 Having longer, healthier fingernails can make the hands look better, and make it easier to type, play a musical instrument, or perform daily tasks.  Nail growth remedies will not typically make the nails grow faster. Instead, they prevent the nails from breaking, helping them look healthier and grow longer.  Understanding how the nails grow can make it easier to make lifestyle changes that support nail health.   Nail plate   The hard part of the nail is called the nail plate. The nail plate, much like hair, is made primarily from a protein called keratin.  The nail plate is not made of living tissue, so it is not possible to improve the health of the nail plate. While it is possible to prevent breakage of the nail plate, nail health begins in the nail bed.   Nail bed   The nail bed is the tissue underneath the nail. If the nail breaks off below the fingertip, the nail bed can be exposed. This painful experience makes it clear that the nail bed is living tissue.  At the base of the nail is a structure called the nail matrix, which is where growth begins.  Long-term approaches to nail health support the body to keep the nail and surrounding skin healthy, enabling the nails to grow longer and stronger.  The nail tissue is already dead by the time it is long enough to be painted, so painting will not affect growth.  It is also a myth that applying  vitamins  directly to the nails can help them grow. These remedies are unlikely to help. At best, they strengthen the nail and prevent it from breaking.  No specific nail polish, such as a gel or powder, can improve nail health. In fact, some products, particularly those that require harsh methods for removal, can even destroy nail health. The  acetone used to remove gel nails  can weaken nails despite the gel polish making them look strong and healthy.  Like the rest of the body,  the nails need a balanced diet  to grow, including protein, water, fruits, vegetables, and a wide array of vitamins and minerals.  People who do not get enough iron, for instance, may have brittle nails, or nails with dents. Protein deficiency may cause ridges in the nails.  Some specific diet changes can strengthen the nails and promote growth. Those include:  Some over-the-counter nail supplements contain  calcium . Some people think that because calcium strengthens the bones, it might also strengthen the nails.   Some research  has found that women experiencing  menopause  with a condition called  osteoporosis  — which is often due to inadequate calcium intake — experience nail changes.  However, few studies have definitively proven whether or not calcium improves nail health. People at risk of calcium deficiency should consider supplementing their diet with this essential mineral.  As the nails are made of protein, some people think that not including enough protein in the diet may affect nail health.  To increase the amount of protein in the diet, choose lean meats, such as chicken, and fish. Vegetarian sources of protein include lentils, peanuts, nuts, and dairy products, such as cheese and milk.   Biotin  is a B-complex vitamin that  proponents say  can promote healthy hair and nail growth. Biotin  may strengthen brittle nails , and prevent them from breaking, but there is little evidence that biotin supplements will help the nails grow faster.  The following home remedies might improve nail health and protect against breakage. These remedies will not make the nails grow faster but may help improve the overall health of nails for optimum growth rates:  Dry skin often means dry nails. Very dry skin can even crack open and bleed, exposing the nails to fungal and bacterial infections.  When the skin surrounding the nail bed or nail matrix is dry, it may even damage the nails as they grow.  Keep hands and nails moisturized during the winter months. Apply lotion after washing hands. People who have  eczema  should choose eczema-friendly creams that are highly moisturizing.  Water can weaken the nails, making them soft and brittle. Keep the nails dry by toweling off after swimming or showering.  When washing dishes, clothes, the bathroom, the kitchen floor, the car, or anything else wear gloves to prevent water or cleaning products from sitting on top of the nails.  Keeping the nails filed in a natural shape — slightly rounded or squared — can prevent nails from snagging and breaking.  Good nail grooming may also discourage biting and picking.  Medical conditions such as  diabetes  can reduce circulation to the nails, making them weaker.  While this is more likely to affect the toenails than the fingernails, gentle massage can promote circulation to the nails, offsetting the effects of diabetes and other circulatory issues.  The cuticles are thin pieces of skin that protect the nail matrix. Cutting them very short can expose the nail matrix or nail bed, damaging the nails and causing infections.  Instead, keep the cuticles moisturized. Do not cut them.  Some nail salons are sources of nail infections. Aggressive manicure techniques, such as cutting the cuticles very short, can allow bacteria to enter the nail bed and weaken the nails.  Take personal tools to the nail salon, and check a salon's reputation by reading reviews. If something hurts, ask the technician to stop. Manicures should not be painful.  Acetone polish remover can dry and weaken the nails. Avoid using it, and steer clear of nail polishes that require its use.  If acetone is the only option, avoid soaking the nails in acetone. Instead, rub them with the polish remover, then thoroughly wash and moisturize the hands.  Medical conditions such as diabetes and  psoriasis  can affect the skin and nails. Instead of treating the nails, address the problem at its source by following a doctor's treatment recommendations.  If symptoms change or get worse, or if someone has a chronic disease accompanied by nail problems, see a doctor.  The nails can provide an early warning sign to some health problems, such as nutritional deficiencies and diabetes.  If home remedies do not improve the look of the nails, talk to a dermatologist. Treatment for an underlying condition might be the path to better nails.    
 Beattie, J. R., Caraher, M. C., Cummins, N. M., O'Driscoll, O. M., Eastell, R., Ralston, S. H., … Towler, M. R. (2017, March 8). Raman spectral variation for human fingernails of postmenopausal women is dependent on fracture risk and osteoporosis status [Abstract].  Journal of Raman Spectroscopy ,  48 (6), 813–821.  Beattie, J. R., Caraher, M. C., Cummins, N. M., O'Driscoll, O. M., Eastell, R., Ralston, S. H., … Towler, M. R. (2017, March 8). Raman spectral variation for human fingernails of postmenopausal women is dependent on fracture risk and osteoporosis status [Abstract].  Journal of Raman Spectroscopy ,  48 (6), 813–821.  Calderone, J. (n.d.). The truth about hair, skin, and nail supplements.  Can vitamin supplements strengthen brittle nails? (2017, August 24).  Gel manicures: The good, the bad and the UV. (2016, February 2).  Hoffman, K. (2017, August 21). When vitamin and nutritional deficiencies cause skin and nail changes.  Podiatry Today ,  28 (1), 56–62.  Nails. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What can you do to make your nails grow faster?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320061.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2017, November 18). "What can you do to make your nails grow faster?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  