 Chlorella is a single-celled, freshwater alga, native to Taiwan and Japan, that is  naturally rich  in proteins,  vitamins , minerals, and dietary fiber. Its reported benefits include boosting antibody count, promoting weight-loss, and fighting  cancer  and other diseases.  There are various types of chlorella, each with  different nutritional qualities . Those most commonly sold as food supplements are believed to have the highest nutritional value. Supplements are available as tablets, powder, or liquid extracts.  Chlorella's tough cell wall makes it rigid and  impossible to digest  in its natural form. It is processed before being sold so its nutrients can be properly digested.  Practical benefits  include  the fact that it grows quickly. Researchers have also looked at it as a possible alternative and renewable  fuel source  for agricultural equipment.  Alongside the nutritional content mentioned above, several studies have also suggested that chlorella has the potential to provide other health benefits.  Animal studies dating back decades have found that chlorella improved the ability of the immune systems of mice to fight against both  bacteria  and  viruses .  A  2012 study  was carried out to test the effects of chlorella on the salivary immune system of human subjects.  A total of 30 healthy people were given chlorella and studied over a 4-week period alongside 30 people who received a  placebo . This trial was repeated 12 weeks later for another 4-week period on the same individuals.  The researchers found various positive and significant changes that suggested a strengthened immune system due to taking chlorella. However, the researchers recognized there were limitations to the study and suggested further testing was needed.  A  2009 study in mice  found that chlorella played a significant role in preventing age-related mental decline. A big part of this seemed to be chlorella's  antioxidant  effects on the brain.  However, no human studies have been done to date.   Estrogen  is a naturally occurring hormone, important for the health of both men and women. There are certain estrogen-mimicking substances that can  get into the body  through contaminated soil, water, air, and other sources.  These mimicking substances are called xenoestrogens, and research  has linked  them to an increased risk of developing various types of cancer.  A  2005 study  found that a laboratory culture contaminated with a xenoestrogen called BPA could be effectively treated with chlorella. In the study, the chlorella completely removed all of the estrogenic activity of the BPA from the culture.  While research needs to be carried out on animal and human subjects, chlorella may be able to reduce significantly the risk of cancers caused by estrogen-mimicking compounds.  The  American Cancer Society  have previously stated that there is a lack of scientific evidence showing chlorella is effective in fighting cancer or any other human diseases.  Anyone who wishes to take chlorella as a dietary supplement should be aware of potential risks from lack of oversight in its production.  The exact balance of nutrients found in chlorella can vary a lot depending on the way it has been grown and processed, as well as the particular strain used.  A  2014 study  found that chlorella treated with activated clay, to make it more suitable as a fuel source, lost over 70 percent of its fatty acid content. Chlorella sold in health stores should have a higher nutritional value than that being considered for fuel.  There is a lack of regulation over the safety and efficacy of supplements in the United States, however, so people should still use caution when purchasing from these retail stores.  Below are some of the nutritional benefits of chlorella.   Chlorella vulgaris , one of the most commonly used varieties, is up to  58 percent protein .  Chlorella protein is absorbed by the body almost as well as protein from eggs and milk. This is rare for plant protein sources and makes chlorella a great protein option for vegans.  Chlorella is one of the few plant sources of vitamin B-12, as confirmed by a  2002 study .  A  2015 study  found that B-12 taken from chlorella helped to improve the health markers of 17 vegans and vegetarians between the ages of 26–57 years old with a history of B-12 deficiency.  This result suggests that the body effectively absorbs the B-12 found in chlorella, making the alga a useful option for vegans and vegetarians with vitamin B-12 deficiency.  Chlorella is rich in iron and can stave-off an iron deficiency. One  2009 study  found that a group of pregnant women given a chlorella supplement experienced significantly lower rates of pregnancy-associated  anemia .  People should be aware that every superfood could have a few potential risks and side effects associated with it. Unfortunately, chlorella is no different in this respect.  A  2003 study  noted that green algae, such as chlorella, could become infected by viruses.   Some evidence  has been found by researchers at Johns Hopkins University of these algal viruses infecting humans and leading to reduced mental functions.   A study  dating back to 1996 found endotoxin-like properties in an extract of chlorella. Endotoxins are substances that  are known  to cause  inflammation  in humans when given in laboratory conditions. The effect depends largely on the size of the dose, however.  Chlorella is touted by its supporters as a highly nutritious dietary supplement that can make up for some of the nutrient deficiencies commonly experienced by vegetarians and vegans.  However, chlorella supplements are not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the U.S. This leads to questions regarding efficacy and safety.  There is some early scientific evidence behind the claims that it might be able to improve mental function, boost immunity, and even reduce the risk of cancer. However, more studies on humans are needed to substantiate any of these claims.  One of the potential downsides to chlorella is that it may cause inflammation in some people, although the bulk of the evidence suggests otherwise.  If someone were to feel unwell while taking chlorella, they should stop immediately and consult a doctor. As there is no regulation of chlorella supplements, there is a risk of contaminants. For instance, a user might buy virus-infected chlorella and become infected.  As a dietary supplement, chlorella may have some benefits. However, given the lack of regulation in the production of these supplements, people should always use caution when taking them.    
 Barka, A., &amp; Blecker, C. (2016, May 23). Microalgae as a potential source of single-cell proteins. A review.  Biotechnology, Agronomy, Society and Environment ,  20 (3), 427–436.  Barka, A., &amp; Blecker, C. (2016, May 23). Microalgae as a potential source of single-cell proteins. A review.  Biotechnology, Agronomy, Society and Environment ,  20 (3), 427–436.  Belasco, W. (1997, July). Algae burgers for a hungry world? The rise and fall of chlorella cuisine [Abstract].  Technology and Culture ,  38 (3), 608–634.  Chlorella. (2011, April 29).  Fucic, A., Gamulin, M., Ferencic, Z., Katic, J., von Kraus, M. K., Bartonova, A., … Merlo, D. F. (2012, June 28). Environmental exposure to xenoestrogens and oestrogen related cancers: Reproductive system, breast, lung, kidney, pancreas, and brain.  Environmental Health ,  11 (Suppl 1), S8.  Fullerton, J. N., Segre, E., De Maeyer, R. P. H., Maini, A. A. N., &amp; Gilroy, D. W. (2016, May 16). Intravenous endotoxin challenge in healthy humans: An experimental platform to investigate and modulate systemic inflammation.  Journal of Visualized Experiments , (111), 53913.  Hirooka, T., Nagase, H., Uchida, K., Hiroshige, Y., Ehara, Y., Nishikawa, J.-I., … Hirata, Z. (2005, August). Biodegradation of bisphenol a and disappearance of its estrogenic activity by the green alga  Chlorella fusca  var.  vacuolata  [Abstract].  Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry ,  24 (8), 1896–1901.  Ibusuki, K., &amp; Minamishima, Y. (1990). Effect of Chlorella vulgaris extracts on murine cytomegalovirus infections [Abstract].  Natural Immunity and Cell Growth Regulation ,  9 (2), 121–128.  Kittaka-Katsura, H., Fujita, T., Watanabe, F., &amp; Nakano, Y. (2002, July 16). Purification and characterization of a corrinoid compound from  Chlorella  tablets as an algal health food [Abstract].  Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry ,  50 (17), 4994–4997.  Kucińska, M., &amp; Murias, M. (2013). [Cosmetics as source of xenoestrogens exposure] [Abstract].  Przeglad Lekarski ,  70 (8), 647–651.  Kwak, J. H., Baek, S. H., Woo, Y., Han, J. K., Kim, B. G., Kim, O. Y., … Lee, J. H. (2012, July 31). Beneficial immunostimulatory effect of short-term  Chlorella  supplementation: Enhancement of  Natural Killer  cell activity and early inflammatory response (randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial).  Nutrition Journal ,  11 , 53.  Merchant, R. E., Philips, T. W., &amp; Udani, J. (2015, December 17). Nutritional supplementation with  Chlorella pyrenoidosa  lowers serum methylmalonic acid in vegans and vegetarians with a suspected vitamin B-12 deficiency [Abstract].  Journal of Medicinal Food ,  18 (12), 1357–1362.  Nakano, S., Takekoshi, H., &amp; Nakano, M. (2010, March).  Chlorella pyrenoidosa  supplementation reduces the risk of anemia, proteinuria and edema in pregnant women [Abstract].  Plant Foods for Human Nutrition ,  65 (1), 25–30.  Nakashimi, Y., Ohsawa, I., Konishi, F., Hasegawa, T., Kumamoto, S., Suzuki, Y., &amp; Ohta, S. (2009, October 30). Preventive effects of  Chlorella  on cognitive decline in age-dependent dementia model mice [Abstract].  Neuroscience Letters ,  464 (3), 193–198.  Otsuki, T., Shimizu, K., Iemitsu, M., &amp; Kono, I. (2011, September 9). Salivary secretory immunoglobulin A secretion increases after 4-weeks ingestion of chlorella-derived multicomponent supplement in humans: A randomized cross over study.  Nutrition Journal ,  10 , 91.  Park, J.-Y., Choi, S.-A., Jeong, M.-J., Nam, B., Oh, Y.-K., &amp; Lee, J.-S. (2014, June). Changes in fatty acid composition of  Chlorella vulgaris  by hypochlorous acid [Abstract].  Bioresource Technology ,  162 , 379–383.  Royce, C. L., &amp; Pardy, R. L. (1996, December 1). Endotoxin-like properties of an extract from a symbiotic, eukaryotic Chlorella-like green alga [Abstract].  Innate Immunity ,  3 (6), 437–444.  Safi, C., Zebib, B., Merah, O., Pontalier, P.-Y., &amp; Vaca-Garcia, C. (2014, July). Morphology, composition, production, processing and applications of  Chlorella vulgaris : A review [Abstract].  Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews ,  35 , 265–278.  Tanaka, K., Koga, T., Konishi, F., Nakamura, M., Mitsuyama, M., Himeno, K., … Nomoto, K. (1986, August). Augmentation of host defense by a unicellular green alga,  Chlorella vulgaris , to  Escherichia coli  infection.  Infection and Immunity ,  53 (2), 267–271.  Tang, G., &amp; Suter, P. M. (2011). Vitamin A, nutrition, and health values of algae: Spirulina, chlorella, and dunaliella.  Journal of Pharmacy and Nutrition Sciences ,  1 , 111–118.  Van Etten, J. L. (2003). Unusual life style of giant chlorella viruses [Abstract].  Annual Review of Genetics ,  37 , 153–195.  Yolken, R. H., Jones-Brando, L., Dunigan, D. D., Kannan, G., Dickerson, F., Severance, E., … Van Etten, J. L. (2014, November 11). Chlorovirus ATCV-1 is part of the human oropharyngeal virome and is associated with changes in cognitive functions in humans and mice.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America ,  111 (45), 16106–16111.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Wessels, Dan. "What are the health benefits of chlorella?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320067.php&gt;    APA  Wessels, D. (2017, November 18). "What are the health benefits of chlorella?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  