 So far, research into the potency of chamomile tea has shown promise. However, studies vary with some research proving clear benefits compared to alternative remedies, and others merely pointing to possible ones.  For most people, chamomile tea is safe to try as a supplement to other treatments, but it should not replace mainstream medical treatments when people have serious illnesses.  The potency of various chamomile teas varies, with some containing significantly more chamomile than others. The more potent teas are also more likely to cause side effects in people who are vulnerable to them. Consequently, it is safest to start with a low dosage and work up to larger doses slowly.  Chamomile contains chemicals called flavonoids. These flavonoids are a type of nutrient present in many plants, and they play a significant role in chamomile's medicinal effects.  Researchers are not sure yet what other chemicals are present in chamomile specifically and account for its benefits.  The potential benefits of chamomile tea, for which there is the most evidence, include:  Several studies have linked chamomile tea to reduced severity of menstrual cramps. A  2010 study , for example, found that consuming chamomile tea for a month could reduce the pain of menstrual cramps. Women in the study also reported less  anxiety  and distress associated with  period pain .  Again, some studies have found that chamomile tea can lower blood sugar in people with  diabetes . Research does not show that chamomile is a viable substitute for diabetes medications, but it may be a helpful supplement to existing treatments.  Similarly, a  2008 study  of rats found that consistent consumption of chamomile tea might prevent blood sugar from increasing. This effect reduces the long-term risk of diabetes complications, suggesting that chamomile could improve diabetes outcomes.   Osteoporosis  is the progressive loss of bone density. This loss increases the risk of broken bones and stooped posture. While anyone can develop osteoporosis, it is most common among post-menopausal women. This tendency may be due to the effects of  estrogen .  A  2004 study  found that chamomile tea might have anti-estrogenic effects. It also helped promote bone density, but the study's authors caution that further research is needed to prove this apparent benefit.   Inflammation  is an immune system reaction to fight infection. Chamomile tea contains chemical compounds that  may reduce inflammation . However, long-term inflammation is linked to a wide range of health problems, including  hemorrhoids , gastrointestinal pain,  arthritis , autoimmune disorders, and even  depression .  Some studies suggest that chamomile tea may target  cancer  cells, or even prevent those cells from developing in the first place. However, research so far is inconclusive, and scientists say more work is needed to prove chamomile's anti-cancer claims. Also, most research has looked at clinical models in animals, not humans.  A  2012 study  compared the cancer-fighting powers of marigold and chamomile teas. Both were able to target cancer tumors selectively, but the effects of marigold tea were more potent.  Chamomile tea is widely thought to help people relax and fall asleep. Few clinical trials have tested this, however.  In one review of the current evidence,  10 of 12 cardiovascular patients  are quoted as having fallen asleep shortly after consuming chamomile tea. A handful of other studies looking at clinical models also suggest that chamomile tea may help people relax.  In a  study using rats , chamomile extract helped sleep-disturbed rodents fall asleep. Many researchers believe that chamomile tea may  function like a benzodiazepine . Benzodiazepines are prescription drugs that can reduce anxiety and induce sleep. Some research suggests that chamomile binds to benzodiazepine receptors.  A review looking at the  ability of chamomile tea to reduce anxiety  is inconclusive. Some studies show a modest anti-anxiety benefit, but others do not.  Anecdotal evidence and  some studies  suggest that inhaling steam with chamomile extract can relieve some of the symptoms of the common cold. But this benefit is not proven yet.  A  small 1987  study found that applying chamomile extract directly to a wound assisted healing. Likewise,  a few studies  have found that chamomile ointments may help with  eczema  and mild inflammatory skin conditions, although they are not as effective as hydrocortisone cream.  The following groups should avoid chamomile unless advised otherwise by a doctor:  It is also not safe to use chamomile as a substitute for proven medical treatments. If someone is taking any medications, they should ask their doctor about potential interactions with chamomile tea.  Chamomile tea has been used in folk medicine for thousands of years, often with encouraging results. For now, however, it remains a supplement and not a medication.  People interested in trying chamomile tea should use it as a supplement to, and not a replacement for their usual medication regimen. In regular doses, such as 1 to 2 cups a day, it is possible to see incremental health improvements.  Chamomile tea is  available to purchase online .     
 Bianco, M. I., Lúquez, C., de Jong, L. I. T., &amp; Fernández, R. A. (2008, Febraury 10). Presence of  Clostridium botulinum  spores in  Matricaria chamomilla  (chamomile) and its relationship with infant botulism.  International Journal of Food Microbiology ,  121 (3), 357–360.  Bianco, M. I., Lúquez, C., de Jong, L. I. T., &amp; Fernández, R. A. (2008, Febraury 10). Presence of  Clostridium botulinum  spores in  Matricaria chamomilla  (chamomile) and its relationship with infant botulism.  International Journal of Food Microbiology ,  121 (3), 357–360.  Glowania, H. J., Raulin, C., &amp; Swoboda, M. (1987, September 1). [Effect of chamomile on wound healing — a clinical double-blind study] [Abstract].  Zeitschrift Fur Hautkrankheiten ,  62 (17), 1267–1271.  Gyllenhaal, C., Merritt, S. L., Peterson, S. D., Block, K. I., &amp; Gochenour, T. (2000, June). Efficacy and safety of herbal stimulants and sedatives in sleep disorders [Abstract].  Sleep Medicine Reviews ,  4 (3), 229–251.  Jenabi, E., &amp; Ebrahimzadeh, S. (2010, March). Chamomile tea for relief of primary dysmenorrhea [Abstract].  Iranian Journal of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Infertility ,  13 (1), 39–43.  Kassi, E., Papoutsi, Z., Fokialakis, N., Messari, I., Mitakou, S., &amp; Moutsatsou, P. (2004, November 17). Greek plant extracts exhibit selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM)-like properties [Abstract].  Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry ,  52 (23), 6956–6961.  Kato, A., Minoshima, Y., Yamamoto, J., Adachi, I., Watson, A. A., &amp; Nash, R. J. (2008, August 6). Protective effects of dietary chamomile tea on diabetic complications.  Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry ,  56 (17), 8206–8211.  Matić, I. Z., Juranić, Z., Šavikin, K., Zdunić, G., Nadvinski, N., &amp; Godevac, D. (2013, June). Chamomile and marigold tea: Chemical characterization and evaluation of anticancer activity.  Phytotherapy Research ,  27 (6), 852–858.  Rafraf, M., Zemestani, M., &amp; Asghari-Jafarabadi, M. (2015, February). Effectiveness of  chamomile  tea on glycemic control and serum lipid profile in patients with type 2 diabetes [Abstract].  Journal of Endocrinological Investigation ,  38 (2), 163-170.  Shinomiya, K., Inoue, T., Utsu, Y., Tokunaga, S., Masuoka, T., Ohmori, A., … Kamei, C. (2005, February 1). Hypnotic activities of chamomile and passiflora extracts in sleep-disturbed rats.  Biological &amp; Pharmaceutical Bulletin ,  28 (5), 808–810.  Srivastava, J. K., Shankar, E., &amp; Gupta, S. (2010, November 1). Chamomile: A herbal medicine of the past with a bright future.  Molecular Medicine Reports ,  3 (6), 895–901.  Subiza, J., Subiza, J. L., Hinojosa, M., Garcia, R., Jerez, M., Valdivieso, R., … Subiza, E. (1989, September). Anaphylactic reaction after the ingestion of chamomile tea: A study of cross-reactivity with other composite pollens [Abstract].  Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology ,  84 (3), 353–358.  Tschiggerl, C., &amp; Bucar, F. (2012, June). Guaianolides and volatile compounds in chamomile tea.  Plant Foods for Human Nutrition ,  67 (2), 129–135.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What are the benefits of chamomile tea?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320031.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2017, November 15). "What are the benefits of chamomile tea?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  