 Binaural beats therapy is an emerging form of soundwave therapy in which the right and left ears listen to two slightly different frequency tones yet perceive the tone as one.  The binaural auditory beat that a person hears is the difference in frequency between the left and the right ear and should be at frequencies lower than   1000 hertz (Hz)   for the brain to detect the binaural beat.  For example, if the left ear registers a tone at 200 Hz and the right at 210 Hz, the binaural beat heard is the difference between the two frequencies — 10 Hz.  Research  has shown  that when a person listens to binaural beats for a recommended time, their levels of arousal change.  Researchers believe these changes occur because the binaural beats activate specific systems within the brain. An electroencephalogram (EEG) that recorded the electrical brain activity of people listening to binaural beats showed that the effect on a person's body varied according to the frequency pattern used.  The four known  categories  of frequency pattern include:  Potential benefits include:  The purpose for using binaural beats therapy may differ between people. Some people may need help decreasing their anxiety, while others may want to increase their concentration or deepen their level of meditation.  To listen to binaural beats, a person will need a pair of stereo headphones and an MP3 player or another music system.  Avoid using binaural beats therapy while undertaking tasks that require alertness and full attention, such as driving. A person will need:  Therapist and life coach  Deb Smith  recommends that to get the full and maximal effect of binaural beats therapy, people should practice it for 15-30 minutes every day for 30 to 45 days.  Smith recommends that once an individual has completed this initial therapy, they should continue to use it regularly as part of a maintenance practice, such as meditation and  yoga .  One small  study  of 19 participants conducted by Dr. Vincent Giampapa found that the use of binaural beats therapy in the alpha, theta, and delta patterns had positive effects on the human body. Dr. Giampapa found that these binaural beats improved the production of the hormones cortisol, DHEA, and melatonin.  His research of binaural beats therapy found:  Another   study  , conducted by researchers from the National College of Natural Medicine in Oregon, evaluated eight study participants who listened to delta wave binaural beat therapy every day for 60 days.  The results showed a decrease in anxiety, insulin-like growth factor, and dopamine. The participants also experienced an increase in quality of life. Researchers concluded that, although further study is needed in this area, binaural beats might improve self-reported anxiety.  A more extensive  study  of over 100 participants who were undergoing general anesthesia for a day procedure, reported a decrease in pre-operative anxiety. The participants in this study listened to 30 minutes of binaural beats before surgery, but the researchers noted that people experiencing high levels of pre-operative anxiety could listen to binaural beats for up to 1 hour before anesthesia to reduce levels of anxiety.  Although there is little evidence of any adverse side effects of using binaural beat therapy, a literature review of some current studies have identified some   conflicting data  , so further research is required.  As with any self-help type of tool, it is important that a person speaks with a healthcare provider or other qualified professional to see if binaural beats therapy is right for them.   Acupuncture is an alternative therapy that involves inserting thin needles into targeted areas of the body. Some believe that this balances a person’s…    Melatonin, a hormone, is involved in regulating daily body rhythms. It also fills a myriad of other roles and boasts a wealth of potential medical…    Why do I have anxiety? Find out here about symptoms and causes, and learn about coping mechanisms that can be used to make feeling anxious less of an…    Moving from a self-criticizing inner voice — the hallmark of perfectionism — to a more compassionate one can be challenging. Here's our guide to help…    Aromatherapy is a type of alternative medicine that uses essential oils to improve a person's health or mood. Find out about the oils and how they…  