 Pancytopenia is usually due to a problem with the  bone marrow  that produces the blood cells. However, there can be several different underlying causes.  The condition is not a disease, but a description of the laboratory findings of low blood cells.  In the most extreme cases of pancytopenia, a person can have infections, the signs of severe  anemia , including  fatigue  and difficulty breathing, and bleeding.  It is necessary to understand what each of the three different types of blood cells do to recognize pancytopenia's symptoms.  For example, red blood cells carry oxygen. Therefore, if a person does not have enough red blood cells due to pancytopenia, they may have difficulty breathing and feel fatigued.  Platelets are responsible for helping blood to clot, during wound healing. If a person's platelets are low, they may bleed more easily.  White blood cells help to fight infection. Therefore, if a person has a low white blood cell count, they may be more prone to infection.  Additional symptoms associated with pancytopenia include:  A person should go or be taken to the emergency room immediately if they have the following symptoms, all of which can occur suddenly:  Pancytopenia is usually due to some disruption of the bone marrow's ability to produce new blood cells. Examples could include:  Some of the conditions that can cause pancytopenia include:  Medications that can affect bone marrow function include chloramphenicol, chemotherapy drugs, thiazide diuretics, anti-epileptic drugs, colchicine, azathioprine, and  non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  (NSAIDs).  The list here covers just some of the potential disease-related pancytopenia causes.  Those with cancers or who are taking medications associated with pancytopenia are at risk for the condition. Having a family history of blood disorders or pancytopenia also increases someone's risk.  If a person has a known blood-related disorder, they should talk to their doctor about risks for and symptoms associated with pancytopenia.  Ultimately, a person needs their blood cells to live. If a person does not produce enough blood cells and experiences severe symptoms or infection, it is possible that they could die.  Therefore, it is important that someone seeks immediate medical attention if they are having severe pancytopenia symptoms, such as shortness of breath, high  fevers , or severe bleeding.  A doctor may order a transfusion of red blood cells or platelets if a person's blood counts are extremely low or they are displaying severe symptoms associated with pancytopenia. Other treatments can include:  In the case of medications, these may be to stimulate bone marrow production or suppress the immune system if it is impairing bone marrow production.  Because there are so many different pancytopenia causes, the treatments vary widely from person to person.  In some instances, a doctor will expect pancytopenia to develop. This is true when a person has cancer and is undergoing chemotherapy treatments to kill cancer cells.  These treatments can also kill healthy cell types. When a doctor expects this to happen, they may not treat pancytopenia unless the person has significant symptoms.  A doctor will typically diagnose pancytopenia by ordering what is known as a complete blood count or CBC. This blood test gives values of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.  A doctor may also order other laboratory tests, such as liver function tests,  vitamin  B-12 levels, HIV and  hepatitis  testing.  As well as laboratory testing, a doctor will also consider a person's symptoms related to pancytopenia.  They may perform a procedure to sample a person's bone marrow. A sample of bone marrow is commonly taken from the hip after the area has been numbed.  The sample is sent to a laboratory where a doctor will examine the cells under a microscope. The cells' appearances can help identify the potential underlying cause of pancytopenia.  Most pancytopenia causes are underlying blood disorders that a person cannot prevent.  In some cases, avoiding taking medications that are known to cause pancytopenia may help to reduce a person's risk.  However, no one should stop taking a prescribed medication without the express direction of their doctor.    
 Garg, A. K., Agarwal, A. K., &amp; Sharma, G. D. (2017). Pancytopenia: Clinical approach.  The Association of Physicians of India ,  2 , 450–454.  Garg, A. K., Agarwal, A. K., &amp; Sharma, G. D. (2017). Pancytopenia: Clinical approach.  The Association of Physicians of India ,  2 , 450–454.  Gayathari, B. N., &amp; Rao, K. S. (2011, January-June). Pancytopenia: A clinic hematological study.  Journal of Laboratory Physicians ,  3 (1), 15–20.  McMahon, B., &amp; Kamath, S. (2016, April 19). Pancytopenia in a patient with hypothyroidism [Abstract].  Journal of the American Medical Association ,  315 (15), 1648-1649.  Pancytopenia. (n.d.).  Weinzierl, E. P., &amp; Arber, D. A. (2015, August 1). The differential diagnosis and bone marrow evaluation of new-onset pancytopenia.  American Journal of Clinical Pathology ,  139 (1), 9–29,  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What you should know about pancytopenia."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320075.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2017, November 19). "What you should know about pancytopenia."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  