 Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is an endocrine disorder that affects  1 in 10 women of childbearing age . The endocrine system consists of glands that secrete and regulate hormones, such as  testosterone  and  estrogen .  Women with PCOS have a hormonal imbalance that causes unusually high levels of male sex hormones. This imbalance changes the way the ovaries function and can cause them to develop many small  cysts .  Women with PCOS may also not ovulate or do so infrequently. PCOS is a  leading cause of infertility .  Some of the  symptoms  of PCOS include:  Symptoms vary and may be mild or so severe that they disrupt a woman's life.  With treatment,  the symptoms can be managed  and may disappear.  Hormonal birth control is considered to be combination birth control when it contains two hormones. These hormones are usually estrogen, and a synthetic form of  progesterone  called progestin.  These combination pills can also regulate some hormonal imbalances, by increasing a woman's estrogen levels and decreasing the amount of testosterone her body produces.  Due to combination birth control pills containing two hormones that can adjust hormone issues, they are the preferred choice for many prescribing doctors.  However, not all women can safely take combination pills. Hormonal birth control pills are safe, but they do present some risks  including :  For some women, a pill known as the minipill may be a better choice. Minipills contain just one hormone, progestin. They are less likely to cause side effects than combination pills. However, when they do cause side effects, these can be the same.  Combination birth control pills  all work the same way . They prevent the ovaries from releasing an egg and so prevent pregnancy. They also thicken the mucus of the cervix. If the ovaries were to release an egg, this thickened mucus could prevent pregnancy.  The same hormones that prevent ovulation can also keep male hormone levels low and raise female hormone levels. Combination pills for PCOS include:  Some pills, such as Loestrin, have lower estrogen levels. These low estrogen levels can reduce the severity of some side effects but may also be less effective against symptoms of PCOS.  Someone with PCOS should talk to a doctor about the right amount of estrogen based on their symptoms and other risk factors.  Women who get some relief from combination pills but who continue to experience painful or heavy periods may wish to switch to a pill that causes them to be less frequent.  The following pills can make a woman have less frequent periods:  Women who develop unpleasant side effects from taking a combination pill may wish to switch to a minipill. In some cases, doctors recommend that women try a minipill first.  Women who smoke, who have a history of cardiovascular problems, who are very overweight, or who are diabetic may have fewer side effects with a progestin-only pill.  Combination and progestin-only pills are highly effective at preventing pregnancy. At typical usage rates, which are the imperfect way most women use these pills, they are about  91 percent effective .  Birth control pills are not for everyone, as some women find it inconvenient to take a pill every day. Non-pill combination options that blend progestin with estrogen tend to be the most effective. Progestin-only options may pose fewer risks and side effects.  The  non-pill alternatives  to birth control for PCOS include:  Non-hormonal birth control options, such as condoms, natural family planning, or diaphragms, will not help with symptoms of PCOS. Also, women who want to become pregnant must try another type of treatment.  Hormonal birth control can help with PCOS symptoms, but it is not the only option. Lifestyle changes, such as losing weight and exercising more, may help.  Some women also try supplements or special diets. Some other drugs, such as Metformin, may help when birth control does not work.  And for women trying to become pregnant, the medication Clomid can encourage the body to ovulate.  Women with PCOS should talk to their doctors about their symptoms, and their treatment aims to arrive at a comprehensive treatment strategy. A woman can ask a doctor to refer her to a specialist for further advice.  Birth control can be a part of a strategy for dealing with PCOS, but it does not have to be the only option.    
 Balen, A. H. (2017, January 24). Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) [Abstract].  The Obstetrician &amp; Gynaecologist ,  19 (2), 119–129.  Balen, A. H. (2017, January 24). Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) [Abstract].  The Obstetrician &amp; Gynaecologist ,  19 (2), 119–129.  Birth control pills. (n.d.).  Contraception. (2017, February 9).  Mani, H., Levy, M. J., Davies, M. J., Morris, D. H., Gray, L. J., Bankart, J., ... &amp; Howlett, T. A. (2013, April 6). Diabetes and cardiovascular events in women with polycystic ovary syndrome: A 20‐year retrospective cohort study [Abstract].  Clinical endocrinology ,  78 (6), 926–934.  PCOS treatments. (n.d.).  Polycystic ovary syndrome. (2017, July 26).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What are the best birth control pills for PCOS."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320055.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2017, November 17). "What are the best birth control pills for PCOS."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  