 A doctor may recommend the bland diet to people experiencing gastrointestinal  inflammation  from infections,  diverticulitis , or flare-ups of conditions such as  Crohn's disease  or ulcerative colitis.  People with other gastrointestinal conditions, such as  acid reflux  or  peptic ulcers , may also follow a bland diet to alleviate their symptoms.  In addition to specific food recommendations, people following a bland diet may have to eat smaller meals more frequently, eat more slowly, and avoid lying down soon after eating.  The goal is to give the digestive system a rest. Foods with fiber are harder for the body to break down, so people on a bland diet tend to avoid foods that contain fiber.   For people experiencing a flare of Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis, a bland, low-fiber diet may help reduce the number and size of bowel movements.   For people with gastrointestinal irritation, eliminating foods that create stomach acid can help to prevent further irritation.  Surgeons may recommend that people preparing for surgery or a procedure involving the digestive system should go on the bland or soft diet.  It is essential for people to check with their doctor about their individual dietary needs.  Foods included in a bland diet are soft, low-fat, low-fiber, easy to digest, and not heavily spiced. Tolerance to foods may differ between people.  A bland diet eliminates foods that are likely to cause issues, such as bloating,  diarrhea , gas, or nausea.   Since people may already be experiencing significant symptoms, the goal is to avoid foods that could cause additional symptoms or worsen existing symptoms.  Recommended foods:  People on a bland diet should avoid tough, high-fiber, high-fat, spicy, and gas-producing foods. These include:  The following foods and drinks may not be high in fiber but can cause gastrointestinal irritation in some conditions, such as acid reflux:   The bland diet is only recommended for a short time when necessary. After a person recovers or their condition improves, their doctor will advise them to increase the amount of fiber in their diet gradually.   Fiber offers many health benefits so following a bland diet for an extended period could adversely impact health.   Eating high-fiber foods can help decrease levels of LDL  cholesterol  (bad cholesterol), promote stable blood sugar levels, and help with weight management.  There are not many scientific studies regarding the effectiveness of a bland diet. The diet proposes that people avoid eating foods that cause gastrointestinal symptoms, such as gas and diarrhea. It also recommends eating softer, milder foods because foods with intense flavors and odors might exacerbate a person's nausea.   Because symptoms and triggers of acid reflux vary widely, there is little evidence to prove that people should avoid specific foods. Due to lack of evidence, the  American College of Gastroenterology  do not routinely suggest that people with gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ) eliminate foods, such as chocolate, caffeine, spicy foods, citrus fruits, and carbonated drinks. However, it does suggest that elimination diets could be beneficial on an individual basis.  A bland diet could result in  constipation  since fiber helps to promote regular bowel movements. A long-term bland diet can also cause changes in a person's overall health because fiber feeds healthy gut bacteria.  A soft, bland diet may be beneficial for people whose gastrointestinal systems are compromised and need time to heal. The foods are easy to digest and unlikely to cause additional pain or symptoms.     
 Bland diet. (n.d.).  Bland diet. (n.d.).  Bland diet. (n.d.).  Gastrointestinal soft diet overview. (n.d.).  Kaltenbach, T., Crockett, S., &amp; Gerson, L. B. (2006, May 8). Are lifestyle measures effective in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease? An evidence-based approach.  Archives of Internal Medicine ,  166 (9), 965–971.  Katz, P. O., Gerson, L. B., &amp; Vela, M. F. (2013, February 19). Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of gastroesophageal reflux disease.  American Journal of Gastroenterology ,  108 , 308–328.  Peery, A. F., Barrett, P. R., Park, D., Rogers, A. J., Galanko, J. A., Martin, C. F., &amp; Sandler, R. S. (2012, February). A High-fiber diet does not protect against asymptomatic diverticulosis.  Gastroenterology ,  142 (2), 266–72.e1.  Vanhauwaert, E., Matthys, C., Verdonck, L., &amp; De Preter, V. (2015, November 10). Low-residue and low-fiber diets in gastrointestinal disease management.  Advances in Nutrition ,  6 (6), 820–827.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Megan Ware RDN LD. "What you can and can't eat on the bland diet."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320027.php&gt;    APA  Megan Ware RDN LD. (2017, November 15). "What you can and can't eat on the bland diet."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  