 The pain and discomfort caused by burning mouth syndrome (BMS) are often recurrent. While BMS is tricky to treat, there are steps that people can take to reduce their discomfort.  BMS causes a sudden burning, scalding, or tingling sensation in the mouth. It can occur in any area of the mouth, including the tongue, cheeks, and the roof of the mouth.  Some people experience BMS on a daily basis for long periods of time, while other people only experience it periodically.  BMS is a rare condition, occurring in less than  2 percent  of the population. Because doctors know relatively little about the condition, it can be difficult to diagnose and treat.  People who experience BMS report a scalding, tingling, or burning sensation occurring in the mouth. The severity of these symptoms varies between individuals.  The pain or burning can last for a few hours to a few days. It may also start suddenly, disappear, and start again several months later.  Some people who have BMS may feel increased pain throughout the day, while others find some relief from eating or drinking.  Additional symptoms may include:  BMS may be classified by either its cause or symptoms.  There are three different types of BMS based on its symptoms:  When BMS is classified by cause, it is considered to be primary or secondary.  Primary BMS does not have an identifiable cause, whereas secondary BMS is linked to an underlying condition.  Some of the possible underlying conditions that can cause BMS include:  Older women are more likely to develop burning mouth syndrome than younger women due to hormonal imbalances. In older women, this imbalance is largely due to a lack of  estrogen .  Diagnosing BMS involves ruling out underlying conditions or other issues that may be causing the symptoms. To do this, a doctor will start by reviewing the person's medical history and current medications.  The doctor may also need to perform a variety of tests, including:  Treatment will depend on the type of BMS a person has and whether there are any underlying causes.  Primary BMS may be difficult to treat as it does not have a known cause. However, a person can try to reduce the severity of their symptoms by:  Symptoms of secondary BMS will usually go away once the underlying cause is treated.  Where acid reflux is causing BMS, a doctor may prescribe antacids or acid blockers as well as recommend some dietary changes.  Mouth infections will likely require medication or  antibiotics  to treat the infection. In some situations, a doctor will prescribe a pain reliever. BMS should resolve after treatment is complete.  When a person has dry mouth, a doctor may suggest that they take  vitamin  supplements, or the doctor may prescribe a vitamin injection, oral rinses, or lozenges to help produce saliva.  It is important to get a proper diagnosis to treat and manage the symptoms of BMS effectively.  Burning mouth syndrome can be painful and irritating. Unfortunately, this unpredictable condition can last for up to several months and may recur.  In some cases, a person may be able to identify and treat the underlying cause of BMS.  BMS will not lead to any further complications, but a person should still speak to a doctor about their symptoms.    
 Burning mouth syndrome. (2015, January 22).  Burning mouth syndrome. (2015, January 22).  Burning mouth syndrome. (2016, July).  Meurman, J. H., Tarkkila, L., &amp; Tiitinen, A. (2009, May 20). The menopause and oral health.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is burning mouth syndrome?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320026.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2017, November 15). "What is burning mouth syndrome?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  