 Based on the most current  World Health Organization guidelines , a healthy sperm count is 15 million per milliliter (ml) or at least 39 million per sample. A sperm count lower than 10 million per ml is considered abnormal and commonly associated with male  infertility .  Anything that impacts the hormones that control the production of sperm or acts as an anti-oxidant may aid the healthy development of sperm and help improve sperm count. Overall, factors that influence  testosterone  levels are thought to have the most significant impact on sperm number and quality.  For several decades, researchers have known that sperm quality and fertility rates have been in decline in most Western nations. According to a 2017 study, between 1973 and 2011 the average sperm count in North America, Europe, Australia, and New Zealand dropped by  59.3 percent .  Despite studies identifying the problem, the reasons for this decline and ways to reliably reverse it are still unknown.  Several non-pharmacologic remedies have been used by ancient, herbal, and traditional medicines to increase sperm count and overall sperm health for thousands of years.  Researchers have shown that most of these remedies influence sperm count in some way.  Natural ways to increase sperm count include:  Several studies have shown that weight loss and exercise in obese and overweight individuals can lead to improved or increased sperm counts. However, the science linking a healthy Body Mass Index ( BMI ) to a healthy sperm count is still weak.  A  2017 study  found that performing a 16-week aerobic exercise program of at least 50 minutes of moderate exercise at 50 to 65 percent peak heart rate 3 times weekly, increased sperm volume and concentration in 45 sedentary, obese men.  Any form of  stress  can cause the body to take defensive actions and conserve energy. In times of distress, it makes biological sense for the body to become less concerned with reproduction and more focused on surviving.  Reducing stress requires addressing the cause, though factors such as exercise and a healthful diet are thought to lessen the effects of stress.  For men who are experiencing severe stress, a doctor may prescribe anti-anxiety or anti-depressant medications.  A  2016 study  reviewing the results of over 20 different studies with a total of nearly 6,000 participants found smoking consistently reduced sperm count.  The number of studies exploring the link between sperm health and drugs is limited given ethical considerations. However, some researchers have linked the worldwide use of drugs such as alcohol, marijuana, and cocaine to decreased sperm production.  Some prescription medications can potentially decrease the healthy production of sperm. Once a person stops taking the drug, his sperm count should return to normal or increase.  Medications that temporarily reduce the production and development of sperm include:  Fenugreek has long been used as a natural remedy for poor sperm health, and advocates suggest it may improve sperm count. A  2017 study  found that the patent-pending compound Furosap®, which is developed from fenugreek seeds, significantly improved overall semen quality and sperm count.  Various fenugreek products, including supplements, are available to purchase  online .  Researchers are not entirely sure why, but  vitamin D  and  calcium  serum appear to impact sperm health.  Some studies  have shown that low dietary  vitamin  D intake seems to correspond with lowered sperm count.   Vitamin D  and  calcium  supplements are available to purchase in health food stores and online.  Ashwagandha, also known as Indian  ginseng , has long been used in traditional medicines as a remedy for several forms of sexual dysfunction.  A 2016 study  found that 46 men with low sperm counts who took 675 milligrams (mg) of ashwagandha daily for 90 days saw a 167 percent increase in sperm count.  Ashwagandha is available to purchase  online  or in health food stores.   Antioxidants  are molecules that help remove and deactivate free radicals and other compounds that damage cells. Several vitamins and minerals have shown to act as antioxidants, and several studies have linked antioxidant consumption with increased sperm count.  Antioxidants that may  contribute  to a healthy sperm count include:  Polyunsaturated fats or so-called healthy fats, such as  omega-3  and omega-6, are crucial to the healthy development of the sperm membrane.  Some  studies  have shown that individuals should consume these two essential omega compounds in equal quantities for ideal sperm development and antioxidant benefits.  Omega-3 supplements are available to purchase  online  from various brands.  A  2014 study  that surveyed 209 healthy Spanish men between the ages of 18 to 23 years of age found that as they increased their consumption of trans fatty acids, their sperm count decreased proportionately.  Several studies have also shown that trans fatty acids may impair the ability of long-chain polyunsaturated fats to incorporate into sperm membranes, a critical step in sperm development.  As the environment and atmosphere become increasingly polluted and congested, environmental factors, such as air quality and toxic chemical exposure, have frequently been linked to reduced sperm health and total count. Avoiding environmental toxins wherever possible also contributes to overall health.  It is important to point out that while some studies have shown a link between low sperm count and environmental contaminants, most of them  do not support it .  Some foods, especially soy products, contain phytoestrogens (plant  estrogen ), compounds shown to reduce testosterone bonding and sperm production. Many canned and plastic products are also high in synthetic forms of estrogen.  Consuming  folate  and zinc in combination has been shown in  limited studies  to increase overall sperm health, including sperm concentration or total count.  Though supplements are considered a safe way to get the recommended daily intake of most vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants, the body does not always easily absorb them.  Most studies suggest that eating foods rich in specific compounds and chemicals allows the body to use them more efficiently. So the best way to increase sperm count naturally may be to increase the consumption of foods high in sperm-friendly nutrients.  Foods high in sperm count-boosting nutrients include:  A doctor may prescribe medication for men with very low sperm counts or who have additional health factors or considerations.  Medications sometimes used to treat low sperm count include:  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Ambiye, V. R., Langade, D., Dongre, S., Aptikar, P., Kulkarni, M., &amp; Dongre, A., (2013). Clinical evaluation of the spermatogenic activity of the root extract of Ashwagandha ( Withania somnifera ) in oligospermic males: A pilot study [Abstract].  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine , 2013.  Ambiye, V. R., Langade, D., Dongre, S., Aptikar, P., Kulkarni, M., &amp; Dongre, A., (2013). Clinical evaluation of the spermatogenic activity of the root extract of Ashwagandha ( Withania somnifera ) in oligospermic males: A pilot study [Abstract].  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine , 2013.  Bagchi, D., Swaroop, A., Maheshwari, A., Verma, N., Tiwari, K., Bagchi, M., ... &amp; Kumar, P. (2017). A novel protodioscin-enriched fenugreek seed extract (Trigonella foenum-graecum, family Fabaceae) improves free testosterone level and sperm profile in healthy volunteers.  Functional Foods in Health and Disease ,  7 (4), 235–245.  Barazani, Y., Katz, B. F., Nagler, H. M., &amp; Stember, D. S. (2014, February). Lifestyle, environment, and male reproductive health [Abstract].  Urologic Clinics ,  41 (1), 55–66.  Blomberg Jensen, M., Gerner Lawaetz, J., Andersson, A.-M., Petersen, J. H., Nordkap, L., Bang, A. K., ... Jørgensen, N. (2016, August 4). Vitamin D deficiency and low ionized calcium are linked with semen quality and sex steroid levels in infertile men.  Human Reproduction ,  31 (8), 1875-1885.  Cooper, T. G., Noonan, E., von Eckardstein, S., Auger, J., Gordon Baker, H. W., Behre, H. M., ... Vogelsong, K. M. (2010). World Health Organization reference values for human semen characteristics.  Human reproduction update ,  16 (3), 231–245.  Chavarro, J. E., Mínguez-Alarcón, L., Mendiola, J., Cutillas-Tolín, A., López-Espín, J. J., &amp; Torres-Cantero, A. M. (2014, March). Trans fatty acid intake is inversely related to total sperm count in young healthy men.  Human Reproduction ,  29 (3), 429–440.  Chehab, M., Madala, A., &amp; Trussell, J. C. (2015, March). On-label and off-label drugs used in the treatment of male infertility.  Fertility and sterility ,  103 (3), 595–604.  Crespo, A. O. O., Cedillo, A. X. O., Cedillo, P. O. O., &amp; López, M. E. S. (2016, July 26). Systematic review on the use of maca ( Lepidium meyenii ) in sexual dysfunction.  Pinnacle Medicine and Medicine Sciences ,  3 (4).  Irani, M., Amirian, M., Sadeghi, R., Le Lez, J., &amp; Roudsari, R. L. (2017). The effect of folate and folate plus zinc supplementation on endocrine parameters and sperm characteristics in sub-fertile men: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  Urology Journal ,  14 (5), 4069–4078.  Levine, H., Jørgensen, N., Martino-Andrade, A., Mendiola, J., Weksler-Derri, D., Mindlis, I., ... Swan, S. H. (2017, November 1). Temporal trends in sperm count: A systematic review and meta-regression analysis [Abstract].  Human Reproduction Update ,  23 (6), 646–659.  Lipovac, M., Bodner, F., Imhof, M., &amp; Chedraui, P. (2016, December 9). Comparison of the effect of a combination of eight micronutrients versus a standard mono preparation on sperm parameters.  Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology ,  14 (84).  Luk, J., Torrealday, S., Neal Perry, G., &amp; Pal, L. (2012, October 1). Relevance of vitamin D in reproduction.  Human reproduction ,  27 (10), 3015–3027.  Rosety, M. Á., Díaz, A., Rosety, J. M., Pery, M. T., Brenes-Martín, F., Bernardi, M., ... Rosety, I. (2017). Exercise improved semen quality and reproductive hormone levels in sedentary obese adults.  Nutrición Hospitalaria ,  34 (3), 608–612.  Safarinejad, M., &amp; Safarinejad, S. (2012, July). The roles of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids in idiopathic male infertility.  Asian Journal of Andrology ,  14 (4), 514–515.  Sharma, R., Biedenharn, K. R., Fedor, J. M., &amp; Agarwal, A. (2013, July 16). Lifestyle factors and reproductive health: Taking control of your fertility.  Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology ,  11 , 66.  Sharma, R., Harlev, A., Agarwal, A., &amp; Esteves, S. (2016, October). Cigarette smoking and semen quality: A new meta-analysis examining the effect of the 2010 World Health Organization laboratory methods for the examination of human semen [Abstract].  Sharpe, R. M. (2010, May 27). Environmental/lifestyle effects on spermatogenesis.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences ,  365 (1546), 1697–1712.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What are the best ways to increase sperm count?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320010.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, November 14). "What are the best ways to increase sperm count?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  