 If the time arrives when she does want to conceive, she may wonder how long it will take her to become pregnant.  The answer to this question can depend not only on when she stopped taking the pill but other factors, including age and overall health.  Birth control pills serve several purposes, including:  In addition to preventing pregnancy, taking birth control pills offers several benefits to women. These include reduced bleeding and cramping during a menstrual cycle and reduced risk for  ovarian cysts .  When taken at the same time every day, birth control pills prevent pregnancy for 91 percent of women on combined pills and 95 percent of women on mini-pills, according to the U.S. Department of Health &amp; Human Services.  When a woman wishes to conceive, she will stop taking the pill.  According to the United Kingdom's  National Health Service (NHS) , a woman's period may be irregular for up to 3 months after she stops taking the pill.  Doctors call a woman's first period after stopping the pill a "withdrawal bleed" where she may experience bleeding patterns that are different from her period while on the pill.  Doctors call the next period a woman has "a natural period" that is more like her typical period.  It is possible that an irregular menstrual cycle, or reestablishing a natural menstrual cycle off the pill, can affect a woman's ability to conceive.  Taking oral contraceptives can result in a short-term delay in achieving pregnancy of 2 to 6 months when a woman stops taking the pill, compared to other contraceptive use, according to a 2013 Danish study published in the journal   Human Reproduction  .  The study included 3,727 women, aged 18 to 40 years.  The participants were asked to complete a questionnaire on a monthly basis for 12 months to determine if pregnancy occurred.  The researchers also found that women who had used birth control pills for longer rather than shorter time periods were more likely to get pregnant.  Similarly, long-term use had no negative effect on the probability of getting pregnant.  The study also found that women who had used birth control pills, starting younger than age 21 years old, were less likely to get pregnant when compared to women who started taking the pill after the age of 21 years.  The researchers theorized that younger women starting birth control pills might have more irregularities in their menstrual cycle compared with women starting birth control pills later.  An older research study published in the 2009 issue of   Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology  , found that previous use of oral contraceptives does not affect conception in the short-term or during a one-year period after trying to conceive.  Examples of the factors that impact the likelihood of conceiving after ceasing the contraceptive pill include:  Most obstetricians use the 1-year mark of having unprotected sex as a milestone in fertility assessment. If a couple has not conceived after trying for 1 year, they may wish to see an obstetrician for further evaluation.  Many factors go into getting pregnant. While stopping the pill is an important step, so is making sure a woman's body is in the best possible health to conceive.  Additional steps a woman can take to ensure a healthy pregnancy include:  While stopping the pill may temporarily extend the time to conception, some women will get pregnant immediately after they come off the pill.  Therefore, it is vital for a woman to be ready to take care of her body during her pregnancy, as soon as she and her partner begin trying to conceive.    
 Birth control pill. (2017, June 8).  Birth control pill. (2017, June 8).  Birth control pills. (n.d.).  Christin-Maitre, S. (2013, February). History of oral contraceptive drugs and their use worldwide [Abstract].  Best Practice &amp; Research Clinical Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism ,  27 (1), 3–12.  Cronin, M., Schellschmidt, I., &amp; Dinger, J. (2009, September). Rate of pregnancy after using drospirenone and other progestin-containing oral contraceptives [Abstract].  Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  114 (3), 616–622.  Daniels, K., Daugherty, J., &amp; Jones, J. (2014, December). Current contraceptive status among women aged 15–44: United States, 2011–2013.  How long does it usually take to get pregnant? (2015, November 21).  Mikkelsen, E. M., Riis, A. H., Wise, L. A., Hatch, E. E., Rothman, K. J., &amp; Sorensen, H. T. (2013, May 1). Pre-gravid oral contraceptive use and time to pregnancy: A Danish prospective cohort study.  Human Reproduction ,  28 (5),1398–1405.  When will my periods come back after I stop taking the pill? (2015, July 30).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Can you get pregnant right after stopping the pill?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320097.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2017, November 21). "Can you get pregnant right after stopping the pill?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  