 However, according to  newer guidelines , chronic  atrial fibrillation  (A-fib) may also be called long-standing, persistent A-fib.  Chronic A-fib is usually diagnosed once a person has had symptoms lasting for longer than 12 months. Episodes of A-fib symptoms may come and go over the course of this time.  People with chronic A-fib might not have any symptoms at all. Other people may experience some combination of the following symptoms:  Anyone who experiences these symptoms for the first time should go immediately to the emergency room. These symptoms can be signs of another cardiac problem, including a  heart attack .  Additionally, anyone diagnosed with chronic A-fib who notices a change in their symptoms should also seek immediate medical attention.  Anyone can develop chronic A-fib, even people who are otherwise healthy. However, several factors may put some people at higher risk than others for developing chronic A-fib.  These risk factors include:  A-Fib can be difficult to diagnose because many people do not experience any symptoms. For these people, A-fib is often diagnosed during a routine physical or a checkup for another problem.  However, some people with symptoms should see a doctor for a diagnosis. In either situation, a doctor will likely ask about the person's medical history and order a series of tests, including:  Treatment of chronic A-fib aims to minimize the risk of blood clots and return the heart to a normal rhythm.  There are many treatment options for chronic A-fib, including:  A person with chronic A-fib should make lifestyle changes to ensure that they are living a heart-healthy life. Individuals should follow a diet that is good for their heart and do the recommended amount of exercise.  People with chronic A-fib may have to reduce their alcohol and caffeine intake or  quit smoking  as well.  Doctors typically recommend medications along with lifestyle changes to help manage the risks and symptoms of chronic A-fib. Commonly prescribed medications for chronic A-fib include the following:  It may take some trial and error to find the right combination of medications to manage chronic A-fib. Some drugs, such as antiarrhythmics, can have serious side effects, and people should only begin taking these drugs under close supervision in a hospital.  For some people, medication may not improve their symptoms entirely, so they may need an electronic device to help manage the condition. These devices regulate the heart by delivering a controlled shock to the heart when the rhythm needs resetting.  These devices include pacemakers and implanted cardioverter defibrillators. Most often, a doctor will insert these devices into a person's chest.  Occasionally, a doctor may recommend a procedure to reset the person's heart rhythm using a cardioversion or a catheter ablation.  During a catheter ablation, a doctor will make a small incision in the groin or arm and slide a straw-sized tube through a blood vessel until it reaches the heart. They will then guide thin wires called electrode catheters through the tube into the heart.  The doctor will place the electrode where the abnormal cells are located and administer painless radiofrequency energy. This  destroys the cells  that were causing the irregular rhythm.  During a cardioversion, a brief electric shock resets the abnormal rhythm back to a normal rhythm.  In situations where A-fib is linked to another illness, treating the underlying condition should stop the A-fib.  It is not always possible to prevent A-fib, but there are steps a person can take to stay healthy and reduce the risk of developing the condition.  These steps include:  People who want to start to make positive changes in their lifestyle may consider talking to a doctor or dietitian. Often, they can help create a general health plan help a person reach their goals safely.    
 Ablation for arrhythmias. (2017, June 5).  Ablation for arrhythmias. (2017, June 5).  How can atrial fibrillation be prevented? (2014, September 18).  How is atrial fibrillation diagnosed? (2014, September 18).  How is atrial fibrillation treated? (2014, September 18).  January, C. T., Wann, S., Alpert, J. S., Calkins, H., Cigarroa, J. E., Clevelnad, J. C., … Yancy, C. W. (2014, December). 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management of patients with atrial fibrillation.  Journal of the American College of Cardiology ,  64 (21), e1–e76.  Pathak, R. K., Middeldorp, M. E., Lau, D. H., Mehta, A. B., Mahajan, R., Twomey, D., … Sanders, P. (2014, December). Aggressive risk factor reduction study for atrial fibrillation and implications for the outcome of ablation.  Journal of the American College of Cardiology ,  64 (21), 2222–2231.  Prevention strategies for atrial fibrillation (AFib or AF). (2016, October 13).  What is atrial fibrillation (AFib or AF)? (2017, February 6).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Chronic or persistent A-fib: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320059.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2017, November 17). "Chronic or persistent A-fib: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  