 Its full name is pan-ulcerative colitis and is also sometimes  known as  total colitis or universal colitis.  Pancolitis is a chronic condition, meaning it develops over a long period and there is currently no known cure.  Ulcerative colitis is a chronic autoimmune disease that affects the colon. At the end of the colon is the rectum, which stores feces before it leaves the body.  In ulcerative colitis, small ulcers can develop on the colon, producing  pus  and mucus. In turn, this can lead to abdominal discomfort,  diarrhea , and rectal bleeding.  Experts estimate that around  20 percent  of people who have ulcerative colitis will have pancolitis.  Other types of ulcerative colitis  include :  The  main symptoms  of pancolitis are:  Other  typical symptoms  of pancolitis can include:  If a person has not experienced symptoms of pancolitis for a significant period and then they suddenly return, it is known as a flare-up or relapse.  During a flare-up, a person can also experience  symptoms elsewhere in the body :  Ulcerative colitis is a type of inflammatory bowel disease. It is an autoimmune condition, which means that instead of defending the body against infection, the immune system goes wrong and instead attacks healthy tissue.  The exact cause of ulcerative colitis is not known, but scientists think that a combination of factors leads to the development of the disease.  The different factors include:  While people of any age can develop pancolitis, it is more commonly diagnosed in those aged between  15 and 25 years old .  Both men and women are equally affected.  When diagnosing pancolitis, the doctor will ask the individual about their symptoms, general health, and medical history.  The doctor might also conduct a physical examination and take stool and blood samples to check for signs of infection and  inflammation , among other things.  If the doctor is concerned that a person may have any form of inflammatory bowel disease, then they may refer the individual for further tests,  including :  Treatment for pancolitis will depend on how severe the condition is and how badly the symptoms are affecting the person's life.  While there is no known cure, the  two main aims  of treatment are to reduce symptoms until they are gone, known as remission, and then to maintain remission.  The  two types  of treatment currently available for pancolitis are medication and surgery.  The  four main forms  of medication given to treat pancolitis are:  If flare-ups are having a serious impact on a person's quality of life, or the person is not responding to medications, then surgery is an option.  Surgery usually involves removal of the colon entirely, which means there is  no chance  of any form of ulcerative colitis returning.  However, anyone thinking about having this surgery must consider the consequences very seriously.  Once the colon has been removed, waste will instead leave the body from the small intestine via a hole in the abdomen. The waste passes into a special bag, known as an ileostomy.  A second surgery may then be performed at a later time to create an internal pouch called an ileoanal pouch. This pouch connects the small intestine to the anus, allowing stools to pass normally,  There can be some  very serious complications  associated with pancolitis:  Pancolitis is a chronic condition with no cure and people living with it can experience significant practical and emotional issues.  When someone is having a flare-up, they may have to limit or change their activities. However, during periods of remission most people can lead a normal and healthy life.  Pancolitis can affect relationships and work, but talking to and seeking emotional support from family, friends, and healthcare professionals can help.    
 Ulcerative colitis. (2016, March 17).  Ulcerative colitis. (2016, March 17).  Ulcerative colitis. (2013, November).  Ulcerative colitis — diagnosis. (2016, March 17).  Ulcerative colitis — treatment. (n.d.).  What is pancolitis? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "What you need to know about pancolitis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320064.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2017, November 18). "What you need to know about pancolitis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  