 Some people with  post-traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD) experience heightened  anxiety . This may make them more sensitive and overly responsive to stimuli and events in the world around them. This state of increased sensitivity is called hyperarousal.  In this article, we look at the symptoms and causes of hyperarousal, as well as how a person can manage it. We also look at how people can help loved ones experiencing hyperarousal better cope with their condition.  Hyperarousal is one symptom of PTSD. A person experiencing hyperarousal may:  The main cause of hyperarousal is PTSD. It is less commonly caused by alcohol withdrawal.  PTSD is a  mental health  condition brought on by a traumatic event. The sorts of events that might cause PTSD include:  There are many other events that can increase the risk of developing PTSD. However, not everyone who has experienced a traumatic event will experience PTSD or hyperarousal.  Experiencing the symptoms of hyperarousal and other PTSD symptoms can be distressing. If a person notices these symptoms in themselves or someone else, it is a good idea for them to speak to a doctor.  Sometimes, a person experiencing hyperarousal might behave in a way that is self-destructive. This can include driving recklessly or drinking excessively. Ensuring their safety and the safety of others means it is important for people affected by hyperarousal to get treatment.  Alongside treatments the doctor may recommend, there are several coping strategies that a person experiencing hyperarousal can try. Strategies to manage different symptoms of hyperarousal are listed below:  People with hyperarousal who find it hard to sleep may try:  People with hyperarousal may find it difficult to control their temper. The following coping strategies may help:  People with hyperarousal who experience difficulties concentrating may find that the following strategies help:  People with hyperarousal who are acting impulsively can try:  One way to support a loved one who is experiencing hyperarousal is to make them aware of the above coping mechanisms.  Offering to try some of these things, such as mindfulness, deep breathing, or meditation, with them may also help.  It is important not to overreact to any behaviors associated with hyperarousal. Being there to listen in a non-judgmental, empathetic way can also help.  Above all, the most important way to help a loved one experiencing hyperarousal is to ensure they have spoken to a doctor and received a proper diagnosis. This will ensure they get access to the right treatment.  There is a range of treatments available for hyperarousal that can help people to manage their symptoms:  In addition to these therapies, the doctor may prescribe the following medications to help manage hyperarousal and other PTSD symptoms:  PTSD can be a long-term condition and hyperarousal is a common symptom. However, there are many coping strategies that people can use to reduce the impact hyperarousal may have on their daily activities.  PTSD can be well managed with the right therapies, medications, and ongoing support. If a person is experiencing symptoms of hyperarousal or PTSD, they should speak to a doctor for a proper diagnosis and treatment plan.  Similarly, if a person is concerned about a colleague, friend, or relative who may be experiencing hyperarousal or PTSD, they should encourage the person to speak with a doctor or even offer to accompany them.    
 Brown, B., Jones, E. C., Clark, K. P., &amp; Jefferson, F. (2014). Sleep disturbances and post-traumatic stress disorder in women.  Neuroendocrinology Letters ,  35 (7), 560–566.  Brown, B., Jones, E. C., Clark, K. P., &amp; Jefferson, F. (2014). Sleep disturbances and post-traumatic stress disorder in women.  Neuroendocrinology Letters ,  35 (7), 560–566.  Contractor, A. A., Armour, C., Forbes, D., &amp; J. Elhai. (2016, January). Posttraumatic stress disorder's underlying dimensions and their relation with impulsivity facets.  Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases ,  204 (1), 20–25.  Harvey, A. G., Jones, C., &amp; Schmidt, D. A. (2003, May). Sleep and posttraumatic stress disorder: A review.  Clinical Psychology Review ,  23 (3), 377–407.  Healthy sleep habits. (2017, February 9).  Post-traumatic stress disorder. (2016, February).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Hyperarousal: Symptoms and treatment."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320000.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2017, November 13). "Hyperarousal: Symptoms and treatment."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  