 Researchers are not sure what causes basilar  migraines , but treatments are available to prevent them and lessen their intensity.  A basilar migraine is a rare type of migraine that begins in the brain stem. A basilar migraine may be caused by a constriction of blood vessels that limit blood flow to the brain.  Other conditions that restrict blood flow, such as tortuous blood vessels, may also cause basilar migraines.  Basilar migraines can affect a person's senses, particularly their sight. This is referred to as a migraine with aura. A basilar migraine may cause a person to see lines, flashes of light, or spots. The pain of the migraine may occur before or during these other symptoms.  Basilar migraines may affect one or both sides of the head. Aura symptoms can last for about an hour before fading, but the migraine itself may last between 4 hours and several days. A person will typically feel exhausted or drained following a basilar migraine.  Basilar migraines have a variety of specific symptoms, but also share symptoms with other aura migraines.  Symptoms specific to a basilar migraine include:  Symptoms shared with other aura migraines include:  Aura symptoms usually occur before the onset of the migraine pain, which can range from moderate to severe. The pain may concentrate in one area of the head before spreading.  Migraines can also cause allodynia, which is when a light touch, such as clothing brushing against the skin, causes pain.  Symptoms will vary between people and between instances.  People who experience basilar migraines may also be at  higher risk of ischemic stroke . The connection between migraines with aura and  stroke  risk is not fully understood, but an ischemic stroke is caused by a reduction in blood and oxygen supply to the brain.  Women who take combined contraceptive pills and experience migraines with aura are at an increased risk of ischemic stroke. For this reason, the World Health Organization  do not recommend  prescribing combined pills to women who experience this type of migraine.  Some researchers believe that a basilar migraine occurs when the basilar artery gets constricted, but more research is needed to confirm this. The basilar artery runs from the back of the neck into the brain stem and is responsible for bringing blood to the brain.  There are, however, several external factors known to trigger basilar migraines. These include:  A doctor will likely diagnose a basilar migraine once a person has experienced at least two episodes of aura symptoms. Basilar migraines are sometimes similar to hemiplegic migraines, but hemiplegic migraines tend to cause weakness on one side of the body.  Other, more serious medical conditions that have similar symptoms to a basilar migraine include:  To rule these conditions out, a doctor or neurologist may recommend a magnetic resonance imaging scan ( MRI ) or a computerized tomography (CT) scan.  Treatment for basilar migraines tends to focus on reducing pain and treating the other symptoms of the migraine.  Medications a doctor may recommend, include:  If over-the-counter medications are not having any effect, a doctor may prescribe a higher dosage. In some cases, a nerve block may be used to reduce pain.  People who experience basilar migraines should also be aware of aura symptoms, which can act as a warning for an oncoming headache. Some painkillers and anti-inflammatory medications may be more effective if taken before the pain becomes unmanageable.  A doctor may prescribe preventative medications to reduce the risk of getting a migraine. These medications include:  A person may also be able to reduce their risk of basilar migraines by making some lifestyle changes. Changes a person may consider include:  If a person begins feeling aura or migraine symptoms, they should stop activities immediately and go to a quiet, dark area. They may also wish to take pain medications as a preventative measure, even if the pain has not yet started.  People can often manage basilar migraines with positive lifestyle changes, such as eating well, doing exercise, and taking over-the-counter medications to relieve symptoms as soon as they appear. Avoiding known triggers can also help reduce the risk having a basilar migraine.  In situations where a person cannot manage the pain at home, they should speak to a doctor about treatment options.  Anyone who loses consciousness during a migraine or experiences aura symptoms should see a doctor who can rule out more serious conditions.    
 Basilar migraine. (2007, October 25).  Basilar migraine. (2007, October 25).  Davies, P. T. G., &amp; Panayiotopoulos, C. P. (2011, April 24). Migraine triggered seizures and epilepsy triggered headache and migraine attacks: A need for re-assessment.  The Journal of Headache and Pain ,  12 (3), 287–288.  Edlow, A. G., &amp; Bartz, D. (2010, Spring). Hormonal contraceptive options for women with headache: A review of the evidence.  Reviews in Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  3 (2), 55–65.  Migraine with brainstem aura. (2016, June 15).  Migraine with brainstem aura (basilar type migraine). (2016, October 8).  Stroke and migraine. (n.d.).  Zhang, C., Cucchiara, B. L., Detre, J. (2017). Basilar artery displacement is associated with migraine with aura [Abstract].  Stroke ,  48 (Suppl. 1).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is a basilar migraine?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320013.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2017, November 14). "What is a basilar migraine?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  