 Though everyone experiences numbness differently, there are a few symptoms that are considered to be hallmarks of the condition. When these symptoms are severe, persistent, or recurrent they may be a sign of depersonalization-derealization disorder (DD).  Currently, most doctors consider emotional numbness to be a side effect of a few different physical and mental causes. In most cases, emotional numbness goes away with self-care, emotional support, and time.  Though many people will experience a feeling of emotional numbness, for between  0.95 and 2.4 percent  of the population, the sensation of feeling numb is far more profound, and the disorder is now classified as a  mental health  condition.  In 2013, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) classified the overwhelming, long-lasting, and ever-present state of feeling unreal or disconnected as depersonalization-derealization disorder or DD.  Common symptoms and signs associated with emotional numbness and DD include:  Each situation varies, but typically, people who experience emotional numbness and DD are so overwhelmed by  stress , outside chemicals, or medications that emotional responses become diminished.  Researchers are still exploring the precise biology, chemistry, and brain changes that cause or are associated with numbness and DD.  Most studies into the matter have found that people with emotional numbness or DD are less responsive to emotional cues, lack social understanding, and lack emotional awareness.  Neuroimaging, however, does show that the same brain chemicals and brain areas are involved in processing each of the shared traits of the condition; a lack of emotion, empathy, and interoception (the ability to understand and sense what is going on inside the body).  DD was only recently reclassified to include a broader range of symptoms and exclude cases caused by medical conditions and medications.  So, researchers are still trying to figure out exactly how, why, and when DD occurs. Currently, the DSM-5 does not define a specific cause; instead, it suggests diagnosis mainly by ruling out known causes, such as certain medications, as well as other mental or physical conditions.  Causes of temporary emotional numbness that are not considered to cause DD include:  Common medications that are known to cause emotional numbness include:  Some research suggests that DD and emotional numbness may develop as a sort of coping mechanism, acting to desensitize individuals exposed to extreme or continual stress.  In 2016, an article in   Developmental Psychology   outlined the results of a 6-year study that had followed nearly 3,500 children who had been exposed to violence. The study found that the young people became increasingly desensitized, or emotionally numb, over time regardless of age or gender.  Causes of numbness that may also potentially cause DD include:  For many people, addressing underlying stress, trauma, or grief with a medical professional and through lifestyle changes can help lessen and eventually resolve symptoms of numbness.  Common coping strategies suggested for the treatment of emotional numbness include:  Commonly used psychotherapy methods include:  A psychotherapist may choose to use one, or several different types of therapy and techniques to help address and treat emotional numbness and DD.  For some people, stopping or starting the use of prescription medications, such as anti-depressant and anti-anxiety medications, may be necessary to provide relief from numbness, especially when the cause is unknown.  To be prescribed medications for emotional numbness and DD, a psychiatrist's diagnosis is necessary. Doctors only prescribe drugs in situations where symptoms are:  Currently, there is no reliable evidence to suggest that any medication effectively treats emotional numbness or DD unless it is considered a symptom of another disorder or condition.    
 Bezzubova, E. (2014, June 13). Depersonalization in the DSM-5.  Bezzubova, E. (2014, June 13). Depersonalization in the DSM-5.  Kennedy, T. M., &amp; Ceballo, R. (2016, March 17). Emotionally numb: Desensitization to community violence exposure among urban youth [Abstract].  Developmental Psychology ,  52 (5), 778–789.  McNally, R. J., Robinaugh, D. J., Wu, G., Wang, L., Deserno, M., &amp; Borsboom, D. (2015, December). Mental disorders as causal systems: a network approach to post-traumatic stress disorder.  Clinical Psychological Science ,  3 (6), 836–849.  Read, J., Cartwright, C., &amp; Gibson, K. (2014, February 3). Adverse emotional and interpersonal effects reported by 1829 New Zealanders while taking antidepressants.  Psychiatry research ,  216,  67–73.  Sandell, K., &amp; Bornäs, H. (2015, August 3). Functioning numbness instead of feelings as a direction: Young adults' experiences of antidepressant use [Abstract].  Sociology ,  51 (3), 543–558.  Sedeño, L., Couto, B., Melloni, M., Canales-Johnson, A., Yoris, A., Baez, S., ... Ibanez, A. (2014, June 26). How do you feel when you can't feel your body? Interoception, functional connectivity and emotional processing in depersonalization-derealization disorder.  PLoS One ,  9 (6), e98769.  Spiegel, D., Lulu, J., &amp; Willson, S., (2017, July). Depersonalization/derealization disorder.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Feeling numb: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320049.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, November 17). "Feeling numb: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  