 Numerous studies have documented its potential to treat several common ailments, including  cancer ,  diabetes , and  inflammation . However, results have not been universally agreed upon.  Native to North Asia and Europe, burdock now grows widely in the United States as a weed. In some parts of the world, people consume it as a root vegetable, much like potatoes.  Burdock has large heart-shaped leaves and produces purple flowers in the spring and autumn.  In traditional medicine, it is the dark roots — not the plant itself — that offer health benefits.  Burdock contains oils, as well as compounds called tannins and plant sterols. Doctors do not know which of the plant's components offer health benefits. The reason for this is that most research looks at burdock root as a whole and not at a specific element in the root.  Burdock root has been a part of traditional medicine, particularly traditional Chinese medicine, for centuries. Researchers are now beginning to design clinical studies to assess its benefits. Some potential health benefits of this plant include:  A  2014 study  found that burdock root could prevent dangerously high blood glucose both in a petri dish and in a live tissue sample. In a  2015 study  of burdock root in mice, researchers found no benefits associated with raw burdock root. However, fermented burdock root significantly reduced blood sugar in mice.  For centuries, traditional healers have recommended the use of burdock root to fight the common cold,  sore throats , and other ailments. Scientific research now provides some insight into how burdock may fight infections. Some studies have found that it has antibacterial qualities. It appears to be particularly useful for  killing biofilms , which are large, sticky colonies of bacteria. The oral plaque that causes cavities is one example of a biofilm. Biofilms grow throughout the body.  A  2015 study  found that burdock root could treat biofilm-related  urinary tract infections .  Research published in 2017  found that burdock might also kill other types of bacteria.  Although there is little western scientific evidence to support the need for detox, it has long had a role in traditional Chinese medicine. Alternative health providers often talk about detoxifying the body or purifying the blood, and practitioners of traditional medicine say burdock may purify the blood.  This belief in burdock's purification benefits could be due to its ability to fight some infections and bacteria.  Burdock root may also  act as a diuretic . Diuretics help remove water from the body, offering relief for people retaining water.   Antioxidants  help fight the effects of free radicals. Free radicals are chemicals in the body that damage the body's cells and may be responsible for a wide range of ailments, including cancer, aging, and inflammatory disorders. They tend to accumulate with age, so researchers are interested in how antioxidants might slow the process of aging.  Several studies have found that burdock root acts as an antioxidant. A  2014 study  of diabetes in mice suggests that because of its antioxidant properties, burdock may improve symptoms of diabetes.  Earlier research , including a 1998 study, found that burdock root actively seeks out and destroys free radicals.  Free radical damage, autoimmune disorders, and other medical conditions can cause chronic inflammation. Inflammation is linked to many medical conditions, including osteoarthritis. A  2014 study  found that burdock root significantly decreased measures of inflammation in people with knee osteoarthritis.  Free radicals and inflammation are both linked to the development of cancer. This means that burdock's role as an antioxidant anti-inflammatory might help to prevent cancer. Preliminary research also supports the notion that burdock can help slow the growth of cancer. A  2016 study  found that burdock might slow the growth of  breast cancer  tumors.   In 1978 , the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recalled some burdock teas after at least two people were poisoned. It is important to choose a trusted source of burdock and only to purchase products that specify the product's contents. If you are unsure, then do not buy or use the herb.  Burdock may cause allergic reactions and other side effects. People who should avoid burdock root include:  People with chronic or life-threatening health conditions should ask their doctor before using burdock root.  Burdock root is a fiber-rich vegetable. People who need more fiber, including those with diabetes, may wish to include it in their diet rather than take it as a supplement. Using the root as a whole product might be safer than using supplements.  Burdock root may also help with some skin conditions, such as  acne  and minor skin irritation. Apply a paste or tincture directly to the affected area.  Burdock root is available as a tea, an herbal tincture, a crushed powder that a person can take in pill form, and as a decoction, which is a liquid made from boiling the herb. Some studies have found that fermented burdock is the best option, so people should consider fermented tinctures over other options. Some teas may also contain fermented burdock.  Because burdock research is in its infancy, there is no single recommended minimum or maximum dose.  A glass of burdock tea per day should be safe. Consult an herbalist with a background in medicine for advice about the appropriate dosage.  It is unsafe to use wild burdock because it might be contaminated. Other weeds might also be mistaken for burdock.  Research into the benefits of burdock root is not conclusive, so people should not use it in place of any medical treatment. They can, however, use it as a healthful way to improve general well-being and supplement treatment for common ailments.  For more advice, people should talk to a doctor knowledgeable about herbal supplements.    
 Burdock. (2015, June 22).  Burdock. (2015, June 22).  Doi, W., Asada, Y., Ohno, A., Okuda, Y., Masuda, S., Matsumoto, A., . . . Masuoka, N. (2015). Effect of burdock root and the fermented product on alloxan-induced mouse hyperglycemia [Abstract].  Journal of Food Research ,  4 (4).  Duh, P. (1998, April). Antioxidant activity of burdock ( Arctium lappa Linné ): Its scavenging effect on free-radical and active oxygen [Abstract].  Journal of the American Oil Chemists' Society ,  75 (4), 455–461.  Maghsoumi-Norouzabad, L., Alipoor, B., Abed, R., Sadat, B. E., Mesgari-Abbasi, M., &amp; Jafarabadi, M. A. (2014, October 28). Effects of  Arctium lappa  L. (Burdock) root tea on inflammatory status and oxidative stress in patients with knee osteoarthritis [Abstract].  International Journal of Rheumatic Diseases ,  19 (3), 255–261.  Rajasekharan, S. K., Ramesh, S., Bakkiyaraj, D., Elangomathavan, R., &amp; Kamalanathan, C. (2014, September 17). Burdock root extracts limit quorum-sensing-controlled phenotypes and biofilm architecture in major urinary tract pathogens [Abstract].  Urolithiasis ,  43 (1), 29–40.  Rajasekharan, S. K., Ramesh, S., Satish, A. S., &amp; Lee, J. (2017, March 28). Antibiofilm and anti-β-lactamase activities of burdock root extract and chlorogenic acid against Klebsiella pneumonia [Abstract].  Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology ,  27 (3), 542–551.  Rhoads, P. M., Tong, T. G., Banner, W., &amp; Anderson, R. (1984). Anticholinergic poisonings associated with commercial burdock root tea [Abstract].  Journal of Toxicology: Clinical Toxicology ,  22 (6), 581–584.  Shareef, M., Ashraf, M. A., &amp; Sarfraz, M. (2016, May). Natural cures for breast cancer treatment.  Saudi Pharmaceutical Journal ,  24 (3), 233–240.  Takemoto, K., Doi, W., Zukeran, A., Inoue, J., Ishihara, K., &amp; Masuoka, N. (2014, August). Effect of  Aspergillus awamori -fermented burdock root on mouse diabetes induced by alloxan--prevention of cell apoptosis.  Food and Nutrition Sciences ,  5 , 1554–1560.  Tousch, D., Bidel, L. P. R., Cazals, G., Ferrare, K., Leroy, J., Faucanié, M., ... Azay-Milhau, J. (2014). Chemical analysis and antihyperglycemic activity of an original extract from burdock root ( Arctium lappa ) [Abstract].  Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry ,  62 (31), 7738–7745.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What to know about burdock root."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320035.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2017, November 16). "What to know about burdock root."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  