  Birth control  implants release a synthetic form of the  hormone progesterone called progestin . This hormone prevents  ovulation  or the release of an egg. It also thickens the mucus of the cervix, making it hard for the sperm to reach an egg if the body does ovulate.  The hormone  progesterone  increases during pregnancy, so the implant works by making the body think it is already pregnant and has no need to release another egg.  Research is mixed on whether the implant causes weight gain or if the weight gain is due to other factors.  The research on weight gain related to birth control is mixed. If birth control implants do cause weight gain, it is not clear why this might happen.  One theory is that the hormone progestin may increase body fat. A  2015 study  found a 2 percent increase in body fat among women who used the implant for 12 months.  Another possibility is that progestin causes  water retention , making women feel bloated and slightly heavier, without changing their body fat percentage.  Some doctors argue that women do not gain weight on birth control, but if they believe birth control causes weight gain, then they gain weight, and later they attribute this to the birth control rather than to anything else.  From young adulthood into middle age, Americans gain an average of 1 to 2 pounds per year. These are women's prime childbearing years, too, and the time when they are most likely to use birth control implants and other hormonal contraceptives. So, gaining wait through age coincides with birth control use.  The 2014 Cochrane study quoted earlier in this article did not directly evaluate implants, but it did look at pills and patches, containing the same hormones as birth control implants. It strongly suggests that women are unlikely to gain weight from using birth control implants.   A study published in 2017  looked at weight loss in overweight and obese women after giving birth. One group received a birth control implant, and the other group used birth control that did not use hormones. Slightly fewer implant users had lost weight 6 months into the study. However, the difference in weight loss between the two groups was no statistically significant. This is evidence that hormonal implants probably do not cause weight gain. Even if they do, the gain is minimal.  However, other studies contradict the findings of these two studies.  The 2015 study mentioned early compared 75 users of the implant to 75 users of a non-hormonal IUD. Implant users had  modest increases  in body size and a 2 percent increase in body fat.  A  2016 study  found that the hormonal birth control implant did not directly cause weight gain. However, women who were told that the implant might cause weight gain were more likely to think they had gained weight. In some cases, this caused them to stop using the implant.  A  2015 study  arrived at a similar result to this last example. It concluded that teens who used hormonal birth control, including the implant, were likely to perceive weight gain.  In summary, this research means that most women should not notice weight gain when they use the implant, and if they do gain weight, the weight is likely to be minimal.  However, women who think they will gain weight may believe they have gained weight. They may even attribute weight gain due to changes in lifestyle to the implant. This could be a barrier to them making healthy lifestyle changes.  Side effects vary from woman to woman and can change based on lifestyle and overall health. Some other side effects of birth control implants include:  Birth control implants are safe, but some women should avoid them. Women should talk to a doctor about alternatives to the implant if:  Women with the following health issues will still be able to use the implant safely:  Certain lifestyle factors, such as smoking or being overweight, may exacerbate some risks of the implant. Women should be honest about their lifestyle and health history and should ask their doctors about the risks and benefits of each birth control option.  Seek emergency medical care for signs of a blood clot, such as swelling in the leg or unexplained  leg pain  accompanied by a rapid heart rate. Women who suddenly gain significant weight or retain water should talk immediately to their doctors.  For most women, weight gain is a fact of life, particularly without an aggressive exercise routine and careful management of diet. It is normal to gain a few pounds with each passing year, and weight gain that appears related to birth control implants might be part of normal weight gain that comes with age. Increasing activity can counteract weight gain that accompanies aging.  Women should discuss with their doctors whether their weight gain is healthy and normal, as well as how they can minimize problematic weight gain. For most implant users, weight gain is unlikely. Even if it occurs, it may only be a few pounds.    
 Birth control implants. (n.d.).  Birth control implants. (n.d.).  Gallo, M. F., Legardy-Williams, J., Hylton-Kong, T., Rattray, C., Kourtis, A. P., Jamieson, D. J., … Steiner, M. J. (2016, March). Association of progestin contraceptive implant and weight gain [Abstract].  Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  127 (3), 573–576.  Griffin, L., Hammond, C., Liu, D., Rademaker, A. W., &amp; Kiley, J. (2017, June). Postpartum weight loss in overweight and obese women using the etonogestrel subdermal implant: A pilot study [Abstract].  Contraception ,  95 (6), 564–570.  Hutfless, S., Maruthur, N. M., Wilson, R. F., Gudzune, K. A., Brown, R., Lau, B., . . . Segal, J. B. (2013, March). Strategies to prevent weight gain among adults. Comparative Effectiveness Reviews, No. 97.  Perez, M. J., Squires, K. J., Parks, L., &amp; Peipert, J. F. (2015, April). Perceived weight gain among adolescents using contraception [Abstract].  Journal of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology ,  28 (2), e70.  Risks and side effects of NEXPLANON. (n.d.).  Stuebe, A. M., Bryant, A. G., Lewis, R., &amp; Muddana, A. (2016, May 4). Association of etonogestrel-releasing contraceptive implant with reduced weight gain in an exclusively breastfed infant: Report and literature review.  Breastfeeding Medicine ,  11 (4), 203–206.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Do you gain weight with a birth control implant?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320058.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2017, November 18). "Do you gain weight with a birth control implant?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  