 When a person has  psoriasis , their immune system causes too many skin cells to be produced. These cells build up in red patches covered with silvery scales. Psoriasis can also cause  inflammation  throughout the body.  This article explores the relationship between psoriasis and  stress  and considers how people with psoriasis can manage their triggers.  Doctors know that a problem with the immune system causes the excessive growth of skin cells that is characteristic of psoriasis. However, the underlying causes of this immune response are not yet understood.  Psoriasis is a long-term condition and does not currently have a cure.  Psychological stress can trigger flare-ups. When a person experiences reduced stress levels, their skin tends to improve as well.  A  2013 review  notes that 68 percent of adults with psoriasis experience flare-ups after stressful incidents.  Scientists do not know precisely why stress makes psoriasis worse, but they believe it relates to the effect that stress has on inflammation.  A  2014 study  notes that stress factors can increase the immune system response involved in inflammation.  This means that being under psychological stress can lead to physical inflammation in the body. In turn, increased inflammation may make psoriasis symptoms worse.  This  2013 study  also suggests that the increase in inflammatory cells that results from stress aggravates the symptoms of psoriasis.  Additionally,  one study  found that women with  depression  were at a higher risk of developing psoriasis.  While researchers are still exploring the relationship between depression and inflammation, their connection may be influential in future psoriasis treatments.  While avoiding stress is not always possible, much can be done to reduce the effects it has on a person's body and mind.  The following activities may help reduce the impact stress has on a person with psoriasis and make flare-ups less likely:  Avoiding smoking or drinking too much alcohol and eating a healthful, balanced diet can also be beneficial to stress management.  Sometimes, however, it is hard to manage stress levels despite making lifestyle changes. If a person is finding stress hard to manage, a doctor may refer them to see a specialist to help.  A  2016 study  suggests early referral access to psychological intervention may be an important way to help manage psoriasis.  Stress may trigger psoriasis flare-ups, and the impact the flare-ups have may take a toll on a person's  mental health . This can result in a vicious circle of stress and psoriasis flare-ups.  Psoriasis is a long-term condition that can be itchy, painful, and cause a lot of discomfort. It may also be visible and cause a person to feel unhappy or uncomfortable about the way they look.  The combined effects of physical discomfort and self-consciousness may have a profound impact on a person's mental wellbeing.  A  study in 2015  found chronic stress to have a significant influence on the health-related quality of life in people with psoriasis.   Cognitive behavioral therapy  (CBT)  has been found  to be effective in helping those people with psoriasis who are experiencing mental health problems as a result of their condition.  While psoriasis is a long-term skin condition, there are some treatments available to help manage its symptoms. These include light therapy and topical medications.  Stress is a trigger for psoriasis flare-ups because of how it relates to the immune system and inflammation. Engaging in activities that help manage stress can help people with psoriasis reduce flare-ups.  Understanding how to reduce the impact of triggers, such as stress, can reduce the negative impact psoriasis may have on a person's life. Following a psoriasis treatment plan as advised by a doctor may also help keep symptoms under control.  If a person has psoriasis and is experiencing anxiety or depression, they should speak to a doctor. A doctor can refer them to a specialist who may offer CBT or similar therapies.    
 Breuer, K., Göldner, F. M., Jäger, B., Werfel, T., &amp; Schmid-Ott, G. (2015, March 2). Chronic stress experience and burnout syndrome have appreciable influence on health-related quality of life in patients with psoriasis.  Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology ,  29 (10), 1898–1904.  Breuer, K., Göldner, F. M., Jäger, B., Werfel, T., &amp; Schmid-Ott, G. (2015, March 2). Chronic stress experience and burnout syndrome have appreciable influence on health-related quality of life in patients with psoriasis.  Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology ,  29 (10), 1898–1904.  Dominguez, P., Han, J., Li, T., Ascherio, A., &amp; Qureshi, A. A. (2012, October 3). Depression and the risk of psoriasis in US women.  Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology ,  27 (9), 1163–1167.  Hunter, H. J. A., Griffiths, C. E. M., &amp; Kleyn, C. E. (2013, October 31). Does psychological stress play a role in the exacerbation of psoriasis?  British Journal of Dermatology ,  169 (5), 965–974.  Sathyanarayana-Rao, T. S., Basavaraj, K. H., &amp; Das, K. (2013, October–December). Psychosomatic paradigms in psoriasis: Psoriasis, stress and mental health.  Indian Journal of Psychiatry ,  55 (4), 313–315.  Schwartz, J., Evers, A. W. M., Bundy, C., &amp; Kimball, A. B. (2016, February 2). Getting under the skin: Report from the international psoriasis council workshop on the role of stress in psoriasis.  Frontiers in Psychology ,  7 , 87.  Slavich, G. M,, &amp; Irwin, M. R. (2014, January 13). From stress to inflammation and major depressive disorder: A social signal transduction theory of depression.  Psychological Bulletin ,  140 (3), 774–815.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Psoriasis and stress: What's the link?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320088.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2017, November 20). "Psoriasis and stress: What's the link?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  