 Several studies have found evidence that weather, and especially changes in pressure, increase the likelihood of  headaches  and  migraines  occurring. In fact, a  2017 study  demonstrated a positive association between the atmospheric pressure and the amount of migraine pain a person experiences.  Weather changes almost inevitably cause variations in atmospheric pressure. So, headaches or migraines that are caused by or affected by changes in the weather are often called barometric or pressure headaches or migraines.  For some people, weather changes immediately trigger headache and migraine symptoms, while for others it takes time for these to set in. Some people may also anticipate or sense weather changes well before they happen.  Common symptoms of barometric pressure headaches and migraines include:  Researchers think that changes in atmospheric pressure cause a pressure difference between the sinus cavities, the structures and chambers of the inner ear, and the outside world.  Depending on how quickly they occur and their intensity, these pressure changes can cause persistent pain, especially in small, confined, air-filled systems, such as the sinus and ear chambers.  Increasing external pressure may also cause blood vessels to dilate and abnormal blood flow to the brain, increasing the risk of a headache or a migraine.  In general, people with migraines and headache disorders tend to have overactive nervous systems, as well.  Atmospheric and weather changes associated with headaches include:  While weather change is considered a trigger for migraines, the accompanying pressure changes may not be enough on their own to spark a migraine unless they are dramatic or sudden.  It is crucial to seek medical attention anytime headaches or migraines cause severe pain or are disabling.  Similarly, someone should seek medical attention for a head pain that does not go away after:  In most cases, there are several low-risk treatment options available to both treat and potentially prevent headaches, especially migraines.  Other reasons to seek medical attention for headaches and migraines include:  There is no set protocol doctors use to diagnose barometric pressure headaches or migraines.  In most cases, doctors will rely on a person's medical history and diagnostic tools to rule out other causes.  Commonly used medications to treat pressure headaches and migraines include:  A doctor may prescribe medications that can be used to treat acute or severe migraines when they occur.  Basic home remedies can also help reduce the symptoms of headaches and migraines and may help shorten how long they last.  Common tips for treating barometric pressure headaches and migraines at home include:  Ways to prevent barometric headaches and migraines include:  Common preventative medications used for severe headaches or migraines include:  Several firms have developed new products to treat pressure headaches, due to the number of people with migraines who report that their symptoms worsen with changes in the weather and barometric pressure.  As an example of this, in 2016  MigraineX™ migraine relief ear  devices were released to the United States market. The product claims to reduce the intensity, duration, and pain associated with barometric pressure headaches, by slowing down the rate at which air enters the middle ear, reducing the pressure difference between the middle ear and the outside environment.   Botox  injections have also been proposed and, increasingly, are being used, as a potential migraine prevention method.  Anyone of any age can get headaches and migraines. But, according to the World Health Oganization, women are  twice as  likely as men to develop migraines, probably due to hormonal fluctuations.  Furthermore, most people with migraines and headache disorders have a family history of the conditions. Headache disorders also seem to impact most people during their most productive or active years, between the ages of 25 to 55 years.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Becker, W., Holtby, C., &amp; Nascimento, F. (2016, February 1). Weather and migraines.  Becker, W., Holtby, C., &amp; Nascimento, F. (2016, February 1). Weather and migraines.  Brand-Schieber, E., Munjal, S., Kumar, R., Andre, A. D., Valladao, W., &amp; Ramirez, M. (2016, May 30). Human factors validation study of 3 mg sumatriptan autoinjector, for migraine patients.  Medical Devices (Auckland, N.Z.) ,  9 , 131–137.  Causes. (n.d.).  Cioffi, I., Farella, M., Chiodini, P., Ammendola, L., Capuozzo, R., Klain, C., ... Michelotti, A. (2017, March 30). Effect of weather on temporal pain patterns in patients with temporomandibular disorders and migraine.  Journal of Oral Rehabilitation ,  44 , 333–339.  Headache disorders [Fact sheet]. (2016, April).  Hoffmann, J., &amp; Recober, A. (2014, October 1). Migraine and triggers: Post hoc ergo propter hoc?  Current Pain and Headache Reports ,  17 (10).  Hoffmann, J., Schirra, T., Lo, H., Neeb, L., Reuter, U., &amp; Martus, P. (2014, December 16). The influence of weather on migraine – are migraine attacks predictable?  Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology ,  2 (1), 22–28.  Migraine facts. (n.d.).  Okuma, H., Okuma, Y., &amp; Kitagawa, Y. (2015, December 18). Examination of fluctuations in atmospheric pressure related to migraine.  SpringerPlus ,  4 , 790.  Ozeki, K., Noda, T., Nakamura, M., &amp; Ojima, T. (2015, April). Weather and headache onset: A large-scale study of headache medicine purchases [Abstract].  International Journal of Biometeorology ,  59 (4), 447–451.  What are NSAIDs? (2009, January).  When to go to the emergency room for a headache or migraine. (2017, February 13).  Yang, A. C., Fuh, J.-L., Huang, N. E., Shia, B.-C., &amp; Wang, S.-J. (2015, December). Patients with migraine are right about their perception of temperature as a trigger: Time series analysis of headache diary data.  Journal of Headache and Pain ,  16 , 49.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What you should know about barometric pressure and headaches."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320038.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, November 16). "What you should know about barometric pressure and headaches."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  