 Mostly, yellow tongue clears up with basic home care. But on rare occasions, the condition is a symptom of a more serious health condition that requires medical attention, usually  jaundice .  The signs of yellow tongue vary depending on the cause. In the majority of cases, basic at home care, especially good oral hygiene, resolves cases of yellow tongue within a matter of days to weeks.  A few specific habits, conditions, and medications are known to increase a person's likelihood of developing the condition. Causes of yellow tongue include:  Some oral hygiene products, such as mouthwashes, rinses, and toothpaste, contain chemicals or particles that cause dry mouth, irritate skin cells on the tongue, or cause them to change color.  Common compounds that are known to cause yellow tongue discoloration include:  Teeth and tongue cleaning help reduce bacteria on the surface of the tongue, reducing the risk of developing yellow tongue.  Tobacco products contain compounds and toxins that can discolor skin cells or irritate them. Tobacco can also cause cells to enlarge, increasing the chances of them trapping particles and bacteria.  Saliva naturally helps clear excess bacteria and particles from the tongue's surface. Dehydration reduces saliva production, so bacteria and food particles remain near cells, increasing the risk of bacterial overgrowth. Mouth breathing, especially at night, increases the risk of dry mouth.  Black hairy tongue is a fairly common, non-cancerous condition where bacteria or fungi cause an enlarged, elongated, hair-like carpet to appear on the surface of the tongue. Although the tongue most commonly appears black, it may also turn yellow, blue, or green.  Most people only seek treatment for the condition due to its appearance, though others experience nausea, gagging,  bad breath , and a burning sensation in the mouth.  Many foods contain dyes or colorants that can stain the tongue yellow, or are sticky and remain stuck to the tongue, discoloring its surface.  Several medications and drugs also contain staining particles, cause pigment discoloration, or weaken the immune system.  Common substances and medications that may increase the likelihood of developing yellow tongue include:  Some Illicit drugs, such as cocaine, can also cause the tongue to discolor.  Overgrowth of the bacteria  Candida  can cause white patches on the tongue that eventually develop a yellow tone.  Geographic tongue is a non-cancerous condition that causes red or white patches on the top and sides of the tongue that are often surrounded by a yellow border. The condition has no known cause but primarily affects children between the ages of 4 to 5. Patches tend to occur where skin cells are missing and occasionally are painful.  In people with jaundice, bilirubin, a chemical created by the breakdown of red blood cells, builds up abnormally in tissues. Sometimes, only specific parts of the body become yellowed, such as the whites of the eyes.  Other times, the entire skin may take on a yellow glow or hue. Unlike many of the causes of yellow tongue, jaundice requires immediate medical attention and often treatment as it is might be a sign of life-threatening conditions, such as liver failure.  Some autoimmune conditions such as  eczema  weaken the body's immune system, allowing otherwise harmless bacteria to overgrow on the tongue. In a  2017 study , out of 35 individuals with yellow tongue coating, 32 had acute or severe eczema.  In the same study, out of 122 patients with white tongue coating, only three had acute eczema.  Conditions that cause  inflammation  of the gastric lining have been known to cause yellow tongue coating. Several  studies  have confirmed that a yellow, thickened tongue coating is associated with chronic cases of gastritis or inflammation of the stomach lining, especially when caused by the bacteria  Helicobacter pylori .  Though anyone can develop yellow tongue at any age, a few factors are known to increase the likelihood of developing the condition. Risk factors for yellow tongue include:  Common symptoms associated with yellow tongue include:  Oral hygiene is an essential factor. The same habits and remedies that help treat yellow tongue also help prevent it. Common ways to treat and prevent yellow tongue include:  For cases where yellow tongue causes pain, burning, or discomfort, a doctor may prescribe medication or prescription grade mouth rinses or washes.  Doctors only prescribe medications for severe symptoms, or when the condition has a specific cause, such as geographic tongue disease.  Medications that may be used to treat yellow tongue include:  In some instances, especially when accompanied by noticeable symptoms, yellow tongue can be a sign of more serious health complications, such as jaundice.  Reasons to seek medical attention for yellow tongue include:  The only complications associated with yellow tongue are those linked to more serious underlying conditions, such as jaundice.  Potential complications of jaundice include:  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Gurvits, G. E., &amp; Tan, A. (2014, August 21). Black hairy tongue syndrome.  World Journal of Gastroenterology,   20 (31), 10845–10850.  Gurvits, G. E., &amp; Tan, A. (2014, August 21). Black hairy tongue syndrome.  World Journal of Gastroenterology,   20 (31), 10845–10850.  Jayakaran, T. G. (2014). The effect of drugs in the oral cavity - A review.  Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research ,  6 (2), 89–96.  Liao, P.-Y., Hsu, P.-C., Chen, J.-M., Chiang, J.-Y., &amp; Lo, L-C. (2014). Diabetes with pyogenic liver abscess—A perspective on tongue assessment in traditional Chinese medicine [Abstract].  Complementary therapies in medicine ,  22 (2), 341–348.  Liu, X., Sun, Z.-M., Liu, Y.-N., Ji, Q., Sui, H., Zhou, L.-H., ... Li, Q. (2015). The metabonomic studies of tongue coating in  H. pylori positive chronic gastritis patients.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine .    Shah, N., Kariya, P., Dave, B., &amp; Thomas, P. (2016, December 7). Geographic tongue: A case report with review of literature.  Advances in Human Biology , 6 (3),142–144.  Yu, Z., Zhang, H., Fu, L., &amp; Lu, X. (2017, July 20). Objective research on tongue manifestation of patients with eczema.  Technology and Health Care ,  25 (S1), 143–149.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What you should know about yellow tongue."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320022.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, November 15). "What you should know about yellow tongue."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  