 Most CoolSculpting sessions take around an hour and cost about $1,000 per treatment area.  CoolSculping is a fairly new technique, only approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2012. CoolSculpting and cryolipolysis are registered trademarks of Zeltiq Aesthetics.  While the number of independent clinical research studies backing the procedure is still relatively small, Zeltiq Aesthetics claim CoolSculpting lowers the amount of fat cells in the treatment area by between  20 and 25 percent .  Most people start to notice the effects a few days after the procedure, but it often takes 1 to 4 months for the full results to show.  Although research is still limited, CoolSculpting is generally viewed as a safer, non-invasive type of fat reduction surgery than traditional procedures, such as liposuction.  Most people do not feel anything during the procedure, aside from a tugging sensation where the skin is between the device's two cooling panels.  As the procedure does not involve any cutting, tissue manipulation, or anesthesia, most people do not need any recovery time and can immediately resume normal activities.  The only noticeable side effects of the procedure tend to be minor and occur only around the area of treatment. Most minor side effects reduce or go away within a few days to weeks after the procedure.  It is normal, however, to experience numbness or loss of sensation in the treatment area for around a month.  Common immediate side effects of CoolSculpting include:  A person may continue to experience these side effects for a few weeks after the procedure. Other common side effects that a person may experience in the first few weeks after CoolSculpting include:  The risk of side effects and complications often depends on the medical professional performing the procedure.  People should make sure to choose an experienced, trusted professional, such as a dermatologist or plastic surgeon. Individuals can do this by researching local options and asking questions before committing to the procedure.  CoolSculpting is relatively new, and so the full extent of risks, side effects, and complications associated with the procedure is still unknown.  A  2017 study  reviewing all available research papers from two major medical research databases found only 319 studies linked to the terms cool sculpting, cryolipolysis, fat freezing, and lipocryolysis.  As it is relatively new, few medical professionals are aware of the procedure or have much experience with it  CoolSculpting is also only approved and proven effective on a limited number of body areas.  Body regions where CoolSculpting is considered safe and effective for removing minor fat deposits include:  CoolSculpting is considered a safe, effective way to reduce the number of fat cells in a small target area. It is not considered a form of weight loss and not recommended for the treatment of  obesity .  The procedure is designed to help dissolve stubborn fat cells that usually only shrink through diet and exercise.  People with weakened immune systems are not ideal candidates for surgeries such as CoolSculpting. People with certain conditions that weaken or change the body's ability to handle the cold can also experience serious medical complications.  Conditions that rule out the use of CoolSculpting include:  In some very rare cases, fat cells respond to CoolSculpting by enlarging rather than dying. This condition is called paradoxical adipose hyperplasia (PAH).  A 2014 study reported the incidence of PAH with CoolSculpting is currently thought to be around  0.0051 percent .  Researchers are not sure why PAH occurs, but most people who develop the condition are men. While PAH does not cause any symptoms aside from changing physical appearance, only surgery can reverse it.  Additional rare complications that may occur after CoolSculpting include:  One benefit of CoolSculpting is that, unlike with diet and exercise, fat cells are actually destroyed and removed from the body. This means the same fat cells cannot return or enlarge with weight gain.  There are several other benefits of CoolSculpting:  Overall, the procedure can help boost self-confidence, especially when combined with weight loss achieved through a healthful diet and exercise.  There is not much independent research on CoolSculpting at present. What research exists suggests that it is a low-risk option for removing small amounts of fat that is proving difficult to remove with diet and exercise.  People who are interested in this form of treatment should discuss it first with their doctor. They can help decide whether it is the right option, or if there are more suitable ways for removing unwanted fat.    
 About CoolSculpting ®. (n.d).  About CoolSculpting ®. (n.d).  Derrick, C., Shridharani, S., &amp; Broyles, J. M. (2015, February 14). The safety and efficacy of cryolipolysis: A systematic review of available literature.  Aesthetic Surgery Journal ,  35 (7), 830–836.  Fat reduction vs. weight loss. (n.d.).  Ingargiola, M. J., Motakef, S., Chung, M. T., Vasconez, H. C., &amp; Sasaki, G. H. (2015). Cryolipolysis for fat reduction and body contouring: Safety and efficacy of current treatment paradigms.  Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery ,  135 (6), 1581–1590.  Jalian, H. R., Avram, M. M., Garibyan, L., Mihm, M. C., &amp; Anderson, R. R. (2014, September 23). Paradoxical adipose hyperplasia after cryolipolysis.  JAMA Dermatology ,  150 (3), 317–319.  Nassab, R. (2015, March 1). The evidence behind noninvasive body contouring devices.  Aesthetic Surgery Journal ,  35 (3), 279–293.  Stefani, W. (2015, September 1). Adipose hypertrophy following cryolipolysis.  Aesthetic Surgery Journal ,  35 (7), 218–220.  Stevens, W. G., Pietrzak, L. K., &amp; Spring, M. (2013, August 1). Broad overview of a clinical and commercial experience with CoolSculpting.  Aesthetic Surgery Journal ,  33 (6), 835–846.  Swanson, E. (2015, July 1). Cryolipolysis: The importance of scientific evaluation of a new technique.  Aesthetic Surgery Journal ,  35 (5), 116–119.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What are the risks of CoolSculpting?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320138.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, November 25). "What are the risks of CoolSculpting?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  