 While hair transplants are the most effective way to increase the amount or thickness of hair, they can be expensive in terms of both treatment and recovery.  This article looks at the cost of hair transplants and transplant recovery and outlines what can be expected after hair transplant surgery.  The cost of a hair transplant varies greatly and depends on several factors. In general, it will cost between  $4,000 and $15,000 .  Some factors affecting cost include:  It should be noted that some clinics offer financing options or payment plans to help spread the cost of treatment over several installments.  As most insurance companies view hair transplants as cosmetic, the majority of plans do not cover the process.  The two most popular types of hair transplants are FUSS and FUE, which are outlined below.  FUSS involves removing a strip of skin from a non-bald area. This donor site is usually the back of the head. The cut is then closed and hidden by the surrounding hair.  The strip of scalp that is removed is divided into tiny sections called grafts, each containing just one hair or a few hairs. These are each relocated to the balding areas being treated, known as the recipient sites.  The cost of the hair transplant can depend on the number of grafts being relocated. This can be an advantage if the person only requires a few grafts, as it may work out cheaper than paying a flat rate for the treatment.  One of the main disadvantages of FUSS transplants is that they typically lead to scarring around the donor site. Some people may also experience pain and swelling in this area.  FUE surgery involves shaving the back of the head and then removing individual hair follicles, as opposed to taking an entire strip of scalp.  The donor sites heal relatively well. Only small dots are noticeable, but these are covered by the surrounding hair.  As with FUSS, the surgeon will prepare the grafts and place them onto the recipient areas. The entire process takes between 4 and 8 hours, depending on the transplant size.  Usually, FUE is less invasive than FUSS, and there is a lower likelihood of experiencing complications, such as scarring or post-operative pain. Also, the hair follicles can be removed from several areas, rather than from one single site, so hair thickness at the donor sites is not affected.  FUE transplant surgery is often more expensive than FUSS.  The scalp may be quite sensitive following hair transplant surgery. It will be necessary to wear bandages for a few days, and the doctor may prescribe pain medication, an  antibiotic  to prevent infection, or an anti-inflammatory to stop swelling.  Recovery time depends on the type of surgery used, with FUE offering faster recovery times.  In general, most people return to work within a week of the procedure. If stitches are used, they will be removed within 10 days.  According to the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, most of the transplanted hair will fall out within  6 weeks  of the surgery. New hair growth should be visible in the recipient areas within months, with hair growing by a half-inch each month.  Along with the cost of the hair transplant surgery, there may be recovery costs, such as:  Treatment may also be necessary for complications after surgery, such as infection, which can involve spending money on visits to the doctor and additional medications.  Also, some surgeons prescribe minoxidil (Rogaine), which is a hair-growth drug, following the transplant. This can be expensive, and its effectiveness is unclear.  Hair transplant surgery is considered to be safe when carried out by a qualified and experienced surgeon. However, all surgeries carry risks.  The risks associated with hair transplant procedures include:  Sometimes, some of the original hair in the recipient site can fall out, an occurrence known as shock loss. Usually, this is not permanent, and the hair will grow back with time.  Additionally, there is the risk that the grafts will not "take" and the surgery will have to be repeated.  Not everyone who wants thicker hair will undergo a hair transplant. For some, the cost of the hair transplant is too high, while others would prefer a nonsurgical approach.  The  American Academy of Dermatology  list some of the most common alternatives to hair transplant surgery as:  Finally, hair loss that is caused by medical conditions, such as thyroid disorders, may be reversed by treating the underlying condition.  The cost of hair transplants can be high, and there is no guarantee of success. There are also other factors to take into account when considering a hair transplant, such as the cost of travel, medications needed after the transplant, and the recovery time.  Those who are interested in getting a hair transplant should thoroughly research the subject first and choose a skilled and experienced surgeon to carry out the treatment.  It is advisable to discuss surgical risks and recovery times with the surgeon before going ahead with the procedure.    
 Hair loss. (n.d.).  Hair loss. (n.d.).  Hair transplant cost guide. (n.d.).  Hair transplant recovery. (n.d.).  Ranaweera, A. (2013). Low dose laser therapy for hair loss.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What are the costs involved with a hair transplant?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320153.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2017, November 26). "What are the costs involved with a hair transplant?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  