 There are a variety of home remedies that people use to try and regrow their hair. However, it is important to remember that research to support such methods is not always extensive.  There are many common myths about lifestyle approaches or remedies that can help hair regrow, and it is often difficult to determine the fact from the fiction.  Here we will explore what works and what doesn't work.  There are a range of remedies and techniques that people can try. Including:  There are some misconceptions about whether hair care does contribute to hair loss and regrowth.  For example, washing hair too often  does not  cause hair loss. Blow-drying hair can cause hair loss because it can damage, burn, or dry out the hair — however, this hair will grow back.  Hair dye is another cause of temporary hair loss — most hair-coloring treatments contain chemicals that can damage the hair and make it fall out.  Overly vigorous brushing can cause injury, which can lead to hair loss and some hairstyles, such as tight plaits, ponytails, or cornrows, can cause hair loss because there is too much tension on the hair.  Hair care products, such as gel, mousse, or hairspray, do not cause hair loss, though.   A study conducted in Japan  showed that scalp massage could increase hair thickness. The men involved in the study had regular massages over a 24-week period, and while hair growth rate did not improve, thickness improved significantly.  Researchers believe that this could be to do with increased blood flow and direct stimulation of the cells.  While  hair loss can be affected by nutrient deficiency , the exact links between diet and hair loss are complicated:  It is important to remember that there is a lack of research on the role of supplementation. Researchers do not know whether supplements will prevent hair loss in people that do not have nutrient deficiencies.  In fact, the over supplementation of certain nutrients, such as  vitamin  A, vitamin E, and  selenium , can lead to hair loss.  There appears to be a direct link between  stress  and hair loss. Likewise, a shock to the system, be that through physical or emotional trauma, can also act as a shock to the hair follicles and they can stop growing.  In  some cases , the use of red  ginseng , which can be taken as a supplement, has been shown to promote hair growth.  Exactly why this happens is unclear, although researchers think it could be because of indirect stimulation of the hair follicles.  Before taking any supplements, it is important to ensure that they won't interact with any medication or existing conditions.  The omega-6 fatty acid arachidonic acid  has been shown  to promote hair growth by helping to speed up the production of the follicles.  This natural hair growth supplement  was shown  to promote hair growth in women experiencing temporary thinning. However, a further study also showed its ability to decrease hair loss.  The use of geranium oil as a treatment  significantly promotes  hair growth and can prevent hair loss. People can apply it by mixing a few drops into a shampoo or conditioner.   Coconut oil  is widely used to treat damaged hair of various types. It  significantly reduces  the protein loss in both damaged and undamaged hair as it can penetrate the hair shaft.  Coconut oil can be used as a pre-wash and a post-wash wash hair product.  The use of aloe vera as a treatment for a variety of different things has been traced back as far as 6,000 years ago in Ancient Egypt.  One such treatment is for hair loss, and  evidence has shown  it has a soothing effect on the skin that can help alleviate certain conditions.  Using rosemary oil for at least 6 months  has been shown  in a study to increase hair count. However, many of the group experienced scalp itching as a side effect.  Here are some  commonly told mistruths  and also some genuine reasons behind hair loss.   Only men experience hair loss    FALSE : Women also lose their hair, but this tends to be hormone related.  Some women experience hair loss after pregnancy, as a symptom of polycystic ovary syndrome, or if they have problems with their thyroid gland.   Hair loss is hereditary    TRUE : Although it is not limited to either side of the family. The hair loss gene can be passed from either the father or the mother.   Masturbation will cause hair loss    FALSE : There is no known link between masturbation or having sex that can cause hair loss.   Aging leads to hair loss    TRUE : As both men and women age, the number of follicles on the scalp reduces, which means the hair will gradually become thinner and sparser.   Wearing a hat causes hair loss    FALSE : Unless the hat is too tight and causes tension on the hair, wearing a hat has no link to hair loss whatsoever.   The sun causes hair loss    FALSE : Hair loss occurs at the follicle, meaning at the base of the hair. The sun cannot reach the follicle because the hair acts as a shield against it.    
 Ablon, G. (2015, March 25). A 3-month, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study evaluating the ability of an extra-strength marine protein supplement to promote hair growth and decrease shedding in women with self-perceived thinning hair.  Dermatology Research and Practice ,  2015 .  Ablon, G. (2015, March 25). A 3-month, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study evaluating the ability of an extra-strength marine protein supplement to promote hair growth and decrease shedding in women with self-perceived thinning hair.  Dermatology Research and Practice ,  2015 .  Aloe vera (2016, September)  Boisvert, W. A., Yu, M., Choi, Y., Jeong, G. H., Zhang, Y.-L., Cho, S., … Lee, B.-H. (2017, February 13). Hair growth-promoting effect of  Geranium sibiricum  extract in human dermal papilla cells and C57BL/6 mice.  Effluviums (n.d.)  Guo, E. L., &amp; Katta, R. (2017, January 31). Diet and hair loss: Effects of nutrient deficiency and supplement use.  Dermatology Practical &amp; Conceptual ,  7 (1), 1–10.  Hair loss myth buster (2012)  Koyama, T., Kobayashi, K., Hama, T., Murakami, K., &amp; Ogawa, R. (2016, January 25). Standardized scalp massage results in increased hair thickness by inducing stretching forces to dermal papilla cells in the subcutaneous tissue.  Eplasty ,  16 .  Panahi, Y., Taghizadeh, M., Marzony, E. T., &amp; Sahebkar, A. (2015, Jan-Feb). Rosemary oil vs minoxidil 2% for the treatment of androgenetic alopecia: A randomized comparative trial [Abstract].  Skinmed ,  13 (1), 15-21.  Park, G.-H., Park, K.-y., Cho, H.-i., Lee, S.-M., Han, J. S., Won, C. H., ... Lee, D. H. (2015, March 1). Red ginseng extract promotes the hair growth in cultured human hair follicles.  Journal of Medicinal Food ,  18 (3), 354–362.  Rele, A. S., &amp; Mohile, R. B. (2003, March–April). Effect of mineral oil, sunflower oil, and coconut oil on prevention of hair damage [Abstract].  Journal of Cosmetic Science ,  54 (2), 175–192.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "What are the options for natural hair regrowth?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320155.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2017, November 26). "What are the options for natural hair regrowth?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  