 For more than 50 years,  birth control  pills have given women the peace of mind of knowing that they won't get pregnant until they are ready for a baby.  Around 82 percent  of women who use contraception have used the pill, according to a report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  The birth control pill has come a long way in those last 50 years, and there are many different options for women who use the pill for birth control. In this article, we take a look at monophasic pills specifically.  One of the most common types of birth control pill is the combination pill. This type of pill contains both progestin and  estrogen .  These two hormones work in several ways to prevent pregnancy:  The amount of estrogen and the kind of progestin is different in each brand and type of pill. Most pills have either 20 or 35 micrograms (mcg) of estrogen. There are different types of combination pills, depending on the quantity of hormones in each pack.  Monophasic pills have the same amount of estrogen and progestin throughout the entire month of pills.  Monophasic birth control pills are mostly used to prevent pregnancy in women who are sexually active, but there are many other uses as well. Some women, such as those with  polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) , use the pill to help regulate their menstrual cycles.  Also, the pill can improve menstrual cycle symptoms by:  Medically, the use of the birth control pill may also improve bone density and bone health, and reduce the risk of ovarian and uterine  cancer .  In contrast to monophasic pills, multiphasic pills have varying amounts of estrogen and progestin in the pack of pills.  The most common type of multiphasic pills is triphasic, meaning that there are three different doses of estrogen in the pill pack.  This type of pill follows the changing hormone levels during a woman's menstrual cycle more closely.  Monophasic pills come in either 21-day or 28-day pill packs. In both cases, these types of pills have the same amount of hormones for 21 days.  This 7-day break from active hormones is the time that a woman would have her period.  Monophasic pills are the most commonly prescribed type of birth control. There are many brands of monophasic pills, all having estrogen (ethinyl estradiol) and a variety of progestin formulas.  This table lists various progestin combinations with examples of a brand name:  A woman should keep in mind that some of these brands also make triphasic or biphasic pills with the same brand name.  People should always talk to their doctor if they have any medication questions or concerns.  Everyone's body reacts differently to the birth control pill. Some women experience fewer side effects when taking the monophasic pill because they are taking a steady level of hormones in their pill.  Also, women taking combination pills may have lighter periods with fewer cramps. Some types of pill have been associated with reduced  acne .   Research has also shown  that combination pills can reduce the risk of certain types of cancers, such as ovarian and endometrial.  Monophasic birth control pills are the most commonly prescribed and studied. This means that they have the most amount of research supporting their safety and efficacy. It does not mean, however, that this type of birth control is better, safer, or more effective than the other brands or types.  The side effects of monophasic birth control pills are the same as other types of birth control pills. They may include:  These symptoms are not usually anything to be concerned about, but it is always best for someone to discuss them with their doctor to be sure.  Birth control pills have also been linked with some serious medical conditions. Anyone experiencing any of the following side effects while taking the pill should contact their doctor immediately:  If the symptoms occur after-hours, someone should go to the nearest emergency room. These symptoms could signal the presence of a blood clot that can cause a  stroke  or  heart attack .  Without prompt treatment, very serious complications or even death can occur.  While using a monophasic birth control pill is usually safe, some women should not use the pill.  Women over the age of 35 years old, women who smoke, or women who have a history of previous blood clots should not use monophasic pills.  Before using the pill, women should also be warned about their risk for blood clots or other complications if they have any of the following medical conditions:  Women who are breast-feeding should not take the combination birth control pill because of the risk that the estrogen in the pill can reduce milk production and supply. Lactating women who wish to use hormonal birth control should consider using a progestin-only pill to avoid this concern.  In addition, certain medications may not be as effective if taken with a birth control. Medications that may interact with the birth control pill include:  Women taking these drugs should be sure to mention it to their doctor and may want or need to use another form of birth control.  The monophasic birth control pill is a very safe and effective option for many women. When used correctly, it is  91–99 percent effective  in preventing pregnancy.  It may take experimenting with a few different brands before the right pill is found, so it is important to stay in touch with the doctor and report any side effects.    
 Birth control pills. (n.d.).  Birth control pills. (n.d.).  Daniels, K., Mosher, W. D., &amp; Jones, J. (2013, February 14). Contraceptive methods women have ever used: United States, 1982–2010.  National Health Statistics Reports , (62).  Goldstein, S. R. (n.d.). Effectiveness of birth control pills.  Hankinson, S. E., Colditz, G. A., Hunter, D. J., Spencer, T. L., Rosner, B., &amp; Stampfer, M. J. (1992, October). A quantitative assessment of oral contraceptive use and risk of ovarian cancer [Abstract].  Obstetrics and Gynecology ,  80 (4), 708–714.  How effective is the birth control pill? (n.d.).  Oral contraceptives and cancer risk. (2012, March 21).  Which birth control is right for me? (2017, February 22).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "What to know about monophasic birth control."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320122.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2017, November 23). "What to know about monophasic birth control."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  