 An autoimmune disease is any condition where a person's immune system mistakenly attacks and damages its own bodily tissues.  Inflammation  is a common feature of an autoimmune disease. Examples include  psoriasis ,  rheumatoid arthritis , and  lupus .  This article explores what the AIP diet is and what foods a person can and cannot eat if they want to follow the diet. It also considers the scientific evidence available to support the effectiveness of the AIP diet in the management and treatment of autoimmune diseases.  Also known as the paleo autoimmune protocol, the AIP diet is a much stricter version of the Paleo diet (which is based on meat, fish, vegetables, nuts and seeds).  It advises eliminating foods that may cause inflammation in the gut and eating nutrient-rich foods.  The AIP diet is based on a belief that autoimmune conditions are caused by something called a "leaky gut", which is medically now referred to as altered intestinal permeability.  The theory is that small holes in the gut cause food to leak into the body. This is thought to cause the immune system to overreact and start attacking bodily tissues in error.  By eating nutrient-rich foods and avoiding inflammatory ones, the AIP diet aims to heal any holes in the gut. This is thought to help:  People who do the AIP diet should follow it strictly for a few weeks and then slowly reintroduce foods that they have avoided.  The idea is to see if there is a reaction when the food is reintroduced. If there is a reaction, the suggestion is that a person should exclude this food from their diet long-term.  These include:  These include:  Here are some AIP meal plans to get started.  This AIP smoothie recipe, from  Paleo Mum , is a tasty breakfast meal replacement:  Blend all the ingredients except for the protein powder in a food processor for up to 2 minutes. Add the protein powder and  pulse  the food processor to blend it in.  This soup recipe from  AIP Lifestyle  is a simple and tasty idea for lunch that a person can make in advance:  After heating the bone broth in a pan and steaming the parsnips, add all the ingredients into a food processor and blend.  This quick and easy AIP chicken dinner idea is inspired by  Eat Something Delicious :  Arrange the frozen vegetables and chicken in a baking tray and season with the oil, salt, and herb blend.  Cover the tray with foil and roast in the oven for 45 minutes. Remove the foil and roast in the oven for a further 20 minutes, or so.  This tasty snack idea is from  Angel Slice :  Blend all ingredients except for carob chips in a food processor. Pour into a greased loaf pan and add in the carob chips. Bake for up to 50 minutes. The bars can be served with whipped coconut cream on top as an addition.  The logic behind the AIP diet is that avoiding gut-irritating foods and eating nutrient-rich ones will reduce inflammation and heal any holes in the gut.  This is believed to reduce or prevent the immune system from attacking bodily tissues. In this way, the AIP diet aims to reduce the symptoms of autoimmune diseases. But what evidence is there that it works?  There is some scientific evidence to support the link between gut health and inflammatory disease.  A  2012 study  suggested bacterial growth in the gut might be linked to inflammatory and autoimmune diseases.  This  study in 2014  notes that the gut wall is maintained by networks of proteins. It explains that inflammation affects how well the gut wall functions. It also notes that  food allergies  can make the gut wall more porous.  The study concludes that problems with the gut wall are associated with autoimmune diseases. This goes some way to support the idea of the "leaky gut" proposed by supporters of the AIP diet.  However, the study adds that more research is needed to confirm that gut wall dysfunction is a primary risk factor in the development of inflammatory disease.  A  2017 study  found that eliminating certain foods as part of the AIP diet can improve symptoms of the autoimmune disease inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).  This is one of the first clinical studies into the effectiveness of AIP diet. Further studies are required to support claims that it can reduce symptoms of other autoimmune diseases.  Research suggests that autoimmune diseases may be linked to how porous the gut wall may be.  It follows that a diet that promotes gut health may be beneficial for those with autoimmune diseases. There is evidence that one such regime, the AIP diet, may reduce symptoms of the autoimmune disease IBD.  More research is needed to say with certainty that the AIP diet can improve symptoms of all autoimmune diseases. However, the AIP diet is a healthful diet that people with autoimmune diseases may find beneficial. This diet may also reduce the need for certain medications or high dosages.  Anyone with an autoimmune disease looking to try the AIP diet should discuss this with their doctor.    
 AIP morning smoothie. (2016, January).  AIP morning smoothie. (2016, January).  Arugula parsnip soup with spring onions. (2014, February).  Eat something delicious. (2017, April).  Groschwitz, K. R., &amp; Hogan, S. P. (2009, July). Intestinal barrier function: Molecular regulation and disease pathogenesis.  Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology ,  124 (1), 3-22.  Konijeti, G. G., Kim, N., Lewis, J. D., Groven, S., Chandrasekaran, A., Grandhe. S., … &amp; Torkamani, A. Efficacy of the autoimmune protocol diet for inflammatory bowel disease.  Inflammatory Bowel Disease ,  23 (11), 2054-2060.  Plantain carob chip bars (autoimmune paleo). (2015, June 13).  Sutherland, D. B., &amp; Fagarasan, S. (2012, June). IgA synthesis: A form of functional immune adaptation extending beyond gut.  Current Opinion in Immunology ,  24 (3), 261–268.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "All you need to know about the AIP diet."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320195.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2017, November 30). "All you need to know about the AIP diet."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  