 Luckily, there are many foods to eat that may help a person reduce the symptoms of  diarrhea . There are also some foods to avoid when dealing with a bout of diarrhea, and some additional home care tips to consider.  Anyone who is experiencing persistent diarrhea should see a doctor, as a person may become dehydrated over time.  Diarrhea is a bowel movement that is more liquid than solid or has a loose texture. It is a common problem and may occur a couple of times each year. Diarrhea will usually last no more than 3 days.  People with chronic digestive conditions, such as  irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS) or  Crohn's disease , may experience diarrhea more regularly.  In addition to loose or runny stools, diarrhea is also associated with other digestive symptoms, including:  A person's diet is crucial if they are experiencing diarrhea. Some foods might help relieve symptoms of diarrhea while eating other foods can make diarrhea worse.  While recovering from diarrhea, a person should eat bland, simple foods that are easy to digest and will help absorb some water from the stool.   Bland foods   People with diarrhea should eat bland foods, as spicy or complex foods can irritate the bowels. Bland foods that may help with diarrhea include:  These foods may be especially helpful on the first day of dealing with diarrhea. Eating many small meals throughout the day can help keep the digestive system from becoming overworked.   Probiotics   Probiotic foods, such as yogurt and kefir, may help in some cases, but in others, probiotics may irritate the digestive system even more.  Probiotics aid digestion by improving the balance of good and bad bacteria in the gut. However, dairy products can irritate the digestive system, so a person may wish to try non-dairy sources of probiotics, such as miso or sauerkraut.  Liquids are also vital to recovery. People with diarrhea must drink plenty of water throughout the day and should drink an additional cup of water after every loose bowel movement.  Drinking plenty of water helps prevent  dehydration  and flush any toxins out of the body.  However, as well as water, the body also loses minerals and electrolytes through diarrhea. People should try to drink liquids containing minerals and electrolytes to replenish those lost. Sources of electrolytes and minerals include:  Many foods can aggravate the digestive system and make diarrhea worse. These include:   Spicy foods   Spicy ingredients can act as irritants in the digestive system. This is why people dealing with diarrhea should stick to bland foods, as they pose the least risk of agitating the digestive system.   Fried foods   It is not advisable to eat foods high in fat or oil when recovering from diarrhea. Added fats and oils from frying can be difficult for the sensitive digestive system to process and will likely make symptoms worse.  A person can try eating boiled or steam vegetables and lean proteins instead.   Sugary foods and artificial sweeteners   Sugars that pass into the colon may disrupt the already sensitive bacteria there, making diarrhea worse. This includes fruit juices and high-sugar fruits.  People with diarrhea should also avoid artificial sweeteners, as some can have a laxative effect.   High fiber foods   It may also help to avoid too much fiber. Fiber helps keep the digestive system active. Usually, this is a good thing, but when the body is trying to recover from diarrhea, fiber may make symptoms worse.  Insoluble fibers are the main culprit and can be found in foods such as:  Soluble fibers, such as the pectin found in apples and bananas, can actually help a person recover from diarrhea, but a person should still try to limit their intake at least for the first day of symptoms.   Other foods not to eat   Other foods that can irritate the bowels during diarrhea include:  Caffeinated beverages, such as  coffee , tea, and soda, may overstimulate the digestive system and make symptoms worse.  Carbonated drinks may also irritate or contribute to other symptoms, such as bloating and cramps. People should also avoid alcohol while dealing with diarrhea.  While many sports drinks contain electrolytes that may help with dehydration, they often contain added sugars or artificial sweeteners. Coconut water or electrolyte-enhanced water are good alternatives.  In addition to following a diet that will help relieve diarrhea, there are several other remedies a person can take to make a swift recovery.  Other diarrhea treatments include bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto Bismol) and Ioperamide (Imodium). These drugs can help relieve occasional cases of diarrhea and may be helpful to have on hand in a medicine cupboard.   Pepto Bismol  and  Imodium  are available for purchase over-the-counter or online.  People with diarrhea should also ensure they get enough rest, as putting the body in stressful situations while dealing with diarrhea may make matters worse.  Limit physical activity while diarrhea symptoms are presenting, as strenuous activity may put the body at a greater risk of dehydration.  Hydration is also vital when managing diarrhea. Drink plenty of water throughout the day.  Blood or mucus may appear in the stool in more serious cases of diarrhea. This is often accompanied by a fever and requires a visit to the doctor as soon as possible.  Untreated diarrhea can also lead to serious complications, including dehydration. A person with severe diarrhea may require hospitalization and intravenous electrolytes.  Anyone experiencing a fever of higher than 102°F or severe abdominal pains should visit a doctor.  Parents or guardians should carefully monitor any children with diarrhea. If symptoms do not clear up with 24 hours, they should call the doctor for guidance.  If a child shows any signs of dehydration, seek immediate medical care. Signs include:  Any additional symptoms should be reported to a doctor as soon as possible for diagnosis and treatment.  Many cases of diarrhea last only a few days and respond well to home treatments. Eating a simple diet, increasing fluid intake, and using over-the-counter medications as necessary can help reduce symptoms quickly.  In cases where the body does not respond to these treatments after 2 or 3 days, a person should visit their doctor for diagnosis and treatment.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.   Article last updated on Mon 19 November 2018.  Visit our  GastroIntestinal / Gastroenterology  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on GastroIntestinal / Gastroenterology.   
 Eswaran, S., Muir, J., &amp; Chey, W. D. (2013, April 2). Fiber and functional gastrointestinal disorders.  The American Journal of Gastroenterology ,  108 (5), 718–727.  Eswaran, S., Muir, J., &amp; Chey, W. D. (2013, April 2). Fiber and functional gastrointestinal disorders.  The American Journal of Gastroenterology ,  108 (5), 718–727.  Halmos, E. P., Power, V. A., Shepherd, S. J., Gibson, P. R., &amp; Muir, J. G. (2014, January). A diet low in FODMAPs reduces symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome [Abstract].  Gastroenterology ,  146 (1), 67–75.  Hempel, S., Newberry, S. J., Maher, A. R., Wang, Z., Miles, J. N. V., Shanman, R., ... Shekelle, P. G. (2012, May 9). Probiotics for the prevention and treatment of antibiotic-associated diarrhea: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  JAMA ,  307 (18), 1959–1969.  Konturek, P. C., Brzozowski, T., &amp; Konturek, S. J. (2011). Stress and the gut: Pathophysiology, clinical consequences, diagnostic approach and treatment options.  Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology ,  62 (6), 591–599.  Symptoms &amp; causes of diarrhea. (2016, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "What foods to eat if you have diarrhea."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Nov. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320124.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, November 19). "What foods to eat if you have diarrhea."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  