 Most  warts  are painless and harmless and go away on their own after a few months or possibly years. But depending on their location, size, and type, warts can cause more serious symptoms that warrant treatment.  Cryosurgery, or the use of very cold temperatures to freeze off abnormal cells and tissues, is one of the most commonly used treatments to remove all types of warts.  Symptoms and problems that might necessitate treatment include:  A doctor usually begins by paring the wart, using a scalpel. This process scrapes away dead skin cells to increase the amount of infected surface to be exposed to the liquid nitrogen.  In some cases, a doctor may instruct an individual to pare down the wart at home the night before the procedure, or apply salicylic acid gels, creams, and bandages, nightly for 1 to 2 weeks before cryosurgery.  During most cryosurgeries, a tool called a cryostat gun, probe, cotton ball, or dipstick is used to deliver a dose of liquid nitrogen to the wart.  Every doctor will have their preferences and methods. However, most cryosurgeries involve at least one, 10-second freezing session. Each session should last no longer than 30 seconds.  Liquid nitrogen-based cryosurgery can be safely used on all kinds of warts, as long as additional health conditions do not prohibit the procedure.  Most warts, except very small ones or those on the hands, require more than one treatment. Larger and plantar warts often need two freezing sessions per treatment.  Overall, the removal of warts usually requires between 1 to 6 treatments in total, performed once every 2 to 3 weeks for several months.  Though many doctors and dermatologists use cryosurgery to treat warts, there is limited research to support the use of the procedure over concentrated salicylic acid treatment.  Given its wide and often successful use, researchers are now beginning to produce evidence that cryotherapy may be the most effective treatment for certain kinds of warts.  A 2012 study that reviewed the research on the effectiveness of cryosurgery found the procedure had between a  60 and 86 percent  rate of success when treating common and  genital warts .  A retrospective study from 2015 concluded that cryosurgery is effective in removing common warts in some  75 percent  of cases.  When considering the success rate of cryotherapy, it is important to understand that the procedure does not cure the underlying viral infection.  Currently, there is no antiviral medication known to treat the  HPV  virus. This means that warts can regrow, although, often, once they are removed, the body's immune system can destroy any remaining infected cells to get rid of the virus.  Large warts and plantar warts on the soles of the feet tend to be both the hardest to treat and most likely to return after cryosurgery. By some estimates, plantar warts have a return rate of more than 50 percent after cryosurgery.  People are not able to perform liquid nitrogen-based therapies at home. Several over-the-counter products, however, claim to freeze warts, using a mixture of dimethyl ether, propane, and sometimes isobutane.  They are not considered as good as cryosurgery because they do not reach such cold temperatures. Nevertheless, Dr. Scholl's Freeze Away Wart Remover has been shown to maintain a temperature of minus 42 °C at its applicator tip.  Some studies say that over-the-counter wart freezing products can freeze tissues to minus 94 °C.  Over-the-counter wart freezing products:  Other over-the-counter wart removal products contain the same acids as doctors use to remove warts. These products can be gels, patches, pads, and strips, although the acid is at much lower doses and concentrations than a doctor would use.  They can be purchased online .  In most cases, over-the-counter products are only effective in removing small, common warts from the hands and fingers. For larger or more complicated growths, such as plantar warts, home remedies will normally only reduce the size or appearance of the wart temporarily.  Alternative remedies, such as applying duct tape to the area for several weeks, are commonly used but have little scientific backing.  Most people experience minor pain during cryosurgery and a burning sensation when the skin thaws afterward.  During and immediately after the procedure, the treatment site may become red and swollen. It may also be sore for a few days after the surgery.  A lot of people develop a blister or fluid-filled sac within 24 hours where the wart was removed. Most blisters caused by cryosurgery tend to go away on their own in 2 or 3 days.  During the entire recovery period, typically a week or so, areas treated with cryotherapy should be kept clean, dry, and free from friction or pressure.  The risks associated with cryosurgery depend on the type, size, and location of the wart being treated.  Usually, plantar warts, large warts, and those in areas that experience a lot of pressure or friction tend to cause the most pain and risks of complication, such as scarring or tissue damage.  Potential side effects of cryosurgery include:  Infection is one of the most serious, complications associated with cryosurgery.  Common signs of infection include:  Without treatment, an infection can lead to many side effects, including  coma  and death in extreme cases. It is important to seek medical treatment if an infection is suspected.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Afsar, F. S., Erkan, C. D., &amp; Karaca, S. (2015, March 30). Clinical practice trends in cryosurgery: A retrospective study of cutaneous lesions.  Advances in Dermatology and Allergology ,  32 (2), 88–93. Afsar, F. S., Erkan, C. D., &amp; Karaca, S. (2015, March 30). Clinical practice trends in cryosurgery: A retrospective study of cutaneous lesions.  Advances in Dermatology and Allergology ,  32 (2), 88–93. Camargo, C. L. de A., Belda, W., Fagundes, L. J., &amp; Romiti, R. (2014, March–April). A prospective, open, comparative study of 5% potassium hydroxide solution versus cryotherapy in the treatment of genital warts in men.  Anais Brasileiros de Dermatologia ,  89 (2), 236–241.  Dermatologists share tips to treat common warts. (2015, October 9).  Sterling, J. C., Gibbs, S., Haque Hussain, S. S., Mohd Mustapa, M. F., &amp; Handfield‐Jones, S. E. (2014, July 14). British Association of Dermatologists' guidelines for the management of cutaneous warts 2014.  British Journal of Dermatology ,  171 (4), 696–712.  Zimmerman, E., &amp; Crawford, P. (2012, December 15). Cutaneous cryosurgery.  American Family Physician ,  86 (12), 1118–1124.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What you should know about freezing warts."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320178.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, November 28). "What you should know about freezing warts."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  