 Oral blood blisters can have other causes, however, especially if they happen often or do not heal. There are steps a person with blood blisters in their mouth can take to relieve their symptoms and promote healing.  A blood blister is a raised area of skin or a sore inside the mouth filled with blood and other fluid. Many blood blisters in the mouth happen when blood vessels just below the skin rupture.  The blood from the blood vessel gets trapped under the skin, causing a blood blister to form.  Many oral blood blisters have no known cause and appear in the mouth spontaneously. Other blood blisters in the mouth have fairly harmless causes, including:  Angina bullosa hemorrhagica is a disorder that causes oral blood blisters to form spontaneously. It is not a harmful condition unless a large blister blocks the airway.  Some blood blisters are the result of more serious causes. These include:  Many blood blisters in the mouth have no symptoms beyond the blister itself. Some people experience mild pain and burning at and around the site of the blister.  Symptoms of a blood blister in the mouth will usually resolve when the blister goes away. People may experience other symptoms depending on the underlying cause.  Most blood blisters in the mouth do not require a doctor's care. However, people may need to seek medical attention in the following cases:  If a person has dentures or braces that cause blood blisters, their dentist may be able to adjust the appliance, so it does not cause any more problems.  Most blood blisters in the mouth can be managed with home remedies. People with blood blisters in the mouth can try the following:  Icing a blood blister in the mouth can help ease the  inflammation  and even prevent the blister from forming if the ice is applied immediately after an injury.  To use ice on a blood blister in the mouth, a person should hold an ice cube directly on the blister for up to 10 minutes several times per day. A person can also use light pressure to help stop the bleeding. A flavored frozen popsicle can also be used in the same way.  Cucumbers contain silica, a chemical that may be beneficial to skin regeneration and healing. To use a cucumber on a blood blister, a person can hold a small slice of cold cucumber on the affected area several times a day until the blister heals.  A person with oral blood blisters can also drink cucumber water to help with healing.  Witch hazel is full of astringent tannins that work to reduce pain and dry up blisters. Some research shows that witch hazel may even reduce inflammation.  To use witch hazel on a blood blister in the mouth, a person should soak a cotton swab in witch hazel and dab the swab on the blister.  The mouth should be kept open for several minutes to allow the witch hazel time to dry. This can be repeated several times a day until the blister heals.  Some people may experience mild allergic reactions to witch hazel. The witch hazel can be dabbed on a small, non-sensitive area first to test for an allergy. If there is no adverse reaction after 24 hours, witch hazel is usually safe to use.  Turmeric is a popular spice, especially in curries. Ayurvedic medicine, which is a form of folk medicine found primarily in South Asia, often uses turmeric to treat pain and inflammation.  Unfortunately,  research has found  little evidence to support turmeric's use as a pain reliever or anti-inflammatory agent. However, there is anecdotal evidence that it is useful for these symptoms.  To use this remedy on an oral blood blister, a teaspoon of turmeric can be mixed with honey to make a balm and applied directly to the affected area.  Chamomile tea is popular for its soothing qualities and is sometimes used  to provide relief  from mouth sores.  People with blood blisters in their mouth can try drinking a cup of chamomile tea to soothe any soreness and promote healing.  Blood blisters in the mouth can be an uncomfortable nuisance.  To help heal blood blisters and prevent them in the future, a person can:  Most blood blisters in the mouth are benign and will go away within 2 weeks. They may improve faster with home remedies, including ice, witch hazel, or chamomile.  Occasionally, blood blisters in the mouth may happen due to an underlying cause, such as renal failure or low platelet levels. These conditions require medical treatment.  If you want to buy witch hazel, turmeric, or chamomile tea, then there is an excellent selection online with thousands of customer reviews.   Shop for witch hazel    Shop for turmeric    Shop for chamomile tea   We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Chamomile. (2016, November 29).  Chamomile. (2016, November 29).  Martin, K. R. (2007, March–April). The chemistry of silica and its potential health benefits.  The Journal of Nutrition, Health &amp; Aging ,  11 (2), 94–97.  Shashikumar, B. M., Reddy, R. R., &amp; Harish, M. R. (2013, August 30). Oral hemorrhagic blister: An enigma.  Indian Journal of Dermatology ,  58 (5), 407.  Theisen, L. L., Erdelmeier, C. A. J., Spoden, G. A., Boukhallouk, F., Sausy, A., Florin, L., &amp; Muller, C. P. (2014, January 31). Tannins from  Hamamelis virginiana  bark extract: Characterization and improvement of the antiviral efficacy against influenza A virus and human papillomavirus.  PLoS ONE ,  9 (1), e88062.  Thring, T. S. A., Hili, P., &amp; Naughton, D. P. (2011, October 13). Antioxidant and potential anti-inflammatory activity of extracts and formulations of white tea, rose, and witch hazel on primary human dermal fibroblast cells.  Journal of Inflammation ,  8 , 27.  Turmeric. (2016, December 16).  Wu, H., Li, F., Wang, S., Lu, J., Li, J., Du, Y., ... Ling, D. (2017, October 12). Ceria nanocrystals decorated mesoporous silica nanoparticle based ROS-scavenging tissue adhesive for highly efficient regenerative wound healing.  Biomaterials ,  151 , 66–77.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Blood blister in mouth: Pictures and treatment."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320115.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2017, November 22). "Blood blister in mouth: Pictures and treatment."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  