 People with  asthma , allergies, and lung conditions are more likely to develop bronchospasms than those without these conditions, as are young children and people over 65 years of age.  Bronchospasms, in themselves, are not considered contagious, but some of the viruses and bacteria that cause bronchospasms can be transmitted to other people.  Some medical conditions, allergens, and medications can cause bronchospasms.  Common causes of bronchospasms include:  Scientists are still not sure why but, in some people, exercise appears to induce bronchospasms. Traditionally, bronchospasms brought on by exercise were considered a symptom of asthma, but new studies have revealed this may not be true.  A  2014 study  surveying almost 8,000 French schoolchildren concluded that exercise-induced bronchospasms seem to be a separate, independent condition from asthma.  The same study found that bronchospasms were associated with several types of atopic  rhinitis , a chronic condition causing dry crusts to form in the nasal cavities and the gradual loss of the mucosal lining.  Researchers are also still trying to determine whether newer smoking alternatives, such as  electronic cigarettes , cause bronchospasms. Nicotine has been shown to stimulate the primary nerve of the lungs, triggering muscle constriction and bronchospasms.  A  2017 study  found that a single puff from an e-cigarette containing 12 mg/ml of nicotine was enough to cause bronchospasms in anesthetized guinea pigs.  Some chemicals found in medications used to open the airways (bronchodilators) have also been shown to cause bronchospasms, though this is rare.  The signs of bronchospasm are fairly apparent while the severity of symptoms is directly related to how much the airways have narrowed, or how much airflow has been restricted.  Common symptoms of bronchospasm include:  A doctor will need to diagnose and prescribe treatment for bronchospasms. For complicated or severe cases, a pulmonologist or doctor who specializes in the lungs may help confirm the diagnosis.  Typically, a doctor will ask questions about a person's history of lung conditions and allergies, before listening to the lungs with a stethoscope.  Depending on the severity of the symptoms, and if bronchospasms are suspected, the doctor may perform a series of tests to assess how constricted or reduced the person's airflow and breathing are.  Common tests used to help diagnosis bronchospasms include:  To determine whether bronchospasm is caused by exercise, a doctor may recommend a eucapnic voluntary hyperventilation test. During this test, an individual inhales a mix of oxygen and carbon dioxide to see how it changes their lung function.  A person should seek immediate medical attention whenever they experience severe, ongoing, or distressing bronchospasms. If airflow is extremely compromised, they should call 911 or go to the emergency department.  Additional reasons to speak with a doctor include:  In most cases of bronchospasm, a doctor will prescribe bronchodilators. These drugs cause the airways to widen, increasing airflow.  The three most common types of bronchodilators are beta-agonists, anticholinergics, and theophylline.  Though the medications used to treat bronchospasms come in tablet, injectable, and liquid forms, many are considered to be most effective when inhaled.  The best treatment plan depends on individual factors, such as the severity of the spasms, how often they occur, and their cause.  For severe or chronic cases, doctors may recommend steroids to reduce  inflammation  in the airways and increase airflow. When bronchospasms are caused by bacterial infections, doctors may also prescribe antibiotic medications.  Common medications used to treat bronchospasms include:   Short-acting bronchodilators   This type of bronchodilator starts working within minutes, and its effects last for several hours.  Doctors prescribe short-acting bronchodilators for quick relief from sudden, severe spasms and for treating exercise-induced spasms. Typically, an individual should only take these drugs once or twice a week.  People can take short-acting bronchodilators in "rescue inhalers" or in a liquid form that becomes an inhalable mist after being passed through a device called a nebulizer.  Common short-acting bronchodilators include:   Long-acting bronchodilators in combination with steroids   For chronic cases of bronchospasm, long-acting medications may be prescribed in combination with inhaled steroids to help prevent spasms.  In most cases, people take long-acting bronchodilators two or three times per day and at scheduled times. These drugs are not helpful for quick relief of spasm symptoms.  Common long-acting bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroid medications include:  If a person's bronchospasms are exercise-induced, taking long-acting bronchodilators and inhaled corticosteroid medications 15 to 20 minutes before exercise can help reduce the chances of having spasms.  If exposure to an allergen, irritant, or medicine, causes a bronchospasm, avoiding or stopping exposure to it will also help reduce or prevent spams.  For bronchospasms caused by general anesthesia, doctors usually prescribe additional anesthesia medicine. If this does not resolve the spasms, short-acting bronchodilators and intravenous corticosteroids may be used.    
 Caillaud, D., Horo, K., Baiz, N., Banerjee, S., Charpin, D., Lavaud, F., ... &amp; Annesi‐Maesano, I. (2014, May 24). Exercise‐induced bronchospasm related to different phenotypes of rhinitis without asthma in primary schoolchildren: The French six cities study.  Clinical &amp; Experimental Allergy ,  44 (6), 858–866.  Caillaud, D., Horo, K., Baiz, N., Banerjee, S., Charpin, D., Lavaud, F., ... &amp; Annesi‐Maesano, I. (2014, May 24). Exercise‐induced bronchospasm related to different phenotypes of rhinitis without asthma in primary schoolchildren: The French six cities study.  Clinical &amp; Experimental Allergy ,  44 (6), 858–866.  George, M., Joshi, S. V., Concepcion, E., &amp; Lee, H. (2017). Paradoxical bronchospasm from benzalkonium chloride (BAC) preservative in albuterol nebulizer solution in a patient with acute severe asthma. A case report and literature review of airway effects of BAC.  Respiratory Medicine Case Reports ,  21 , 39–41.  Khosravi, M., Lin, R.-L., &amp; Lee, L. Y. (2017). Inhalation of electronic cigarette vapor induces bronchospasm in guinea pig model through a cholinergic reflex.  American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine ,  195 .  Pulmonary function tests. (2016, December 9).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What is a bronchospasm and what causes it?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320162.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, November 27). "What is a bronchospasm and what causes it?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  