 In this article, learn about eight health benefits of beans, including getting more protein and reducing the risk of  heart disease .  Beans are the seeds from flowering plants in the Fabaceae family and are classified as legumes. They usually grow in pods, which are capsules with several beans inside. These pods or capsules develop from flowers. Other legumes include peas, peanuts, and lentils.  Beans contain amino acids, which are the chemicals that combine to form protein and help build muscle. Protein is an essential nutrient.  There are a variety of different beans, and most must be cooked to be safe to eat. Some of the most popular bean varieties include:  Beans offer several health benefits, including:  Protein is a vital nutrient that plays a key role in virtually everything the body does. Beans are high in amino acids, the building blocks of protein.  Protein sources can be divided into two different categories: complete and incomplete. Animal products, soy, and  quinoa  are all complete proteins, which means they contain all nine amino acids.  Out of all the types of beans, only soybeans contain all nine amino acids. Incomplete proteins can be easily combined with nuts, seeds, dairy, or grains at a single meal or over various meals throughout the day to make complete proteins.  For example, a person can eat beans with rice or couscous. Even having black beans at lunch and then almonds or cheese later in the day can ensure people get complete proteins.  Beans make an excellent source of protein for vegetarians and vegans. They are also lower in  calories  and saturated fat than some other protein sources, such as dairy products.  Beans contain several vital nutrients, including  folate . Folate can help prevent neural tube defects in a fetus during pregnancy.  Dried beans contain nearly double the folate that canned beans contain, so it is better to cook them from their dried form. However, canned beans still contain more folate than many foods.  Not getting enough folate can cause several symptoms, including:  Other important nutrients found in beans include:  Beans are rich in a type of  antioxidant  called polyphenols. Antioxidants fight the effects of free radicals, which are chemicals that affect a wide range of processes in the body, from physical aging to  cancer  and  inflammation .  People who consume beans may be less likely to die of a  heart attack ,  stroke , or other cardiovascular health problem.   A 2013 analysis  of previous studies found a clear correlation between eating beans and a reduced risk of  coronary heart disease .   Other research  suggests that beans may lower  cholesterol . High cholesterol is a risk factor for heart disease and heart attacks.   Some studies have shown  that beans act as antioxidants and anti-inflammatories. These effects could reduce the risk of cancer.   Research published in 2015  analyzed whether beans might have antioxidant properties that fight intestinal cancer. Black beans were shown to have the highest antioxidant activity.   A 2016 study  also found that chemicals in Northeast China black beans could slow the growth of  colorectal cancer  by damaging cancer cells.  Beans may help stabilize blood glucose levels or even prevent  diabetes . Beans are high in fiber, which can help lower blood glucose.   A 2015 study  in mice found that a chemical found in soybean leaves could help the body maintain healthy glucose levels.  Soybeans also support the healthy functioning of pancreatic cells. The pancreas produces  insulin , which regulates blood sugar.  Fatty liver is a metabolic disorder that occurs when fats accumulate in the liver.   Research published in 2016  found that adzuki beans improve the accumulation of fat in the liver of mice. This result suggests that these beans might preserve liver health and reduce the risk of fatty liver, although more studies in humans are needed.  The fiber and healthy starches in beans  can help prevent food cravings . People may feel fuller after consuming beans, which may prevent overeating and even help with weight loss.   Research  has shown a variety of beans, especially black beans, enhance gut health by improving intestinal barrier function, and increasing the number of healthy bacteria. This may help prevent gut-associated diseases.  Some people are allergic to beans or members of the legume family. Peanuts, for instance, are a legume and a common allergen.  Soy is also a common allergen  in the United States, while a lupin allergy is more common in Europe.  Some people who are allergic to one bean or legume are allergic to others, so people with a history of allergies should consider allergy-testing and ask their doctor about carrying an epinephrine injector (EpiPen).  It is unsafe to eat many beans raw because they contain proteins called lectins. These proteins can cause severe  food poisoning  because they interfere with digestion and can lead to cyanide formation.  Cooking the beans for at least 10 minutes destroys lectins so that they can be safely eaten.  The most common side effects of eating beans are gas and intestinal discomfort. These are not dangerous but can be unpleasant and even painful for some people.  People with  irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS) often follow a low-FODMAP diet that restricts certain  carbohydrates , including beans, to reduce their symptoms.  A person can reduce the risk of gas and other intestinal problems by  hot-soaking beans  and discarding the water used for soaking, or sprouting, boiling, or pressure-cooking them. Digestive enzymes can also be taken to improve digestion of beans.  A person should always wash beans before cooking them and remove any beans that are shriveled or discolored.  Beans can be cooked by boiling them with seasoning and allowing them to simmer until they are soft.  Canned beans are pre-cooked and can be used straight away in a variety of dishes.  Some simple strategies for adding beans to a regular diet include:  It can take a little trial and error to find the beans that work best for someone's preferred dishes, but beans can make a healthy addition to almost any meal.    
 Afshin, A., Micha, R., Khatibzadeh, S., &amp; Mozaffarian, D. (2013, March 26). Consumption of nuts and beans and risk of incident coronary heart disease, stroke, and diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  Circulation ,  127 (Suppl 12).  Afshin, A., Micha, R., Khatibzadeh, S., &amp; Mozaffarian, D. (2013, March 26). Consumption of nuts and beans and risk of incident coronary heart disease, stroke, and diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  Circulation ,  127 (Suppl 12).  Bean facts. (n.d.).  Bean varieties. (n.d.).  Bell, R. C., Zahradka, P., Aliani, M., Liang, Y., McCargar, L. J., Chan, C., . . . Taylor, C. (2017, April). Dried beans lower cholesterol and glycated hemoglobin while peas lower blood pressure in adults with mild hypercholesterolemia [Abstract].  The FASEB Journal ,  31 (1 Suppl 966.13).  Dan, X., Ng, T. B., Wong, J. H., Chan, Y. S., Cheung, R. C. F., &amp; Chan, W. Y. (2016, September). A hemagglutinin isolated from Northeast China black beans induced mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells.  Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Cell Research ,  1863 (9), 2201–2211.  Dietary guidelines for Americans 2015–2020 — Eigth edition. (n.d.).  Kim, S., Hong, J., Jeon, R., &amp; Kim, H. S. (2016, January). Adzuki beans ameliorates hepatic lipogenesis and proinflammatory mediator expression in mice fed a high-cholesterol and high-fat diet to induce nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.  Nutrition Research ,  36 (1), 90–100.  Messina, V. (2014, July). Nutritional and health benefits of dried beans [Abstract].  American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  100 (Suppl. 1), 437S–442S.  Monk, J. M., Lepp, D., Wu, W., Pauls, K. P., Robinson, L. E., &amp; Power, K. A. (2017, November). Navy and black bean supplementation primes the colonic mucosal microenvironment to improve gut health.  Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry ,  49 , 89–100.  Moreno-Jiménez, M. R., Cervantes-Cardoza, V., Gallegos-Infante, J. A., González-Laredo, R. F., Estrella, I., Garcia-Gasca, T. de J., . . . Rocha-Guzmán, N. E. (2015, October). Phenolic composition changes of processed common beans: Their antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects in intestinal cancer cells [Abstract].  Food Research International ,  76 (Part 1), 79–85.  Soy allergy. (n.d.).  Webb, D. (2014, December). Beans and grains: The perfect pairing.  Today's Dietitian ,  26 (12), 36.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What are the health benefits of beans?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320192.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2017, November 30). "What are the health benefits of beans?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  