  Bone marrow  contains  stem cells  that develop into the many types of blood cells found in the body, including:  The body usually produces these blood cells as needed, such as when old blood cells die. Sometimes, these cells grow too quickly or abnormally. This is known as bone marrow  cancer .  Bone marrow cancer is categorized by the type of cells affected.   Multiple myeloma  is a type of cancer that occurs in the plasma cells, which are made in the bone marrow. Plasma cells play an important part in the immune system and make antibodies needed to fight foreign bacteria.  Leukemias are cancers of the white blood cells. Sometimes these types of cancers can start in other types of blood cells.  Acute leukemias are fast-growing cancers, while chronic leukemias are slow-growing cancers. There are several different types of leukemia:   Lymphomas  are cancer cells in the lymphatic system. These types of cancers can occur in many places in the body, including in the bone marrow.  There are two main types of lymphomas:  The type of cancer, where it is located, and how aggressive it is will all determine what symptoms a person experiences.  Symptoms of multiple myeloma may include:  Symptoms of leukemia may include:  Symptoms of lymphoma are similar to the signs of leukemia, but may also include:  Anyone experiencing these symptoms should see their doctor promptly for an evaluation.  Tests performed to diagnose bone marrow cancer may include:  These tests may also be used periodically during treatment to see how the treatment is working or to monitor how the disease is progressing.  Treatment for bone marrow cancer is highly individualized and depends on many factors, including the extent of the cancer and the person's overall health.  Treatment can be used to cure the cancer, prevent its spread, or sometimes just minimize the symptoms in order make the person more comfortable.  When there are no longer any abnormal cells in the blood or bone marrow, the person is said to be in remission.  Types of treatment include:   Chemotherapy    Chemotherapy  uses medications to either kill cancer cells or prevent them from reproducing. There are many different types of chemotherapy treatments.   Stem cell transplant   A stem cell transplant may be an option in some cases, though not everyone is a candidate for this type of treatment. A person will be given high doses of chemotherapy to kill the existing bone marrow before receiving the transplanted cells intravenously.   Radiation   This treatment involves the administration of radiation directly into the cancer cells to prevent them from multiplying.  After a diagnosis of a bone marrow cancer, a doctor or oncologist will discuss all of the available treatment options and present a treatment plan. The plan may need to be adjusted periodically, depending on how the cancer is responding and how the person is reacting to the medication.  The outlook after a diagnosis of bone marrow cancer varies significantly from person to person. Many people with an early diagnosis respond well to treatment and remain cancer free for years after going into remission.  In other cases, the cancer is aggressive and may not respond well to the treatment. Additionally, both cancer and cancer treatments can cause life-threatening complications, such as severe infection or kidney failure.  Cancer research is constantly developing new treatments and promising medications. A person should talk to their doctor or a specialist about the different treatment options available.    
 Blood and bone marrow cancer basics. (n.d.).  Blood and bone marrow cancer basics. (n.d.).  Bone marrow diseases. (2017, November 6).  Leukemia. (n.d.).  Multiple myeloma symptoms. (n.d.).  Signs and symptoms. (n.d.).  Signs and symptoms: Acute lymphoblastic leukemia. (n.d.).  What is Hodgkin lymphoma? (2017, March 28).  What is multiple myeloma? (2016, January 19).  What is non-Hodgkin lymphoma? (2016, May 31).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "Bone marrow cancer: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320116.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2017, November 22). "Bone marrow cancer: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  