 Fortunately, scabs inside the nose are usually harmless and heal on their own with a little care.  Knowing the cause of scabs in the nose and how to care for them is key to helping the nose heal and to preventing future problems.  For scabs caused by minor problems, such as allergies and colds, a person can try:  Scabs in the nose can be caused by a variety of factors, but most are simple issues that heal without complications. Common causes include:  Allergens can cause the inside of the nose to feel itchy, which can lead to rubbing or scratching the nose. This may cause damage to the tissues inside.  This may cause  inflammation , bleeding, and the formation of a scab. Even without rubbing or scratching, the ongoing inflammation from allergies can be irritating enough to cause scabs to form.  Certain chemicals can irritate the nose, causing inflammation and scabbing. Common irritants include:  Blowing the nose is often necessary and helpful. However, blowing too hard can do more harm than good.  Forceful blowing of the nose can not only force the mucus back further into the sinuses, but it can also damage and irritate the inside of the nose.  People who blow their nose too hard and too frequently may notice bleeding and scabbing inside the nose. Repeated forceful blowing can rip the scab off, leading to more bleeding and repeated scabbing.  An injury to the nose in an accident or sports can damage the tissue inside, leading to bleeding and scabbing.  Similarly, nose-picking can damage the inside of the nose. Children and adults alike may be guilty of this habit, especially when a cold or allergies lead to a mucus buildup in the nose.  Rhinotillexomania is the medical term for chronic nose-picking. In chronic or compulsive nose-picking, scab formation may prompt the person to blow out or pick the scab, causing more bleeding, scabbing, and an ongoing cycle that does not allow the nose to heal.  Some nasal sprays contain a drug known as oxymetazoline, which is designed to shrink the blood vessels in the nose, helping it to feel less congested.  Although it can help the nose feel better initially, using these sprays too often can lead to dryness, irritation, and increased congestion in the nose.  All of these factors increase the risk of scabs inside the nose.  Although  cold sores  are most common around the mouth, they can appear in other places, including inside the nose.  Cold sores result from an infection of the  herpes  simplex virus (HSV). A cold sore usually starts with a burning and tingling feeling, followed by a sore that scabs over and forms a crust.  The inside of the nose contains hair follicles that can become infected with bacteria. As a result, a pus-filled boil or  pimple  may develop.   Boils  and pimples can cause pain and irritation. If they are scratched or popped, bleeding and scabbing may result.  Inhaling drugs, such as methamphetamines, cocaine, and heroin, can do significant damage to the inside of the nose.  Irritation and scabbing in the nose are common with the use of these drugs. They can also tear, or perforate, the septum inside the nose, leading to serious complications, such as necrosis (tissue death) and holes in the nose.   Cancer  in the nasal cavity, or paranasal cancer, can cause a range of symptoms, including ongoing congestion and nosebleeds. This can lead to irritation and scabbing.  Other symptoms of paranasal cancer include changes in a person's sense of smell, numbness or pain in the face, and changes in vision.  Scabs in the nose and congestion are usually not signs of cancer. If a person is concerned, a doctor can rule out this cause with any needed testing or exams.  A number of steps can be taken to help prevent scabs in the nose, including:  Although scabs in the nose often result from minor, harmless conditions, such as seasonal allergies, a health professional should examine ongoing scabs or discomfort in the nose.  Usually, a family doctor, an allergist, or an ear, nose, and throat doctor (otolaryngologist) can examine the inside of the nose with a light and recommend further testing or treatment if needed.  Blood tests may be required if  herpes  or a bacterial infection is suspected. In many cases, however, scabs due to allergies and trauma can be diagnosed with a visual exam.  Usually, the cause of scabs in the nose is easily treatable with home remedies and time.  Some of the home remedies listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bakhshaee, M., Khadivi, E., Naseri-Sadr, M., &amp; Esmatinia, F. (2013, Winter). Nasal septum perforation due to methamphetamine abuse.  Iranian Journal of Otorhinolaryngology ,  25 (70), 53–56.  Bakhshaee, M., Khadivi, E., Naseri-Sadr, M., &amp; Esmatinia, F. (2013, Winter). Nasal septum perforation due to methamphetamine abuse.  Iranian Journal of Otorhinolaryngology ,  25 (70), 53–56.  Oxymetazoline nasal spray. (2016, September 15).  Paranasal sinus and nasal cavity cancer treatment (PDQ®)–Patient version. (2016, August 19).  Rhinitis (nasal allergies). (2015, October).  Signs and symptoms of nasal and paranasal sinus cancers. (2016, August 18).  Valencia, M. P., &amp; Castillo, M. (2008, January–February). Congenital and acquired lesions of the nasal septum: a practical guide for differential diagnosis.  Radiographics ,  28 (1), 205–223.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "Causes and treatments for nose scabs."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320144.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2017, November 25). "Causes and treatments for nose scabs."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  