  Multiple sclerosis  (MS) is a disease that affects the protective covering of the nerves, called the myelin sheath. The myelin sheath conducts electrical signals and protects the nerves.  MS causes scarring on the myelin sheath, resulting in plaque and lesions. This scarring causes nerve fiber damage and loss of certain necessary body functions, including vision. Uhthoff's phenomenon is when changes in body temperature make a person's existing MS symptoms worse.  Neuro-ophthalmologist Wilhelm Uhthoff first identified the condition in 1890, noting that the phenomenon occurred in those with optic neuritis.  MS causes nerve damage and nerves relay information to and from the brain. Optic neuritis occurs when the optic nerve, which is responsible for relaying information from the eye to the brain, is damaged.  Common MS symptoms include:  Uhthoff's phenomenon causes the symptoms of optic neuritis to worsen temporarily. These symptoms can affect one or both eyes, and include:  The worsening of vision can occur quickly, over the course of a few hours, or may take up to a week.   A 2011 study  found that heat sensitivity could also make other symptoms of MS worse, including:  Heat sensitivity affects upwards of  60-80 percent  of people diagnosed with MS.  Activities that may increase the incidence of overheating include:  Uhthoff's phenomenon is a temporary condition and typically resolves once the body's temperature has returned to normal. There is no treatment specifically for Uhthoff's phenomenon, but there are many steps a person can take to manage symptoms.  A person should try not to panic, as the symptoms of Uhthoff's phenomenon are temporary. It may help to call a loved one, especially if a person's vision is impaired. The visual symptoms will improve with rest and time.  The best way to prevent an episode of Uhthoff's phenomenon is to avoid overheating and remain cool.  A person can cool down by:  Some people with MS do not experience Uhthoff's phenomenon or any changes in their symptoms after a change in body temperature. If a person is not sensitive to heat, they will not need to make any of the preventative changes above.  A person with MS or optic neuritis should speak to a doctor if their symptoms worsen after a change in body temperature, especially if it is the first time.  Someone who has experienced Uhthoff's phenomenon and who knows what to expect and how to cool down may not require medical care.  A person experiencing Uhthoff's phenomenon should also tell a doctor if:    
 Flensner, G., Ek, A.-C., Söderhamn, O., &amp; Landtblom, A-M. (2011, February 25). Sensitivity to heat in MS patients: A factor strongly influencing symptomology — an explorative survey.  BMC Neurology ,  11 , 27.  Flensner, G., Ek, A.-C., Söderhamn, O., &amp; Landtblom, A-M. (2011, February 25). Sensitivity to heat in MS patients: A factor strongly influencing symptomology — an explorative survey.  BMC Neurology ,  11 , 27.  Opara, J. A., Brola, W., Wylegala, A. A., &amp; Wylegala, E. (2016, January–March). Uhthoff`s phenomenon 125 years later — What do we know today?  Journal of Medicine and Life ,  9 (1), 101–105.  Uhthoff's phenomenon. (January 21, 2016).  Uhthoff's syndrome. (n.d).  Westlake, S. (2013, February). Hot and cold – the effects of temperature on MS.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. "Uhthoff's phenomenon: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320154.php&gt;    APA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. (2017, November 27). "Uhthoff's phenomenon: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  