 Doctors sometimes refer to double  pneumonia  as bilateral pneumonia. Pneumonia is the leading cause of infectious death worldwide among children under the age of 5.  When both lungs are affected, the condition is called double pneumonia. Like pneumonia, double pneumonia  is usually caused by a bacterial or viral infection .  People who have the flu ( influenza  virus infection), some types of streptococcal bacterial infections,  respiratory syncytial virus  (RSV), and some other infections can develop double pneumonia.  Because double pneumonia affects both lungs, a person may find it extremely difficult to breathe.  It is impossible to tell if a person has pneumonia or double pneumonia based on symptoms alone. Anybody who thinks they may have pneumonia must see a doctor as soon as possible.  Pneumonia often develops after or alongside another respiratory illness. Some people also get pneumonia after exposure to breathing in dust or certain gases, or after getting fluid in their lungs. These situations make it easier for a germ to sneak into a person's body and cause infection.  People who have these risk factors should look out for symptoms of pneumonia.  These symptoms include :  As pneumonia progresses, it can cause serious complications — particularly in people with weakened immune systems due to age, illness, or debilitating diseases, such as  HIV  or  AIDS .  Complications of pneumonia include:  Infections from viruses or bacteria that get inside of the lungs are the most common cause of pneumonia. Less frequently,  people may develop pneumonia  from inhaling certain fungi.  Double pneumonia occurs when an infecting microbe causes pneumonia in both lungs. Potential causes of pneumonia and double pneumonia include:  Some people are more vulnerable to pneumonia.  Risk factors for double pneumonia  include:  Double pneumonia is a serious infection that can become life-threatening. However, it is also treatable. So it is essential to seek treatment early before the infection establishes itself.  Anyone that has difficulty breathing and a high fever should treat it as a medical emergency.  People with risk factors for pneumonia, such as those who have another serious chronic illness, should seek prompt medical care if they experience symptoms of pneumonia.  A doctor can diagnose pneumonia with the assistance of a chest X-ray, blood tests, and a physical exam.  Treatment for double pneumonia depends on what caused it and how it has affected the body:  Other treatments for pneumonia focus on preventing further damage to the lungs and ensuring a person can breathe. Some people may require supplemental oxygen or monitoring in a hospital setting. Rest and remaining hydrated may also help.  While coughing can be unpleasant,  coughing helps the body rid itself of the infection .  People who have double pneumonia should not take a cough suppressant medicine unless a doctor recommends doing so.  With prompt treatment, most healthy people recover from pneumonia. However, pneumonia may not fully resolve if a person rushes the treatment and recovery process.  Take all medication as prescribed and avoid work or any physically taxing tasks for as long as the doctor advises.  People with weak immune systems or other health problems are more likely to have a form of pneumonia that is harder to clear up, recurs, or causes serious complications and death.  Some people develop double pneumonia as a complication of being severely immunocompromised.  It is crucial to tell a doctor about all health conditions and to be honest about lifestyle choices, such as tobacco smoking.  People who are very ill may need to be hospitalized.  If pneumonia symptoms deteriorate, fever gets higher, or a person finds it difficult to breathe, they must contact a doctor or go to the emergency room.  The microbes that get into the respiratory tract may cause pneumonia in some people but not in others. This depends on the individual risk factors of each person as well as the type of germ present.  Some other strategies for preventing pneumonia include:  Double pneumonia is more than just a bad cold. It is a serious and potentially fatal condition that needs urgent medical treatment. With proper medical care, recovery is possible.  People who have a weak immune system or other risk factors for pneumonia should talk to their doctor about options for minimizing their risk of developing it in future.    
 Bartlett, J. G. (2017, August 9). Aspiration pneumonia in adults.  Bartlett, J. G. (2017, August 9). Aspiration pneumonia in adults.  Diagnosing and treating pneumonia. (2016, October 6).  Explore pneumonia. Causes. (2016, September 2016).  Explore pneumonia. Signs, symptoms, and complications. (2016, September 26).  Is Pneumonia Contagious? (2016, October 13).  Marrie, T. J., &amp; File Jr., T. M. (2017, June 26). Patient education: Pneumonia in adults (beyond the basics).  Pneumococcal vaccination: What everyone should know. (2017, November 07).  Pneumonia. (2016, September 26).  Pneumonia. An infection of the lungs. (2017, August 29).  What causes pneumonia? (2016, October 6).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What to know about double pneumonia."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320164.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2017, November 26). "What to know about double pneumonia."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  