 According to the  National Onion Association , the claim that raw  onion  can treat the  flu  is a theory that dates back to the 1500s. In recent years, many articles online have claimed that this folk remedy is effective.  Here we explore the origins of the onion sock home remedy and whether there is any evidence to support its effectiveness. The article also considers the health benefits of onions and other treatments available for cold and flu.  The notion of "noxious air" developed before scientists understood the germ theory of disease. Today, the role of germs in disease is no longer a theory and is backed up by scientific evidence.  Before scientists identified germs as being responsible for illness, people believed that raw onions could purify the air in the room. When placed against the skin of the foot and kept in a sock, people thought that onion could cleanse the blood. People claimed this purification process could cure the common cold or the flu.  Modern articles that support this folklore claim it is the odorous sulfuric compounds in onions that give them their healing properties.  In a similar way to reflexology, this ancient practice focuses on specific points in the foot based on a belief that each point affects the health of a different internal organ.  A  2002 review  on the health benefits of onions notes that they are indeed rich in sulfuric compounds. However, this is as far as the evidence to support the onion in sock home remedy goes.  That said, there have not been any scientific studies that have looked at this specifically. Most articles online that recommend onion in a sock as a cure for colds and flu do not cite any scientific evidence.  Any claims of effectiveness are based on anecdotes rather than research.  It is also worth noting that there is little evidence to support reflexology as an effective treatment for illness. This  2011 review  concludes that clinical evidence fails to demonstrate that reflexology is an effective treatment for any medical condition.  Aromatherapy is also a growing evidence-based practice where stimulation of smell receptors assists healing.  Although raw onions are not proven to cure a cold when put against the soles of the feet, onions do have some health benefits when eaten. They are a low-calorie, high-fiber, high-nutrient food and contain  vitamin  C. Eating onions may:  Those considering using the onion in sock home remedy to cure a cold or flu may find one of the following home remedies to be more beneficial:  The onion in sock home remedy has origins in western folklore and is hundreds of years old. It also has links to the Chinese practice of reflexology.  Many people claim that the onion in sock remedy is an effective treatment for a cold or the flu. Despite these claims, there is no scientific evidence to support this. There are no proven health benefits to this remedy, but it is not known to be harmful.  Onions offer a range of health benefits when they are eaten as part of a balanced diet.  If a person is looking for ways to treat their cold or flu at home, there are a variety of remedies that do have proven benefits. It is a good idea to try treatments that are known to be effective before trying home remedies that are less evidence-based.  When considering new treatments for cold and flu, it is always a good idea to speak to a doctor first.    
 Cohen, H. A., Rozen, J., Kristal, H., Laks, Y., Berkovitch, M., Uziel, Y., … Efrat, H. (2012, September). Effect of honey on nocturnal cough and sleep quality: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study.  Pediatrics ,  130 , 3.  Cohen, H. A., Rozen, J., Kristal, H., Laks, Y., Berkovitch, M., Uziel, Y., … Efrat, H. (2012, September). Effect of honey on nocturnal cough and sleep quality: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study.  Pediatrics ,  130 , 3.  Ernst, E., Posadski, P., &amp; Lee, M. S. (2011, February). Reflexology: An update of a systematic review of randomised clinical trials.  Maturitas ,  68 (2), 116–120.  Griffiths, G., Trueman, L., Crowther, T., Thomas, B., &amp; Smith, B. (2002, November). Onions — a global benefit to health [Abstract].  Phytotherapy Research ,  16 (7), 603-615.  Myths about onion. (n.d.).  Nicastro, H. L., Ross, S. A., &amp; Milner, J. A. (2015, March 1). Garlic and onions: Their cancer prevention properties.  Cancer Prevention Research ,  8 (3), 181–189.  Satomura, K., Kitamura, T., Kawamura, T., Shimbo, T., Watanabe, M., Kamei, M., … Tamakoshi, A. (2005, November). Prevention of upper respiratory tract infections by gargling: A randomized trial.  American Journal of Preventative Medicine ,  29 (4), 302-307.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Does an onion in the sock work for a cold?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320167.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2017, November 28). "Does an onion in the sock work for a cold?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  