 The name polyarthritis comes from two Greek words:  In this article, we look at some of the different forms of polyarthritis, along with the symptoms that can occur and what can be done to treat them.  The symptoms of polyarthritis can be similar to those of  rheumatoid arthritis . They can develop in the body over a period of many months, or they can have a sudden onset.  Symptoms include:  Polyarthritis can occur as the result of genetic factors. Some people naturally have disease-destroying proteins in their bodies called antibodies that make it easier for the condition to thrive.  Certain triggers can also cause polyarthritis when the body has an infection that weakens the immune system.  Polyarthritis can be either seropositive or seronegative:  Sometimes, polyarthritis is caused by a prior infection or illness, and it can be accompanied by another condition. This parallel occurrence often makes it hard for doctors to diagnose.  The process is outlined in  one study  from 2016, which described how a 19-year-old woman was diagnosed with a form of  meningitis  and also found to have polyarthritis.  The viruses that cause rubella and mumps also activate the body's immune system and can trigger an inflammatory reaction that leads to someone developing polyarthritis.  The risk factors for polyarthritis are of two kinds: those that can be changed and those that cannot.  Factors that can be changed include:  Factors that cannot be changed include:  According to the United States Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),  around 54.4 million adults  annually were diagnosed with a form of  arthritis ,  fibromyalgia ,  gout , or  lupus  between 2013 and 2015.  There are several different forms of polyarthritis, including the following:   Polyarticular JIA   When polyarthritis presents in young people, from an early age to late teens, it is classified as juvenile idiopathic arthritis or JIA.  It can cause very painful swelling in small and large joints from ankles, wrists, and hands to hips and knees. It may even occur in the neck and jaw areas.  Doctors do not always know what causes JIA. In many cases, it is a condition that can improve over time and with good treatment.   Lupus   As well as affecting a person's joints, this form of polyarthritis often impacts the skin, kidneys, and the  central nervous system .   Psoriatic arthritis   Psoriatic arthritis, as its name suggests, can be present in people who have the skin condition  psoriasis . Sometimes, arthritis develops first.  Symptoms to look out for can be a scaly, red rash, and the fingers and toes swelling into a "sausage shape" on one side of the body only.  Polyarthritis is not a specific condition, and people with it may present to their doctor, initially, with something else of concern. For instance, early polyarthritis may cause someone to feel very tired or have flu-like symptoms.  There are some conditions that can accompany polyarthritis or be a sign that there is another problem. These include:  Polyarthritis can be difficult to diagnose because there are many different forms and doctors have to conduct numerous tests to find out what type they are seeing.  If someone has one or more of the following symptoms, it is a good idea to go and see a doctor:  The doctor will carry out a variety of tests, including blood tests that may look for evidence of viral infections, or for a marker called rheumatoid factor (RF). RF is a protein that can attack the healthy tissue in the body.  The doctor will also test the joints by seeing if they are swollen or hot to the touch, and how easy or difficult it is to move them. They may also offer an X-ray to help determine what is causing the pain.  To help them further test to find out what type of polyarthritis may be present, they can take a sample of fluid from the painful joints. This process is called aspiration.  If polyarthritis is not treated or controlled well, other organs and parts of the body can be severely affected. Effects on other areas of the body include:  There is more likelihood of certain conditions developing if the polyarthritis has been present for a while. These include carpal tunnel, permanent joint damage, and problems with joints at the top of the spine.  While polyarthritis cannot be cured yet, it can be treated with medication and non-medical elements such as diet, exercise, and lifestyle. More and more medications become available as research progresses.  Current medicinal treatments that are available include:  According to the British National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society,  a daily 7.5 milligram (mg) dose  of a steroid starts taking effect within a few days of beginning treatment. A one-off injection of a large dose of 25 mg is called a  pulse .  In rare instances, methotrexate  has been found  to cause problems in the liver. As a result, it is advisable to discuss the risks with a doctor, along with how much alcohol someone drinks.  Non-medical treatment for the relief of pain and the stiffness symptoms of polyarthritis can include  physiotherapy  and low-impact exercises, such as swimming, walking, and cycling. Anything that has a gentle or moderate impact on the joints is helpful.  An  exercise plan  should suit the needs of the individual. People may find it useful making a plan with their doctor or an exercise specialist.    
 Arthritis. (2016, January 19).  Arthritis. (2016, January 19).  Arthritis-related statistics. (2017, March 6).  Conway, R., &amp; Carey, J. J. (2017, September 18). Risk of liver disease in methotrexate treated patients.  World Journal of Hepatology ,  9 (26), 1092–1100.  Dry eye syndrome. (2016, March 17).  Flatt, A. E. (2001, October). The Vikings and Baron Dupuytren's disease.  Baylor University Medical Center Proceedings ,  14 (4), 378–384.  Lahiri, M., Morgan, C., Symmons, D. P. M., &amp; Bruce, I. N. (2012, March). Modifiable risk factors for RA: Prevention, better than cure?  Rheumatology (Oxford, England) ,  51 (3), 499–512.  Lavoipierre, V., Dellyes, A., Aubry, C., Zandotti, C., Lafforgue, P., Parola, P., &amp; Lagier, J.-C. (2016, December 20). Acute polyarthritis in a young patient caused by meningococcal and parvovirus B19 infections: A case report and review of the literature.  Journal of Medical Case Reports ,  10 , 362.  Murphy, G., &amp; Isenberg, D. (2013, December 1). Effect of gender on clinical presentation in systemic lupus erythematosus.  Rheumatology ,  52 (12), 2108–2115.  Physical activity for arthritis. (2017, November 9).  Polyarthritis. (n.d.).  Rheumatoid arthritis. (2017, July 7).  State of Musculoskeletal Health 2017: Arthritis &amp; other musculoskeletal conditions in numbers. (n.d.).  Steroids in rheumatoid arthritis. (2013, May 20).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Weaver, Bryony. "What is polyarthritis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320149.php&gt;    APA  Weaver, B. (2017, November 26). "What is polyarthritis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  