 Some doctors are now using platelet-rich plasma therapy or PRP injections for several reasons, from encouraging hair growth to promoting soft tissue-healing.  However, research studies have not definitively proved that PRP works for the conditions it is reported to benefit. In this article, we have a look at the case for PRP, and the costs involved.  Platelets are blood cells with several roles to play in the body.  One is to promote blood clotting so that a person does not excessively bleed when they are cut.  Another is to contain proteins in the blood that help wounds to heal.  Researchers theorize that by injecting areas of inflammation or tissue damage with high concentrations of platelets, it can encourage wounds to heal.  A small blood sample is taken from the person being treated and put into a centrifuge or other specialized device that spins at high speed. This process separates platelets from other blood components. The concentration of platelets is then injected into the area of the person's body that needs to be treated.  Because the injection contains a high concentration of platelets, which can be from 5 to 10 times more than the untreated blood, doctors theorize that the platelets will speed up healing.  Some examples of treatment areas where PRP has been used include:  Doctors have injected PRP into the scalp, as a way of reducing the inflammation that can lead to  hair loss .  Doctors first used PRP to help people heal after jaw and plastic surgeries. Examples of tissues that PRP has been used on include:  Ligaments can take time and be difficult to heal, which can make PRP an attractive option for some of those who have experienced injuries to this tissue group.  Doctors have used PRP to reduce inflammation caused by osteoarthritis. This inflammation can lead to joints becoming painful and stiff.  Research studies about PRP include:  Doctors are also trying to use PRP to heal broken bones, but no research has yet proven its effectiveness in this area.  Costs for PRP treatment are reported to be  between $500 and $2,000 .  It is not typically covered by insurance because of the lack of evidence, so far, to conclusively prove that it works.  Also, costs can vary depending on location, facilities, and the expertise of the doctor performing the treatment. Often, a person will have multiple injections given 2 to 3 months apart.  Some of the world's most elite athletes have used PRP for wound healing. They include golf's Tiger Woods, baseball's Takashi Saito, and football's Hines Ward and Troy Polamalu.  As injecting PRP involves using a person's own platelets, they do not usually experience any adverse reactions to the injections. However, it is possible that a person may have irritation, pain, or bleeding related to the injection site.  Most people can resume their normal activities almost immediately after having a PRP injection. The average time from blood-drawing to the injection itself is about half-an-hour.  While PRP is a promising therapy for those who experience tissue damage or hair loss, large-scale research studies are needed to establish the effectiveness of treatments.  With larger studies than those to date, doctors could identify a dose or injection routine that works best for treating injuries or other conditions. Also, further studies could help doctors determine what symptoms to exclude from PRP injections.  Until that time, PRP injections are likely to remain a controversial therapy not covered by medical insurance, the costs of which, people are required to pay for themselves.    
 Anitua, E., Pino, A., Martinez, N., Orive, G., &amp; Berridi, D. (2017, May). The effect of plasma rich in growth factors on pattern hair loss: A pilot study [Abstract].  Dermatologic Surgery ,  43 (5), 658-670.  Anitua, E., Pino, A., Martinez, N., Orive, G., &amp; Berridi, D. (2017, May). The effect of plasma rich in growth factors on pattern hair loss: A pilot study [Abstract].  Dermatologic Surgery ,  43 (5), 658-670.  Braun, H. J., Kim, H. J., Chu, C. R., &amp; Dragoo, J. L., (2014, March 14). The effect of platelet-rich plasma formulations and blood products on human synoviocytes [Abstract].  The American Journal of Sports Medicine ,  42 (5), 1204–1210.  Charousset, C., Zaoui, A., Bellaiche, L., &amp; Bouyer, B. (2014, April 1). Are multiple platelet-rich plasma injections useful for treatment of chronic patellar tendinopathy in athletes?  A prospective study .  The American Journal of Sports Medicine ,  42 (4), 906–911.  Filardo, G., Di Matteo, B., Di Martino, A., Merli, M. L., Cenacchi, A., Fornasari, P., … Kon, E. (2015, May 7). Platelet-rich plasma intra-articular knee injections show no superiority versus viscosupplementation.  The American Journal of Sports Medicine ,  43 (7), 1575–1582.  Kang, J. S., Zheng, Z., Choi, M. J., Lee, S. H., Kim, D. Y., &amp; Cho, S. B. (2014, January). The effect of CD34+ cell-containing autologous platelet-rich plasma injection on pattern hair loss: A preliminary study.  Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology ,  28 (1), 72–79.  Patel, S., Dhillon, M. S., Aggarwal, S., Marwaha, N., &amp; Jain, A. (2013, February). Treatment with platelet-rich plasma is more effective than placebo for knee osteoarthritis: A prospective double-blind, randomized trial [Abstract].  The American Journal of Sports Medicine ,  41 (2), 356–364.  Gentile, P., Garcovich, S., Bielle, A., Scioli, M. G., Orlandi, A., &amp; Cervelli, V. (2015, November). The effect of platelet-rich plasma in hair regrowth: A randomized placebo-controlled trial.  Stem Cells Translational Medicine ,  4 (11), 1317–1323.  Platelet-rich plasma (PRP). (2011, September).  Storrs, C. (2009, December 18). Is platelet-rich plasma an effective healing therapy?  Scientific American .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What you need to know about PRP."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320107.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2017, November 21). "What you need to know about PRP."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  