 In  some studies ,  Demodex  mites have been found in 10 percent of skin biopsies and 12 percent of follicles.  Other samples  uncovered at least one species of  Demodex  in all adults tested.  The mites are microscopic, meaning they are not visible to the naked eye. While most people with  D. brevis  are not even aware that they are carrying these mites, those housing large infestations may experience symptoms.  Keep reading to discover the symptoms of  Demodex brevis  and the treatment options available to manage these mites.   D. folliculorum  also inhabits the follicles. Unlike  D. brevis , it is mostly found on the face and around the eyelids and eyelashes. It feeds on skin cells, whereas  D. brevis  feeds on oil called sebum in the oil gland cells.   D. folliculorum  is different from other types of mites because it can increase the number of skin cells in hair follicles. This can give people the appearance of scaly skin.  The average  D. folliculorum  mite measures  0.3 to 0.4 millimeters (mm)  in length, while the  D. brevis  is half that size, at 0.15 to 0.2 mm.  Most people with  Demodex brevis  are  only carriers  of the mites — they do not develop symptoms.  However, large infestations of the mites may lead to symptoms such as:  Typical areas of infestation include the neck and chest. However, symptoms can be experienced in any area because  D. brevis  will inhabit any of the body's oil glands.   D. brevis  does not usually lead to complications, but large numbers of mites (over 5 per square centimeter of skin) may cause demodicosis.  Demodicosis is an inflammatory disease, with symptoms including:   Demodex brevis  has also been known to make skin conditions such as  eczema  and  rosacea  worse.   D. brevis  can be spread by contact with other people. Once on the body, the mites feed off the oil gland cells that are attached to hair follicles.  Numbers of  D. brevis  increase naturally, which is why they tend to be more common in older adults than in children.  Anyone can have  D. brevis . However, there are some factors that increase the likelihood and severity of a  Demodex  infestation.  These risk factors include pre-existing conditions such as:  Older adults are also  more likely  to have  Demodex  mites and experience complications such as demodicosis.   Demodex brevis  is most common in people aged  20 to 30 years  because sebum levels are at their highest during that period. The mites are rarely seen in children under 5 years of age due to low sebum production.  Additionally,  D. brevis  and  D. folliculorum  are more common in men than in women, although it is not clear why this is the case.  Most people are not aware they have  Demodex  mites living in their follicles. Many people only become alerted to their presence when being tested for other skin conditions.  It is not necessary for a person to get tested for the mites unless they experience symptoms or complications.  A doctor will diagnose  Demodex brevis  with a biopsy. This involves taking a small skin sample and checking it under a microscope.  The doctor will also ask about symptoms and look for other signs of the mites, such as scaly skin.  Demodicosis will be diagnosed if there is a high level of mites in the follicles.  Most cases of  Demodex  mites can be treated at home. Medical intervention may be necessary if someone has significant numbers of the mites, or is experiencing uncomfortable or severe symptoms.   Home care   There are several ways to minimize the number of  D. brevis  mites on the skin, and to reduce the risk of complications. Personal care tips include:   Medical treatments   If home remedies do not relieve symptoms or reduce mite numbers, then medication may be necessary to reduce excess sebum on the skin.  The medications for  Demodex brevis  and the mite eggs can be taken orally or applied to the skin. These medications include:  In severe cases of mites, or for people with weakened immune systems, a doctor may recommend oral ivermectin.  It is also important to manage any underlying conditions, such as infections, that may be contributing to high levels of mites. In addition, eczema and rosacea may need to be treated with treatments applied to the skin.

  While it may be unpleasant to think of mites living in the skin and hair follicles, they are usually harmless and do not cause symptoms in most people.  However, large numbers of  Demodex brevis  can lead to uncomfortable symptoms and complications such as demodicosis. As a result, it is important to keep numbers under control through simple personal hygiene steps.  Those who are experiencing skin symptoms such as redness, itching, or scaling should consult their doctor who can prescribe effective treatments to get rid of the mites.    
 Ngan, V. (2005). Demodex.  Ngan, V. (2005). Demodex.  Rather, P. A., &amp; Hassan, I. (2014, January–February). Human  Demodex  mite: The versatile mite of dermatological importance.  Indian Journal of Dermatology ,  59 (1), 60–66.  Thoemmes, M. S., Fergus, D. J., Urban, J., Trautwein, M., &amp; Dunn, R. R. (2014, August 27). Ubiquity and diversity of human-associated  Demodex  mites.  PLoS One ,  9 (8).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What is Demodex brevis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320159.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2017, November 27). "What is Demodex brevis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  