 Although this diet plan may help people find a fast weight loss solution, the risks may outweigh the benefits.  The one meal a day diet is a weight loss plan that requires a person to eat only one meal per day. This is a type of intermittent fasting that involves alternating between extended periods of not eating or drinking anything with  calories  and periods of eating.  The one meal a day diet utilizes a type of intermittent fasting referred to as 23:1, meaning a person spends 23 hours of the day fasting, leaving just 1 hour a day to eat, drink and consume calories.  In the one meal a day diet, most people choose to not eat or drink anything with calories during the day. They break their fast when they eat dinner, then resume fasting until the following evening.  There are several variations of the one meal a day diet. Some variations suggest eating healthful, nutrient-rich foods, but most versions of the diet allow people to eat anything they want during their single meal.  People who follow the one meal a day diet believe there are numerous benefits to eating this way, including rapid weight loss.  Other purported benefits include:  There have been several studies conducted on the effects of intermittent fasting. However, most of the studies have been carried out on men, so less is known about the effects of intermittent fasting on women.  Because of women's hormonal cycles, it is likely that the effects of intermittent fasting may be different in women. Women also have different nutritional requirements than men, including more iron, which may not be fulfilled while fasting.  The studies done on intermittent fasting show the following benefits:  While some research supports the benefits of intermittent fasting and the one meal a day diet, an extreme diet plan comes with several risks.  The daily risks include:  There are also serious risks for people with underlying medical conditions. People with  diabetes  or low blood sugar, known as  hypoglycemia , need to eat meals regularly throughout the day to avoid any serious side effects.   One study  in published in  JAMA  involving 100 people found that intermittent fasting raised LDL  cholesterol  (bad cholesterol). Higher levels of LDL cholesterol are linked to increased rates of  heart disease  and  stroke .  The same study also found that the participants following an intermittent fasting diet did not experience any more weight loss than those who simply reduced the number of calories they ate each day.  Finally, people following the one meal a day diet may have an increased risk of binge eating.  Binge eating is a disordered pattern of eating where a person eats unusually large amounts of food in a short period, even after they are full. Some people that follow the one meal a day diet may even develop  binge eating disorder .  While the one meal a day diet may be appealing to people looking for quick weight loss solutions, there are other, less extreme ways to lose weight safely and healthily.  Anyone interested in losing weight should consider one of the following safer alternative ways to shed some pounds. These include:  The best weight loss solutions are sustainable, long-term changes to a person's diet and lifestyle.  The one meal a day diet is a weight loss plan based on the principle of eating only one meal a day and fasting for the rest of the time. Although this diet may help some people lose weight, other people may be frustrated by going for long periods of time without food.  The one meal a day diet is not the best choice for everyone, as some individuals may be more at risk for some adverse side effects.  While there are some research-backed benefits to intermittent fasting, more research needs to be done to verify if this diet is safe and effective for weight loss, particularly in women.  People who want to lose weight should start by making small, sustainable changes to their diet and lifestyle. It is best to consult a doctor or dietitian on how to safely lose weight, particularly if a person has any underlying medical conditions.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Aksungar, F.B., Sarikaya, M., Coskun, A., Serteser, M., &amp; Unsal, I. (2017). Comparison of intermittent fasting versus caloric restriction in obese subjects: A two year follow-up [Abstract].  The Journal of Nutrition Health and Aging ,  21 (6), 681–685.  Aksungar, F.B., Sarikaya, M., Coskun, A., Serteser, M., &amp; Unsal, I. (2017). Comparison of intermittent fasting versus caloric restriction in obese subjects: A two year follow-up [Abstract].  The Journal of Nutrition Health and Aging ,  21 (6), 681–685.  Arnason, T. G., Bowen, M. W., &amp; Mansell, K. D. (2017, April 15). Effects of intermittent fasting on health markers in those with type 2 diabetes: A pilot study.  World Journal of Diabetes ,  8 (4), 154–164.  Horne, B. D., Muhlestein, J. B., &amp; Anderson, J. L. (2015, July 1). Health effects of intermittent fasting: Hormesis or harm? A systematic review.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  102 (2), 464–470.  Tinsley, G. M., &amp; La Bounty, P. M. (2015, October). Effects of intermittent fasting on body composition and clinical health markers in humans.  Nutrition Reviews ,  73 (10), 661–674.  Trepanowski, J. F., Canale, R. E., Marshall, K. E., Kabir, M. M., &amp; Bloomer, R. J. (2011, October 7). Impact of caloric and dietary restriction regimens on markers of health and longevity in humans and animals: A summary of available findings.  Nutrition Journal ,  10 , 107.  Trepanowski, J.F., Kroeger, C. M., Barnosky, A. Klempel, M. C., Bhutani, S., Hoddy, K. K., … Varady, K. A. (2017, July). Effect of alternate-day fasting on weight loss, weight maintenance, and cardioprotection among metabolically healthy obese adults. A randomized clinical trial [Abstract].  JAMA Internal Medicine ,  177 (7), 930–938.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Can you eat just one meal a day?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320125.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2017, November 23). "Can you eat just one meal a day?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  