 Some people experiencing sternum pain worry they may be having a  heart attack . However, in most cases, sternum pain is unrelated to the heart and caused primarily due to problems with the sternum itself or the nearby cartilage.  In this article, learn about the causes of sternum pain and the differences between sternum pain and heart problems.  The sternum is sometimes known as the breastbone. This flat bone sits at the front of the chest and connects to the ribs with cartilage.  The sternum is part of the rib cage, a series of bones that protects the heart and lungs from injuries.  Sternum pain is usually caused by problems with the muscles and bones near the sternum and not the sternum itself.  Pain felt just behind or below the sternum is called substernal pain and is sometimes caused by gastrointestinal problems.  Some of the most common causes of sternum and substernal pain are:  Costochondritis is the most common cause of sternum pain and occurs when the cartilage between the sternum and ribs becomes inflamed and irritated.  Costochondritis can sometimes occur as the result of osteoarthritis but may also happen for no apparent reason.  The symptoms of costochondritis include:  Costochondritis is usually not a cause for concern. However, people experiencing symptoms of costochondritis may want to consult a doctor if their symptoms worsen or do not go away.  The sternoclavicular joint connects the top of the sternum to the collarbone. Injuries to this joint generally cause pain and discomfort at the top of the sternum in the upper chest area.  People experiencing sternum pain due to a sternoclavicular joint injury will often experience the following:  While the collarbone itself is not part of the sternum, it is connected to the sternum by cartilage. Injuries to the collarbone may cause pain in the sternum area.  Collarbone injuries are often the result of trauma, such as a car accident or sports injury, although infections or  arthritis  can also cause them.  Symptoms of a collarbone injury include:  Hernias may not be an obvious cause of pain near the chest. However, a hiatal hernia may cause substernal pain.  A hiatal hernia happens when the stomach moves out of its normal position up past the diaphragm and into the chest. Symptoms of a hiatal hernia include:  People with substernal pain and symptoms of a hiatal hernia should see a doctor for prompt treatment.  Like a fracture in other parts of the body, sternum fractures can cause a lot of pain. Sternum fractures usually occur as a direct result of trauma, such as a car accident or sports injury.  People who believe they may have a sternum fracture should seek immediate medical attention, as the heart and lungs may also be injured.  Symptoms of a sternum fracture include:  Acid reflux happens when stomach acid wears away the lining of the windpipe (esophagus). This happens primarily in people with gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ).  Acid reflux may cause substernal pain and discomfort in the chest and is generally accompanied by a burning feeling.  Pain in this region can also be caused by  inflammation  or a spasm of the windpipe. People with GERD should talk to their doctor about how to prevent further damage to this area.  The sternum and ribs have many muscles attached to them. These muscles can be pulled or strained by severe coughing or strenuous activity involving the arms or torso.  Injuries or trauma can result in bruising to these muscles, which may cause them to ache.  Symptoms of sternum pain vary depending on the cause. The most common symptom is discomfort and pain in the center of the chest, which is the location of the sternum.  Other associated symptoms may include:  People experiencing any kind of chest pain may worry they are having a heart attack. However, sternum pain differs from heart attack pain.  People who are having a heart attack experience specific signs before the heart attack itself, whereas most sternum pain starts suddenly.  A heart attack also occurs with the following symptoms:  However, anyone who thinks they are having a heart attack should seek immediate medical attention.  While sternum pain is not usually serious, there are some causes of sternum pain that require immediate medical attention.  A person should seek emergency medical attention if the pain:  A person should also speak to a doctor if the pain in their sternum gets worse or does not improve over time.    
 Carroll, M. B. (2011, April). Sternocostoclavicular hyperostosis: A review.  Therapeutic Advances in Musculoskeletal Disease ,  3 (2), 101–110.  Carroll, M. B. (2011, April). Sternocostoclavicular hyperostosis: A review.  Therapeutic Advances in Musculoskeletal Disease ,  3 (2), 101–110.  Chest pain. (2017, January 13).  Clavicle fracture (broken collarbone). (2016, December).  Costochondritis. (2016, May 16).  Definition &amp; facts for peptic ulcers (stomach ulcers). (2014, November).  Khoriati, Al-a, Rajakulasingam, &amp; R., Shah, R. (2013, April–June). Sternal fractures and their management.  Journal of Emergencies, Trauma, and Shock ,  6 (2), 113–116.  Pneumonia an infection of the lungs. (2017, August 29).  Sprains and strains. (2016, March 6).  What are the signs and symptoms of bronchitis? (2011, August 4).  What are the symptoms of a heart attack? (2015, January 27).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What causes pain in the sternum?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320185.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2017, November 29). "What causes pain in the sternum?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  