 There is a long tradition of rose water being used in medicine, including in Iran and other parts of the Middle East, as far back as the 7th century.  There is also evidence of North American Indian tribes using it to treat ailments.  Below, we look at some of the benefits of rose water and their uses in medicine.  The skin is the largest organ in the body and acts as a barrier against UV radiation, chemicals, and other physical pollutants.  The antioxidants in rose water protect the cells in the skin against damage.  Rose water also has anti-inflammatory properties, which means it can be put on the skin to soothe the irritation caused by conditions, such as  eczema  and  rosacea .  Rose water acts as an inhibitor against elastase and collagenase, which are both harmful to the skin.  This, in turn, can help soothe the skin and reduce redness, as well as act as an anti-aging product by reducing the appearance of lines and wrinkles.  Rose water facial products  are available for purchase online .  Due to its soothing and anti-inflammatory effect, rose water can be taken to treat a  sore throat . Furthermore,  a study  has shown that it can act as a relaxant on the muscles in the throat.  In its liquid form rose water can be used as part of an eye drop and has been shown to have excellent benefits for people with eye problems.  Conditions it can help treat  include :  Rose water has  antiseptic and antibacterial properties , which mean it can help wounds heal faster, by keeping them clean and fighting injections.  The types of wounds rose water can be used on include:  Due to its antiseptic properties and the fact rose water can prompt the creation of histamines by the immune system, it has been shown to be  useful  for preventing and treating infections.  The inhalation of rose water vapors has been traditionally used as a way to improve a person's mood. The liquid can also be taken orally.  Research has shown that rose water has  antidepressant  and anti-anxiety properties. It is believed to induce sleep and to have a hypnotic effect similar to that of the pharmaceutical drug diazepam.  It has been used to treat a number of  mental health  conditions, including:  In other medical cases, rose water is known to be beneficial in the treatment of conditions such as  dementia  and  Alzheimer's disease .  A specific protein fragment called an amyloid, which is created by the body, has been shown to be present in these conditions and to affect the brain function, kill cells, and hinder memory. Encouragingly, properties found in rose water are an inhibitor of this amyloid.  Just as the fumes of rose water are inhaled to help improve mood, it is believed that the de-stressing effects  can also help  treat  headaches  and  migraines .  Rose water has been used in aromatherapy for some time and can also be applied to a cloth and laid on the forehead for similar effects.  The ingestion of rose water has also been shown to have beneficial effects on the digestive system. It works by increasing bile flow, which helps symptoms of common complaints, including bloating and  upset stomach .  The consumption of rose water can also work as a  laxative . It can increase both the amount of water in the feces and the frequency of going to the toilet, making it a good treatment for  constipation .  Rose water contains between  10 and 50 percent  rose oil. It is often used in religious ceremonies, as well as in the food industry. However, the same product can come in different forms.   Rose oil   This is created by distilling the rose flower. The oil can be mass-produced in factories and is a pale, yellow color and semisolid.  Due to its high concentration, rose oil is known to be a fairly expensive product.   Dried flowers   Both the buds and the petals of the rose can be dried and are used for different reasons.  Often the petals are eaten, with yogurt, for example, and are used for the previously mentioned digestive benefits.   Other products   Other forms that rose products may come in can include:  A person can apply rose products topically by putting a small amount — about the size of a dime — on their arm as an initial test. If there is no adverse or allergic reaction within 24 hours it can be safely applied elsewhere.  In some cases, a person can have a  reaction  to rose water due to a particular and often unknown sensitivity to the product.  This can include:  If someone experiences any of these effects after the use of rose water, they should tell a doctor immediately, as it may be a sign of an infection or allergic reaction.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Abdul, L., Abdul, R., Sukul, R. R., &amp; Nazish, S. (2010, March 10). Anti-inflammatory and antihistaminic study of an Unani eye drop formulation.  Opthalmology and Eye Diseases ,  2 , 17–22.  Abdul, L., Abdul, R., Sukul, R. R., &amp; Nazish, S. (2010, March 10). Anti-inflammatory and antihistaminic study of an Unani eye drop formulation.  Opthalmology and Eye Diseases ,  2 , 17–22.  Boskabady, M. H., Shafei, M. N., Saberi, Z., &amp; Amini, S. (2011, July-August). Pharmacological Effects of  Rosa Damascena .  Iranian Journal of Basic Medical Sciences ,  14 (4), 295–307.  Mahboubi, M. (2016, January).  Rosa damascene  as holy ancient herb with novel applications.  Journal of Traditional and Complementary Medicine ,  6 (1), 10–16.  Thring, T. S. A., Hili, P., &amp; Naughton, D. P. (2011, October 13). Antioxidant and potential anti-inflammatory activity of extracts and formulations of white tea, rose, and witch hazel on primary human dermal fibroblast cells.  Journal of Inflammation ,  8 , 27.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "What you should know about rose water."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320216.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2017, December 5). "What you should know about rose water."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  