 There is no current vaccine to protect against  hepatitis C , although preventive measures can be taken to reduce a person's risk of contracting the disease.  Unprotected vaginal and anal sex can lead to contracting  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs), but people may wonder if the same applies to oral sex.  Hepatitis C is a viral disease and is contagious — is it possible to contract hepatitis C from oral sex?  Hepatitis C spreads through coming into contact with another person's blood. If infected blood from one person enters another person's bloodstream, that person may become infected.  Overall, the risk of transmitting hepatitis C during any type of sexual activity is low. While highly unlikely, it could happen during oral sex if a person with hepatitis C has cracked and bleeding lips and the partner has an open wound.  According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), hepatitis C  is not spread  through kissing or saliva.  Hepatitis C is a virus that affects the liver.  According to the World Health Organization (WHO), around  71 million people  have chronic hepatitis C infections globally. Just under 400,000 people die from  hepatitis  C-related liver diseases every year.  Hepatitis C damages the liver cells, causing  inflammation  and scarring known as fibrosis, as well as liver  cirrhosis . It can also cause  liver cancer  and liver failure.  Currently, there is no direct evidence to prove that hepatitis C is transmitted through oral sex alone. However, a person should still be cautious anytime blood is present because an infection can still occur.  If either sexual partner has a break in their skin, there may be a risk of blood passing from one person to the other.  Additional risk factors may include:  The risk of contracting or passing hepatitis C from one person to another during oral sex is very low. This is particularly true of couples in monogamous relationships who have been tested for contagious diseases.  Knowing how hepatitis C transfers from one person to another, as well as understanding safer sex practices, can further reduce a person's risk of infection.  Risk factors for contracting hepatitis C include:  While transmission of hepatitis C through sexual contact is rare, there are many other ways a person can become infected.  The hepatitis C virus lives in the blood and certain bodily fluids. Transmission of the virus occurs when an infected person's blood is transmitted to another person.  Exchange of semen may also result in infection, though the chances of this are very rare.  Additionally, while the hepatitis virus has been detected in saliva, it is believed that antibodies in saliva block the transmission of the virus to others, so the disease is not transmitted through kissing.  Besides sexual contact, the most common ways a person can become infected with hepatitis C virus are:  Many people who have been infected with the hepatitis C virus do not realize that they have it.  However, depending on whether the infection is acute or chronic, symptoms of the disease can include:  The majority of people infected will only experience symptoms as the virus progresses and may not experience symptoms when they first contract it.  Many infected people only discover they are carrying the virus when they have a routine blood test or try to donate blood.  Although it is often difficult for a person to know that they have been infected with the hepatitis C virus, if they have reason to believe they have been exposed to it, they should get tested as soon as possible.  All individuals born between 1945 and 1965 should be tested for hepatitis C if they have not been already. People of this generation are  five times  more likely to have hepatitis C than other people. There is no clear reason for this, but researchers know that transmission was at its highest during the 1960s–1980s.  Diagnosis is made using a blood test to check for specific antibodies that would be present in an infected person. This test is known as the hepatitis C antibody test or anti-HCV test.  If a person tests positive for antibodies, doctors will suggest further testing to see whether the hepatitis C virus is currently active. This test is called an RNA or PCR test.  It is possible to have a false positive result. This occurs when a person receives a positive anti-HCV test when they do not have the virus.  A positive result can also occur if a person has had the infection in the past, but it has already cleared. An RNA test should always be done to confirm whether a person has active hepatitis C.  It is also possible for recently infected persons to receive a false negative result when they do have the virus. This is because there may not be sufficient antibodies present in the blood to react with the test early on.  If infected, a doctor may refer a person to a liver specialist. Other blood tests and a liver biopsy may be done to determine the level of damage and whether cirrhosis or  cancer  of the liver has occurred.  A wide range of factors determine the  treatment  options. People with hepatitis C should also be vaccinated against hepatitis A and B, if not previously exposed.  Sexually active people should be screened for STIs on a regular basis, particularly if they change sexual partners or have many sexual partners. It may take up to  4 to 12 weeks  for hepatitis C to show up in test results.  About  15 to 20 percent  of hepatitis C infections will clear up without treatment. In all other people with the disease, hepatitis C will be chronic.  It is not clear why some people can eliminate the virus, and others are cannot. If a person is diagnosed with hepatitis C, doctors can prescribe antiviral medications for treatment.  Other self-care practices that a person can do during the acute infection include:  If a person is unaware they have acute hepatitis C and it develops into a chronic infection, a doctor may recommend other medical treatments.  Hepatitis C is considered a manageable condition. New antiviral drugs have proven effective at fighting off the virus, and living a healthy lifestyle can help to treat hepatitis C effectively.  A person with hepatitis C should always take extra precautions during sexual activity to limit the risk of transmitting the disease to someone else.  If a person is diagnosed with hepatitis C, making healthy choices and working closely with a doctor means that they can usually manage the virus.    
 Buffington, J., Murray, P. M., Schlanger, K., Shih., Badsgard, T., Hennessy, R. P. … Gunn, R. A. (2007). Low prevalence of Hepatitis C antibody in men who have sex with men who do not inject drugs.  Public Health Reports ,  122 ,(Suppl2), 63–67.  Buffington, J., Murray, P. M., Schlanger, K., Shih., Badsgard, T., Hennessy, R. P. … Gunn, R. A. (2007). Low prevalence of Hepatitis C antibody in men who have sex with men who do not inject drugs.  Public Health Reports ,  122 ,(Suppl2), 63–67.  Hepatitis C. (2015, June 10).  Hepatitis C. (October, 2008).  Hepatitis C. (2016, August 17).  Hepatitis C fact sheet. (2017, October).  Hepatitis C FAQs for health professionals. (2017, Jan 27).  Hepatitis C FAQs for the public. (2016, October 17).  Hepatitis C: Information on testing &amp; diagnosis. (2013, October).  Miani, C., Manville, C., Burge, P., Marjanovic, S., &amp; Chataway, J. (2017, January 1). Hepatitis C: Understanding factors that influence the physicians' treatment decisions.  Rand Health Quarterly ,  6 (4), 6.  People born 1945–1965 (baby boomers). (2017, September 19).  Picco, M. F. (2014, November 27). Hepatitis C: How common is sexual transmission?  Terrault, N. A. (2002, November). Sexual activity as a risk factor for Hepatitis C.  Testing recommendations for hepatitis C virus infection. (2015, October 15).  Viral hepatitis. Frequently asked questions. (2013, July 09).  What about sex and hepatitis C? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Can hepatitis C be transmitted through oral sex?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320253.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2017, December 6). "Can hepatitis C be transmitted through oral sex?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  