 The condition occurs when the body's heat-regulation system becomes overwhelmed by outside factors, causing a person's internal temperature to rise.  Hyperthermia is considered separate from conditions where internal body sources, such as infection, heat-regulating problems, and adverse drug reactions or overdoses cause a raised body temperature.  In humans, core body temperature ranges from  95.9°F to 99.5°F  during the day, or 35.5°C to 37.5°C. In contrast, people with some level of hyperthermia have a body temperature of more than 100.4°F (38°C).  The symptoms of hyperthermia depend on the stage it has reached or how much the body is overheated. Symptoms of overheating may develop very quickly or over the course of hours or days.  As the body attempts to cool itself by sweating, the sweat takes with it water and crucial salts called electrolytes, causing  dehydration .  Mild dehydration tends to cause minor symptoms, such as  headache  and muscle cramps.  Severe dehydration, however, can strip the body of its ability to cool. Without treatment, this can result in dangerously high body temperatures and life-threatening conditions, including organ failure and death.  Types of hyperthermia and their associated symptoms include:  This stage of hyperthermia causes:  Heat exhaustion, if left untreated, can lead to heat  stroke , which is a life-threatening condition.  Symptoms of heat exhaustion include:  Without treatment, heat stroke can lead to dangerous complications, especially in young children, those whose immune system is compromised, and people over 65 years of age.  Hyperthermia is also more likely to cause complications in people with heat-related, heart, and  blood pressure  conditions.  With heat stroke the body temperature is more than 103°F to 104°F, depending on a person's normal, average body temperature.  Temperature and many of the other early signs of heat stroke are the same as those for heat exhaustion. Symptoms of heat stroke include:  Symptoms of severe heat stroke include:  Another condition that may occur with severe heat stroke is known as rhabdomyolysis. This is when a protein released from damaged skeletal muscle cells causes kidney damage.  A person should immediately stop what they are doing and move to a cool, shaded place with good airflow if they suspect hyperthermia.  People should seek medical attention if heat cramps last longer than one hour after they have rested in a cool place.  Medical attention should also be sought for general symptoms that do not improve within 30 minutes of rest and care.  Additional tips for treating mild to moderate hyperthermia include:  If heat stroke is suspected or symptoms persist, 911 must be called immediately or the individual must be taken to the emergency room.  Another person will have to help if the individual with heat stroke is unconscious or very disorientated.  Guidelines for treating heat stroke include:  Once in the hospital, doctors may give intravenous fluids containing electrolytes and possibly chilled fluids.  Individuals will be closely monitored until symptoms resolve and their body temperature returns to a safe level, which can take several hours.  Additional emergency medication and treatment may be necessary for severe or complicated cases of heat stroke, including if organ failure, seizure, or other medical conditions have occurred.  Severe cases of hyperthermia often require several days of hospitalization and monitoring until a person is fully recovered.  Hyperthermia occurs when the body can no longer release enough of its heat to maintain a normal temperature.  The body has different coping mechanisms to get rid of excess body heat, largely breathing, sweating, and increasing blood flow to the surface of the skin.  But when the environment outside is warmer than the inside of the body, the outside air is too warm or humid to passively accept heat from the skin and evaporate sweat, making it difficult for the body to release its heat.  As overheating progresses, more and more moisture and electrolytes are lost from the body, lowering blood pressure and limiting sweating.  Hyperthermia often occurs during physical exertion or exercise in a warm or humid environment.  During exercise, blood pressure rises to deliver more oxygen to working tissues, increasing body temperature and the amount of work the body must do to maintain a stable temperature.  When combined with other factors, such as warm weather that also raises the body temperature and reduces its ability to release heat, it is unsurprising that exercise can increase the likelihood of overheating.  Though less common, hyperthermia can also take place while someone is resting, especially during extreme heat waves. Those on certain medications, diets, and with some medical conditions can also be affected by hyperthermia even when they are at rest.  As well as a person being under 16 years old or more than 65 years of age, the risk factors for hyperthermia include:  Common activities that increase the risk of hyperthermia include:  Several jobs or types of work also increase the risk of hyperthermia. Common occupations or work associated with an increased risk of hyperthermia include:  These occupations carry a risk because they expose people to extreme heat, or involve protective equipment, such as firefighting gear that severely limits airflow and the body's ability to cool itself.    
 Baumann, M. H. (2016, January-February). The changing face of recreational drug use.  Cerebrum ,  2016 , 1–16.  Baumann, M. H. (2016, January-February). The changing face of recreational drug use.  Cerebrum ,  2016 , 1–16.  Faulds, M., &amp; Meekings, T. (2013, June). Temperature management in critically ill patients.  Continuing Education in Anaesthesia Critical Care &amp; Pain ,  13 (3), 75–79.  Heat exhaustion and heatstroke. (2015, June 11).  Hyperthermia: Too hot for your health. (2012, June 27).  Nybo, L., Rasmussen, P., &amp; Sawka, M. N. (2014, April). Performance in the heat— physiological factors of importance for hyperthermia‐induced fatigue.  Comprehensive Physiology ,  4 (2), 657–689.  Warning signs and symptoms of heat-related illness. (2017, November 3). Retrieved  https://www.cdc.gov/disasters/extremeheat/warning.html   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What should you know about hyperthermia?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320226.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, December 5). "What should you know about hyperthermia?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  