 A person's blood is made up of many different types of blood cells. White blood cells, also known as leukocytes, help to fight off infection. Leukocytes are a vital part of the immune system.  People who have leukopenia have fewer white blood cells than they should. This makes them more likely to get infections.  This article explores the effect leukopenia has on the body, what causes it, and the treatment options available.  Leukopenia is a condition where a person has fewer white blood cells in their bloodstream than they should. Leukopenia is diagnosed with a blood test called a complete blood count or CBC.  A healthy white blood cell count is between 3,500 and 11,000 white blood cells per microliter. A person with leukopenia may have fewer than 3,500 white blood cells per microliter.  White blood cells are made in the  bone marrow  and are critical for the immune system. Having too few of them means the body is less able to fight off infections and diseases.  There are five types of white blood cells. Each helps to protect the body from a different kind of infection:  There are five kinds of leukopenia, each one corresponding to the type of white blood cell that is affected.  The terms leukopenia and neutropenia are often used interchangeably. However, they refer to slightly different conditions.  Leukopenia is an umbrella term that refers to a reduction in any of the white blood cell types.  Neutropenia is a type of leukopenia but refers specifically to a decrease in neutrophils, the most common type of white blood cell.  A person's neutrophil count is an important indicator of their infection risk.  An absolute neutrophil count (ANC) is a test that doctors may carry out to decide a person's overall health. This test can help to diagnose conditions that include  leukemia . It can also help assess the body's response to treatments, including  chemotherapy .  There are no specific symptoms of having a low white blood cell count. However, when someone has leukopenia, they are more likely to get infections. The symptoms of infection include:  A person with leukopenia may have other symptoms that relate to the cause of their low white blood cell count. The different causes of leukopenia are explored below.  There are several medical conditions that cause leukopenia by interfering with the production of white blood cells in the bone marrow.  Other conditions cause leukopenia by destroying white blood cells rather than affecting their production. Leukopenia may also be the result of some treatments and medications.  The following conditions may cause leukopenia:  Cancer treatments may affect a person's white blood cell count, leading to leukopenia. Examples that may have this effect include:  Certain medications can also affect the number of white blood cells in someone's blood and may lead to leukopenia. Medications that can have this effect include:  If a person is unsure of the generic name of the drug they are taking, and if it will affect their immune system, it is a good idea for them to ask a doctor.  If a person's body is fighting off infection, this may affect their white blood cell count. They may have slightly fewer white blood cells circulating in their bloodstream. This condition is called pseudoleukopenia.  Pseudoleukopenia is the stage before leukopenia. If a person's white blood cells continue to decrease, they may go on to develop leukopenia.  If a medication is causing leukopenia, a doctor might recommend that a person stops taking it or tries a different type. A person should never stop or change their medication without first consulting a doctor.  If a person has cancer and their chemotherapy is causing leukopenia, they may need to pause their treatment to allow their white blood cells to replenish.  Treatments that use growth factors, such as granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, may help leukopenia. These are often used when chemotherapy is causing leukopenia or if the cause is genetic.  A  2015 study  found that when chemotherapy was used alongside a drug called erlotinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, the risk of leukopenia was much lower.  The following home treatments and behaviors may help a person with leukopenia improve their condition and reduce their risk of infection:  Treatment may also be needed for any infections that result from a reduced white blood cell count. This might include antibiotics or antifungals.  Treating leukopenia may involve pausing medication or treatments. This may be problematic if the underlying condition is serious, such as cancer, but doctors will help a person work around the condition.  A doctor will regularly check a person's white blood cell count if they have a condition known to cause leukopenia.  Getting regular blood tests helps leukopenia to be identified early and treated before it leads to complications.    
 Blood basics. (n.d.).  Blood basics. (n.d.).  Lin, F.-S., Wu, M.-Y., Tu, W.-J., Pan, H.-Q., Zheng, J., Shi, J.-W., … Zhang, X. (2015, December). A cross-sectional and follow-up study of leukopenia in tuberculosis patients: Prevalence, risk factors and impact of anti-tuberculosis treatment.  Journal of Thoracic Disease ,  7 (12), 2234–2242.  Zhou, J., Tian, X., Cheng, L., Zhou, Q., Liu, Y., Zhang, Y., …&amp; Ma, H. (2015, October 9). The risk of neutropenia and leukopenia in advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients treated with erlotinib: A prisma-compliant systematic review and meta-analysis.  Medicine ,  94 (40), e1719.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What is leukopenia?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320299.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2017, December 13). "What is leukopenia?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  