 "Lie bumps" is the common name for transient lingual papillitis. People used to believe that these bumps appeared on a person's tongue when they lied. While this superstition is long forgotten, the name has stuck.  This article explores the potential causes of lie bumps and how they might be treated.  Transient lingual papillitis is a short-term condition that affects the tongue.  When a person has lie bumps, small red or white bumps appear on their tongue. These swollen bumps may cause some pain and discomfort.  A  2017 study  notes that while this type of tongue bump may be painful, it is common and passes quickly. Lie bumps usually go away without treatment after 2 or 3 days.  Some people describe lie bumps as looking like  pimples  on the tongue. They may feel:  Other than pain or irritation from the bumps themselves, people do not usually have any other accompanying symptoms.  If a person is experiencing additional symptoms, they may have another condition called eruptive lingual papillitis.  The bumps on the tongue in eruptive lingual papillitis may look the same as lie bumps, or transient lingual papillitis.  Eruptive lingual papillitis differs from transient lingual papillitis in the following ways:  According to a  2003 study , transient lingual papillitis is considered an inflammatory disease. The underlying causes of the condition remain unclear. A  2016 study  explains that while the condition is poorly understood, it is not harmful to an individual.  While more research is needed to understand the causes of transient lingual papillitis, the following are thought to play a role:  It is thought that lie bumps occur when small fleshy papillae on the tongue become irritated. The papillae are where the taste buds are, and when they get irritated, they may swell and form bumps.  Lie bumps usually go away on their own after 2 or 3 days. To help treat symptoms and resolve the condition quickly, a person can try:  It is a good idea to see a dentist or doctor if the lie bumps:  A doctor or dentist can usually diagnose lie bumps by looking at them. If they think the bumps may be caused by something else, they will perform other diagnostic tests.  If bumps on the tongue are not caused by transient or eruptive lingual papillitis, then another condition may be the cause.  Other potential causes of bumps on the tongue include:  Lie bumps are not usually a cause for concern and tend to go away on their own after 2 or 3 days.  A person should speak to a doctor if the bumps on the tongue do not go away after a week, frequently recur, bleed when touched, or are very painful.  A doctor can help determine the cause of the bumps, most of which are not harmful. If the cause is an underlying medical condition, a doctor can help a person access the right treatment.    
 Brannon, R. B., &amp; Flaitz, C. M. (2003, August). Transient lingual papillitis: A papulokeratotic variant.  Oral Surgery Oral Medicine Oral Pathology Oral Radiology ,  96 (2), 187–191.  Brannon, R. B., &amp; Flaitz, C. M. (2003, August). Transient lingual papillitis: A papulokeratotic variant.  Oral Surgery Oral Medicine Oral Pathology Oral Radiology ,  96 (2), 187–191.  Kalogirou, E.-M., Tosios, K. I., Nikitakis, N. G., Kamperos, G., &amp; Sklavounou, A. (2017, January 1). Transient lingual papillitis: A retrospective study of 11 cases and review of the literature.  Journal of Clinical and Experimental Dentistry ,  9 (1), e157–e162.  Kornerup, I. M., Senye, M., &amp; Peters, E. (2016). Transient lingual papillitis [Abstract].  Quintessence International ,  47 (10), 871–875.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Lie bumps (transient lingual papillitis): What to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320275.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2017, December 10). "Lie bumps (transient lingual papillitis): What to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  