 A-fib episodes can come on suddenly and are often alarming. They can last for a few hours, a few days, or be continually present. Sometimes, the episodes stop without intervention, but other times it is necessary to take action.  This article provides strategies to help stop an attack once it starts and suggests ways to prevent future A-fib episodes.  A-fib is an irregular heartbeat.  It occurs when the atria of the heart (the upper chambers) quiver instead of beat as they should.  This may happen because some health problems, such as  high blood pressure  (hypertension), interfere with the electrical signals that control the heartbeat.  There are three types of A-fib:  While A-fib itself is not usually life-threatening, people should take this medical condition seriously because it can lead to complications, such as  heart failure  and  stroke . In fact, the AHA estimate that A-fib occurs in up to  1 in 5 people  who have strokes.  There are several methods that may help stop an episode of paroxysmal or persistent A-fib once it starts.  These include:  To practice deep breathing, sit down and place one hand on the stomach.  Inhale deeply through the nose, all the way into the stomach, for a count of 4 seconds.  Do this to slowly fill up the lungs with air gradually, until they are completely filled.  Hold this breath for a moment, before exhaling through the mouth for the same amount of time.  Slowly drinking a glass of cold water can help steady the heart rate. This tip is especially useful for those whose A-fib episode has been brought on by  dehydration .  Some people report feeling better after exercising. A  2002 case study , published in the  New England Journal of Medicine , found that a 45-year-old athlete with paroxysmal A-fib stopped symptoms by engaging in a low impact aerobic activity. In this case study, the athlete used an elliptical machine or a cross-country skiing machine.  People wishing to try this method of dealing with an A-fib attack should speak to their doctor first.   Yoga  is known to relax those who practice it by focusing on the breathing. This could be beneficial for those with A-fib — both to stop a current episode and as a preventative technique.  In 2015,  a study  published in the  Journal of Arrhythmia  reported that people with A-fib who undertook twice-weekly yoga sessions over a 3-month period enjoyed significant reductions in high blood pressure and heart rate. Participants also reported a better quality of life.  Biofeedback techniques can have a calming effect on people during an A-fib episode. Biofeedback involves training the mind to control the body's responses to external and internal triggers. It can improve a person's control of their autonomic nervous system functions, which can stabilize the heart's rhythm.  While  preliminary research  on biofeedback suggests that it can be used to decrease episodes of fibrillation, more controlled research is necessary.  These techniques may stop a paroxysmal A-fib episode. Vagal maneuvers involve doing things to trigger the vagus nerve, a nerve that impacts heart function.  Examples of such maneuvers include coughing, or engaging the muscles as if having a bowel movement.  Exercise helps with weight management, regulates the heart rate, stops  stress , and lowers  blood pressure .  Aim for at least 20 minutes of aerobic activity most days, such as:  Lifting weights can also be beneficial. Always warm up before exercise and stay hydrated throughout.  Follow a heart-healthy diet to reduce the risk of A-fib episodes, strokes, and heart conditions.  It is also important to stay hydrated throughout the day to prevent A-fib episodes and other health concerns.  Having high  cholesterol  is a risk factor for a  heart attack , which can also impact the heart rate. High blood pressure can interfere with the electrical system that regulates a steady heartbeat.  It is important to work with a doctor if lifestyle changes cannot keep these health markers in the healthy range. For some people, medication may be necessary.  Blood pressure monitors are available from pharmacies or  you can purchase them online .  Lack of sleep could trigger an A-fib episode. Furthermore, some sleep conditions — including sleep apnea and  insomnia  — can increase the risk of heart problems.  For optimal health, people should aim to get between 7 and 9 hours of quality sleep a night. Anyone who suspects they have sleep apnea should consult a doctor.  Being overweight or obese can increase the risk of diabetes, sleep apnea, and high blood pressure, which are all risk factors for A-fib.  Smoking has been linked to an increased incidence of A-fib. Research suggests that current smokers have a more than twofold-increased risk of A-fib than non-smokers and former smokers.  Tobacco use also increases the risk of stroke and other heart conditions.  Intense emotions, such as stress and anger, can cause problems with the heart's rhythm. Practice good stress management techniques, such as:  Many of these can also be used to stop A-fib attacks in their tracks.  As A-fib can lead to serious complications, such as stroke, people should treat it as a serious medical condition. It is important for anyone who experiences symptoms of A-fib to see a doctor as soon as possible. The doctor may recommend medications or medical procedures to control symptoms and decrease stroke risk.  Also, if symptoms are severe or persist for longer than usual, consult a doctor.  If a person experiences any of the following, seek emergency medical treatment:  People should only use the above-listed techniques to stop an A-fib episode after first consulting a doctor about their symptoms.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Chamberlain, A. M., Agarwal, S. K., Folsom, A. R., Duval, S., Soliman, E. Z., Ambrose, M., ... Alonso, A. (2011, August). Smoking and incidence of atrial fibrillation: Results from the atherosclerosis risk in communities (ARIC) study.  Heart Rhythm ,  8 (8), 1160-1166.  Chamberlain, A. M., Agarwal, S. K., Folsom, A. R., Duval, S., Soliman, E. Z., Ambrose, M., ... Alonso, A. (2011, August). Smoking and incidence of atrial fibrillation: Results from the atherosclerosis risk in communities (ARIC) study.  Heart Rhythm ,  8 (8), 1160-1166.  Deutsch, S. B., &amp; Krivitsky, E. L. (2015, December). The impact of yoga on atrial fibrillation: A review of the yoga my heart study.  Journal of Arrhythmia ,  31 (6), 337–338.  Liang, Y., Mente, A., Yusuf, S., Gao, P., Sleight, P., Zhu, J., ... &amp; Teo, K. K. (2012, October 1). Alcohol consumption and the risk of incident atrial fibrillation among people with cardiovascular disease.  Canadian Medical Association Journal ,  184 (16), E857-E866.  Living with atrial fibrillation.(n.d.).  Nolan, R. P., Floras, J. S., Harvey, P. J., Kamath, M. V., Picton, P. E., Chessex, C., ... Chen, M. H. (2010, March 17). Behavioral neurocardiac training in hypertension. A randomized, controlled trial.  Hypertension ,  55 (4), 1033-1039.  Ragozzino, M. W., Snyder, J., &amp; Nayak, H. M. (2002, December 19). Self-cardioversion of paroxysmal lone atrial fibrillation with exercise.  New England Journal of Medicine ,  347 , 2085-2086.  What is atrial fibrillation (AFib or AF)? (2017, February 6).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Ways to stop an A-fib episode."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320285.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2017, December 13). "Ways to stop an A-fib episode."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  