 The causes of  erectile dysfunction  (ED) are varied, but it can often be treated without the need for medication.  This article will discuss the use of essential oils in treating ED.  When the brain initiates a state of arousal, it sends signals to the penis that cause its arteries to widen and allow more blood to flow through it.  When the amount of blood flowing into the penis is restricted, the erection is lost. The inability to reach or maintain an erection can happen for a variety of reasons, such as an overconsumption of alcohol or  fatigue .  The inability to hold an erection is diagnosed as ED when it occurs persistently.  This is an indication that there is an underlying problem preventing the penis from becoming sufficiently erect.  Most often, the problem relates to:  Depending on the cause, ED can be treated in a variety of different ways and might involve medication, therapy or changes in lifestyle. Natural remedies, such as essential oils, can also be helpful in treating ED in males.  Essential oils are highly concentrated plant extracts that contain the chemical compounds that make up the aroma of the plant they derive from. They are produced through distillation, and can be harmful if used in their pure form; people must dilute essential oils in a carrier oil before use.  Do not apply essential oils directly to the skin. Dilute essential oils in a carrier oil, such as sweet almond oil — the usual dilution is 3 to 5 drops of essential oil in one ounce of carrier oil.  Each type of oil has different properties and can be used to achieve different effects. While there is evidence to suggest that essential oils can help to treat certain conditions, such as  acne  or a  headache ,  studies have shown that they  can have several adverse side effects, including allergic reactions.  The U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) do not regulate essential oils, so they should be used with a high degree of caution and only in consultation with a doctor or healthcare professional.  The evidence underlying the use of essential oils in treating ED is often anecdotal, but some empirical work has been conducted to suggest certain oils may be helpful:  Currently, there are no conclusive studies to demonstrate that essential oils can effectively treat ED in human males because much of the empirical research has been conducted in rodents rather than humans.  Essential oils can be toxic and should never be taken by mouth. Anyone considering using essential oils for ED should speak with a certified aromatherapist first. Essential oils should be diffused into the air or applied diluted in a carrier oil before applying to the skin. While essential oils can have adverse side effects, when used correctly, they are considered safe and could still have benefits for ED.  Aside from essential oils, there are other alternative treatments for ED that people can pursue. Talk to a healthcare provider for the best treatment as ED can be a symptom of other problems, such as  diabetes , high blood pressure,  atherosclerosis , or prostate issues.    
 Aleissa, M. S. (2014). Effect of ginger supplements on some reproductive parameters and spermatogenesis of mice.  Indian Journal of Fundamental and Applied Life Sciences ,  4 (1), 271–277.  Aleissa, M. S. (2014). Effect of ginger supplements on some reproductive parameters and spermatogenesis of mice.  Indian Journal of Fundamental and Applied Life Sciences ,  4 (1), 271–277.  Khaki, A., Fathiazad, F., &amp; Nouri, M. (2013, September). Effects of watermelon seed extract (Citrullus vulgaris) on spermatogenesis in rat.  International Journal of Women's Health and Reproduction Sciences ,  1 (3).  Khaki, A. (2015, February). Effect of  Cinnamomum zeylanicumon  on Spermatogenesis.  Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal ,  17 (2), e18668.  Khojasteh, S. M. B., Khameneh, R. J., Houresfsnd, M., &amp; Yaldagard, E. (2016, February 8). A review on medicinal plants used for improvement of spermatogenesis.  Biology and Medicine ,  8.   Kondo, T., Kishi, M., Fushimi, T., Ugajin, S., &amp; Kaga, T. (2009, August 7). Vinegar intake reduces body weight, body fat mass, and serum triglyceride levels in obese Japanese subjects.  Bioscience, biotechnology, and biochemistry ,  73 (8), 1837–1843.  Modaresi, M., &amp; Khodadadi, A. (2014). The effects of Aloe vera extract on spermatogenesis and reproductive hormones in mice.  Research Journal of Biological Sciences ,  9 (5), 165–168.  Posadzki, P., Alotaibi, A., &amp; Ernst, E. (2012, August). Adverse effects of aromatherapy: a systematic review of case reports and case series.  International Journal of Risk &amp; Safety in Medicine ,  24 , 147-161.  Sariözkan, S., Türk, G., Güvenç, M., Yüce, A., Özdamar, S., Cantürk, F., … Yay, A. H. (2016, March 23). Effects of cinnamon (C. zeylanicum) bark oil against taxanes-induced damages in sperm quality, testicular and epididymal oxidant/antioxidant balance, testicular apoptosis, and sperm DNA integrity [Abstract].  Nutrition and Cancer ,  68 (3), 481–494.  Sumalatha, K., Kumar, S. A., &amp; Lakshmi, S. M. (2010). Review on natural aphrodisiac potentials to treat sexual dysfunction.  International Journal of Pharmacy &amp; Therapeutics ,  1 (10, 6–14.  Tajuddin, A., Ahmad, S., Latif, A., &amp; Qasmi, I. A. (2004, November 5). Effect of 50% ethanolic extract of  Syzygium aromaticum  (L.) Merr. &amp; Perry.(clove) on sexual behaviour of normal male rats.  BMC complementary and Alternative Medicine,   4 , 17.  Tajuddin, A., Ahmad, S., Latif, A., Qasmi, I. A., &amp; Amin, K. M. Y. (2005, July 20). An experimental study of sexual function improving effect of  Myristica fragrans  Houtt.(nutmeg).  BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  5,  16.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What you should know about essential oils for erectile dysfunction."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320258.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2017, December 7). "What you should know about essential oils for erectile dysfunction."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  