 Allergies are the sixth leading cause of chronic illness in the United States, affecting approximately  50 million  people. While there is no cure for allergies, there are several ways that allergy symptoms can be managed.  This article lists the most effective essential oils for relief of the symptoms of seasonal allergies and skin allergies and suggests some ways to incorporate essential oils into your allergy treatment regimen.  Symptoms of seasonal allergies include watery eyes, stuffy nose, sneezing, coughing, wheezing, and chest congestion.  Skin allergies can lead to swelling, itching, and redness.  People with these allergy symptoms may wish to try the following oils for seasonal or skin allergies.  When using an essential oil, it is advisable to consult a doctor first and then proceed with caution. Some oils can make skin allergies worse.   1. Peppermint   A  2010 study , although on animals, found that peppermint oil has a relaxing effect on smooth muscle, which helps to reduce the contractions that cause coughing.  According to other  research , the oil may also help treat  anxiety  and mental  fatigue , symptoms that are often experienced by allergy sufferers.  Peppermint may be useful for relieving seasonal allergies.   2. Frankincense   Frankincense is another oil that reduces inflammatory activity in the body. One  study  reports that frankincense exhibits anti-inflammatory effects in  bronchitis , which causes  inflammation  of the airways, and sinus infections. It may also be beneficial for people with  asthma .  Frankincense may help with the symptoms of seasonal allergies.   3. Eucalyptus    Research  suggests that using a blend of oils, including eucalyptus, for infections of the upper respiratory tract leads to a significant and immediate improvement in symptoms. Participants reported a reduction in hoarseness, cough, and  sore throat .  These symptoms can appear with seasonal allergies.  The essential oil blend used in the study contained  Eucalyptus citriodora ,  Eucalyptus globulus , peppermint, Syrian oregano, and rosemary.   4. Lemon   In  one study , it was found that a lemon-based nasal spray helped in the treatment of perennial and seasonal  allergic rhinitis . Lemon essential oil can also  inhibit  bacterial activity.  It is not recommended to apply citrus-based essential oils to the skin before exposure to the sun. These oils can cause the skin to become more sensitive to sunlight, increasing the risk of harmful blistering or burning.   5. Lavender   Lavender naturally quells inflammation,  inhibits anxiety , and  encourages a deep sleep , all of which can benefit people with allergies.  Lavender is an especially good option for skin allergies, as it is gentle on the skin and calms irritation, with  research  indicating that it speeds up healing. The oil can be applied directly to the skin, or added to baths, lotions, and other skin products.   6. Tea tree oil   Tea tree oil has proven antifungal, antiviral, and antibacterial properties, and it may be suitable for some skin allergies.  It also reduces inflammation, with research finding that tea tree oil applied topically significantly decreases swelling from histamine-induced skin inflammation when compared to paraffin oil.  It must be noted that, due to its potency, tea tree oil may induce allergic contact dermatitis in some people. Also, the oil should only be used topically and should not be ingested.   7. Chamomile oil   In  a review  of the properties of chamomile oil, it was reported that chamomile is an effective anti-inflammatory that can be used to treat skin conditions, inflammation of the mucous membranes, and symptoms of  sinusitis .  It may also  relieve the itching  and swelling associated with eczema when mixed with a carrier oil and applied topically.   Peppermint ,  frankincense ,  eucalyptus ,  lemon ,  lavender ,  tea tree , and  chamomile  oil are all available for purchase online.  Essential oils can be used in a variety of ways to treat allergies. Some of the most popular include:   Diffusion   Add a few drops of the oil or oils to a plug-in diffuser or oil burner. This method is especially beneficial for treating the symptoms of seasonal allergies, as well as other respiratory conditions.   Direct inhalation   Essential oils can be breathed directly from the bottle or by putting a drop or two on a handkerchief.  People with seasonal allergies may relieve congestion by adding a few drops of essential oil to a bowl of hot water and breathing in the vapors. For nighttime allergy relief, a person can add 5 drops of essential oil to their pillow.   Topical application   People with skin allergies and symptoms such as itching, hives, and rashes can apply the oil to their skin.  Most oils should be mixed with a carrier oil, such as jojoba, coconut, or sweet almond oil before application. A ratio of 2 drops of essential oil to 1 tablespoon of carrier oil is recommended.  Take care when applying lemon essential oil or other citrus-based oils to the skin, as they are sun and light sensitive and cause discoloration of the skin.   Targeting allergens   Some oils, such as lemon, eucalyptus, and tea tree, can help kill molds and dust mites, both of which are common allergens that trigger symptoms.  To do this, a person should add 20 drops of essential oil and a tablespoon of white vinegar to 1 cup of water. The mixture can then be used to spray on bathroom fittings and other areas prone to mold, and on to mattresses and other textiles to kill dust mites.  Always do a patch test and wait 24 hours before spraying on larger areas of fabric.  People should bear in mind the following guidelines when using essential oils:  Essential oils are not regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and so should be used with caution.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Al-Yasiry, A. R., &amp; Kiczorowska, B. (2016, January 4). Frankincense--therapeutic properties [Abstract].  Postępy Higieny i Medycyny Doświadczalnej (Advances in Hygiene &amp; Experimental Medicine) ,  70 , 380–391.  Al-Yasiry, A. R., &amp; Kiczorowska, B. (2016, January 4). Frankincense--therapeutic properties [Abstract].  Postępy Higieny i Medycyny Doświadczalnej (Advances in Hygiene &amp; Experimental Medicine) ,  70 , 380–391.  Allergy facts and figures. (n.d.).  Ben-Arye, E., Dudai, N., Eini, A., Torem, M., Schiff, E., &amp; Rakover, Y. (2011). Treatment of upper respiratory tract infections in primary care: A randomized study using aromatic herbs.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2011 , 690346.  Choi, S. Y., &amp; Park, K. (2016, March 13). Effect of inhalation of aromatherapy oil on patients with perennial allergic rhinitis: A randomized controlled trial.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2016 , 789081.  de Sousa, A. A., Soares, P. M., de Almeida, A. N., Maia, A. R., de Souza, E. P., &amp; Assreuy, A. M. (2010, July 20). Antispasmodic effect of Mentha piperita essential oil on tracheal smooth muscle of rats [Abstract].  Journal of Ethnopharmacology ,  130 (2), 433–436.  Ferrara, L., Naviglio, D., &amp; Caruso, A. A. (2012, October 16). Cytological aspects on the effects of a nasal spray consisting of standardized extract of citrus lemon and essential oils in allergic rhinopathy.  ISRN Ppharmaceutics ,  2012 (2012).  Hajhashemi, V., Ghannadi, A., &amp; Sharif, B. (2003, November). Anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties of the leaf extracts and essential oil of Lavandula angustifolia Mill [Abstract].  Journal of Ethnopharmacology ,  89 (1), 67–71.  Koh, K. J., Pearce, A. L., Marshman, G., Finlay‐Jones, J. J., &amp; Hart, P. H. (2002, December). Tea tree oil reduces histamine‐induced skin inflammation [Abstract].  British Journal of Dermatology ,  147 (6), 1212-1217.  Koulivand, P. H., Ghadiri, M. K., &amp; Gorji, A. (2013, March 14). Lavender and the nervous system.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2013 , 681304.  Lee, S.-H., Heo, Y., &amp; Kim, Y.-C. (2010, March 3). Effect of German chamomile oil application on alleviating atopic dermatitis-like immune alterations in mice.  Journal of Veterinary Science ,  11 (1), 35–41.  Liu, Y., Zhang, X., Wang, Y., Chen, F., Yu, Z., Wang, L., ... &amp; Guo, M. (2013, July). Effect of citrus lemon oil on growth and adherence of Streptococcus mutans [Abstract].  World Journal of Microbiology &amp; Biotechnology ,  29 (7), 1161–1167.  Shrivastava, A. (2009, April–June). A review on peppermint oil.  Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical and Clinical Research ,  2 (2), 27–33.  Smell. (n.d.).  Srivastava, J. K., Shankar, E., &amp; Gupta, S. (2010, November 1). Chamomile: A herbal medicine of the past with bright future.  Molecular Medicine Reports ,  3 (6), 895–901.  Ueno-Iio, T., Shibakura, M., Yokota, K., Aoe, M., Hyoda, T., Shinohata, R., ... Kataoka, M. (2014, July 17). Lavender essential oil inhalation suppresses allergic airway inflammation and mucous cell hyperplasia in a murine model of asthma [Abstract].  Life Sciences ,  108 (2), 109–115.  Wallengren, J. (2011, July). Tea tree oil attenuates experimental contact dermatitis [Abstract].  Archives of Dermatological Research ,  303 (5), 333–338.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What are the best essential oils for allergies?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320225.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2017, December 2). "What are the best essential oils for allergies?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  