 From a side view, the spine typically curves to some extent at the neck and lower back, forming a wide "S" shape. But from the back and front view, the spine usually appears mostly straight.  In people with levoscoliosis, from the back view, the spine appears to take on a hard "C" or "S" shape, leaning to the left.  For approximately  80 percent  of people who have scoliosis, the condition develops without an apparent cause or reason (idiopathic). Medical conditions, wear and tear, and injury can also cause scoliosis and levoscoliosis.  Levoscoliosis or scoliosis involving a left spinal curve is considered less common than those involving right curvatures.  A 2014 review study found that an estimated  85 to 90 percent  of adolescents with scoliosis had right curves.  It also found that levoscoliosis is more associated with conditions such as spinal tumors, growths, and neuromuscular disorders.  Types of scoliosis and levoscoliosis with known causes (non-idiopathic) include:  Types of scoliosis and levoscoliosis with uncertain or unknown causes include:  Some research shows that scoliosis may have a genetic cause; approximately  30 percent  of people with idiopathic scoliosis have a family history of the condition. Many of the medical conditions that can cause scoliosis are genetically inherited.  Currently, researchers do not think lifestyle habits, such as poor posture, inactivity, or diet, play any role in the development of scoliosis, though they may play a role in worsening symptoms.  Typically, the severity of the condition depends on the extent of the curve, where it is, and the cause.  Many people, especially younger children and adolescents, develop a mild form of levoscoliosis that does not tend to cause any obvious symptoms other than a slight change in posture and how clothing fits.  Severe scoliosis tends to occur less often, but it can be very painful, and if it is left untreated can cause serious health risks.  In general, levoscoliosis is considered to be a particularly dangerous form of scoliosis because the heart is located in the left half of the body.  Potential complications associated with moderate to severe forms of levoscoliosis that are left untreated include:  To diagnose levoscoliosis, a doctor will ask a person questions about:  The doctor will then perform a physical exam to assess the alignment of the spine, shoulders, and hips and check for pain, tingling, numbness, and muscle weakness.  A doctor will also ask the individual to bend forward at the waist and let their arms hang to the sides.  Once a doctor suspects levoscoliosis, they will order an X-ray to confirm the condition and determine the extent of the curve.  Other diagnostic tools commonly used to confirm and assess scoliosis include:  Most doctors ultimately diagnose levoscoliosis by measuring the angle between the two most misaligned vertebrae on diagnostic images. This is known as the Cobb angle.  A Cobb angle greater than 10 degrees is considered a sign of scoliosis and requires monitoring.  The most effective course of treatment depends on the cause and severity of the scoliosis, as well as the individual's health and age.  Common treatments for scoliosis and levoscoliosis include:  Wearing a plastic back brace cannot reverse a spinal curve, but it can help prevent curves from worsening in about  80 percent  of children. Children with spine curvatures between 25 and 45 degrees may need to wear a back brace.  Most people will need to wear the brace between 16 and 23 hours a day, only taking it off to bathe or exercise.  Once the bones have stopped growing or repairing themselves, a back brace will no longer be useful.  In severe cases, especially when spinal curvatures threaten major organs or are disabling, a spinal fusion may be performed in an attempt to reverse the curve.  In spinal fusion procedures, a surgeon realigns the curved bones and then attaches small pieces of bone tissue along the repaired region. When it heals, it will form a single, straightened bone.  A metal rod may be attached to the spine after surgery to ensure the bone remains straight while healing. Most people can walk the day after surgery and can return to non-strenuous activities in around 4 weeks.  The scientific community is conflicted over the value of some therapies, such as chiropractic and massage. However,  physiotherapy  has offered more promising results.  Founded in 2004, the international Society of Scoliosis Orthopedic Rehabilitation and Treatment (SOSORT) have developed physiotherapy scoliosis-specific exercises (PSSE).  Several high-level studies have shown that PSSE can help treat mild to moderate cases of scoliosis, especially when used alongside bracing.  Currently, major North American scoliosis organizations, such as the Scoliosis Research Society (SRS), do not support the use of physiotherapy as part of scoliosis treatment.  The core principles of the program include:  In most instances, people with a minor form of scoliosis do not require treatment, and it is not a sign of a serious underlying medical condition.  However, people who have more severe cases of scoliosis may experience serious complications, such as chronic pain and reduced organ function, if they do not receive treatment. Levoscoliosis is considered especially dangerous given that the heart is on the left side of the body.  For children and adolescents, wearing a back brace can help stop the progression of the curvature; but surgery may be necessary for adults or adolescents with severe spinal curves.    
 Berdishevsky, H., Lebel, V. A., Bettany-Saltikov, J., Rigo, M., Lebel, A., Hennes, A., ... Durmala, J. (2016, August 4). Physiotherapy scoliosis-specific exercises — a comprehensive review of seven major schools.  Scoliosis and spinal disorders ,  11 (1), 20.  Berdishevsky, H., Lebel, V. A., Bettany-Saltikov, J., Rigo, M., Lebel, A., Hennes, A., ... Durmala, J. (2016, August 4). Physiotherapy scoliosis-specific exercises — a comprehensive review of seven major schools.  Scoliosis and spinal disorders ,  11 (1), 20.  Horne, J., Flannery, R., &amp; Usman, S. (2014, February 1). Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: Diagnosis and management.  American Family Physician ,  89 (3): 193–198.  Hresko, T. (2014, May 19). SRS statement on physiotherapy scoliosis specific exercises.  Idiopathic scoliosis in children and adolescents. (2015, March).  Konieczny, M. R., Senyurt, H., &amp; Krauspe, R. (2013, February). Epidemiology of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.  Journal of Children's Orthopaedics ,  7 (1), 3–9.  Scoliosis. (n.d.)  Scoliosis. (2017, February 3).  The importance of early detection. (n.d.)  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "All you need to know about levoscoliosis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320207.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, December 1). "All you need to know about levoscoliosis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  