  Xanthan gum is a polysaccharide , a type of sugar that is made from a bacteria called  Xanthomonas campestris , through a process of fermentation.  Xanthomonas campestris  infects a wide range of cruciferous plants, such as cabbage, cauliflower, and Brussels sprouts, causing diseases such as  black rot  and bacterial wilt.  Manufacturers make xanthan gum by pulling bacteria from many different plants. The finished product does not contain any viable bacteria, so there is no risk of xanthan gum causing infections.  Some research suggests that xanthan gum can improve health in the following ways:  A  2016 study  found that xanthan gum could lower the glycemic index of rice. After a group of people ate rice that was coated with xanthan gum, their blood sugar levels were lower.  The benefits were most significant when participants consumed rice covered with xanthan, instead of using xanthan gum before or after meals.  So foods containing xanthan gum might offer the most potent blood sugar-lowering benefits.  Xanthan gum may also stabilize blood sugar. A  2013 study  found that xanthan gum mixed with beta-glucan (a type of sugar found in plants) could help prevent blood sugar spikes.  Some research suggests that, when taken in very high doses, xanthan gum may lower  cholesterol  levels. A  1987 study , for example, found that men who consumed xanthan gum for about 3 weeks experienced a 10 percent reduction in cholesterol.  There is little evidence that xanthan gum is beneficial on its own in the treatment of high cholesterol. A newer study has yet to be done to confirm these results.  Xanthan gum may be a useful and safe saliva substitute for people who experience chronic  dry mouth .  Some varieties of toothpaste  for dry mouths contain xanthan gum to help lock in moisture.  Because xanthan gum helps to bind water,  it may also help act as a laxative . The food thickener swells in the digestive tract, helping the intestines to remain moist and supporting gastrointestinal function.  Some diseases can make swallowing difficult, especially when the mouth and throat are dry. A  2014 study  found that xanthan gum could help people with  dysphagia , a swallowing disorder, safely swallow their food.  Xanthan gum does this by thickening food and saliva, making it easier for both to move down the throat. This could reduce the risk of choking and make eating safer.  Xanthan gum may help treat some forms of  cancer  by slowing their growth. A  2009 study , for example, looked at mice with  melanoma , a type of  skin cancer . Mice treated with xanthan gum lived longer, and their tumors grew more slowly.  For people with  celiac disease  and gluten-sensitivity, foods containing gluten can cause intense stomach pain,  diarrhea , and other unpleasant symptoms. Flour and other ingredients in many baked goods contain gluten.  Gluten-free products rely on substitutes that can make them resemble the texture, crumb, and flexibility of gluten-containing bread. Xanthan gum thickens food and binds moisture, potentially improving the properties of gluten-free baked goods.  Xantham gum  is available for purchase online .  While xanthan gum provides emulsifying properties, it is a type of  carbohydrate  known as a polysaccharide. It is not in the same category as some other emulsifiers that can negatively alter gut bacteria, drive intestinal  inflammation , and worsen conditions, such as  Crohn's disease  and ulcerative colitis.  There is no widespread or consistent evidence of any adverse health effects associated with xanthan gum.  In  1987, researchers  asked five men to consume xanthan gum every day for over 3 weeks. There were no adverse health consequences; in fact, there were a few modest health improvements. These results suggest that xanthan gum is safe for most people.  For some people, xanthan gum might be less safe. Those people include:  People with any severe  food allergies , particularly to plants, should talk to a doctor before using xanthan gum.  Xanthan gum serves two primary purposes:   A handful of alternatives  to xanthan gum can thicken food and ensure an even texture:  Xanthan gum is present in a wide range of foods. It is not a cure for any specific illness and is not a nutritional supplement, yet some foods treated with xanthan gum may offer health benefits.  People interested in trying xanthan gum should consider it only as a complement to their usual medical treatment plan. Research on the benefits of xanthan gum is limited, and there is no evidence that it can replace medication for various ailments.  It may, however, improve the effects of some medications, make food taste better, and help people with swallowing issues and  dry mouth  enjoy their food.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 CFR - Code of Federal Regulations Title 21. (2017, April 1).  CFR - Code of Federal Regulations Title 21. (2017, April 1).  Chassaing, B., Van de Wiele, T., De Bodt, J., Mazorati, M., &amp; Gewirtz, A. T. (2017). Dietary emulsifiers directly alter human microbiota composition and gene expression ex vivo potentiating intestinal inflammation [Abstract].  Gut ,  66 (8).  Dost, F., &amp; Farah, C. S. (2013, January 30). Stimulating the discussion on saliva substitutes: A clinical perspective.  Australian Dental Journal ,  58 (1), 11–17.  Eastwood, M. A., Brydon, W. G., &amp; Anderson, D. M. (1987, Jan–Mar). The dietary effects of xanthan gum in man [Abstract].   Food Additives and Contaminants ,  4 (1), 17–26.  Fuwa, M., Nakanishi, Y., &amp; Moritaka, H. (2016). Effect of xanthan gum on blood sugar level after cooked rice consumption [Abstract].  Food Science and Technology Research ,  22 (1), 117–126.  Lane, C. (2013, May 28). 5 alternatives to xanthan gum and guar gum in gluten-free baking.  Paquin, J., Bedard, A., Lemieux, S., Tajchakavit, S., &amp; Turgeon, S. L. (2013, April). Effects of juices enriched with xanthan and β-glucan on the glycemic response and satiety of healthy men [Abstract].  Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism ,  38 (4), 410–414.  Rofes, L., Arreola, V., Mukherjee, R., Swanson, J., &amp; Clavé, P. (2014, May). The effects of a xanthan gum-based thickener on the swallowing function of patients with dysphagia [Abstract].  Alimentary Pharmacology &amp; Therapeutics ,  39 (10), 1169–1179.  Tan, C., Wei, H., Zhao, X., Xu, C., &amp; Peng, J. (2017, April 3). Effects of dietary fibers with high water-binding capacity and swelling capacity on gastrointestinal functions, food intake and body weight in male rats [Abstract].  Food &amp; Nutrition Research ,  61 (1).  Takeuchi, A., Kamiryou, Y., Yamada, H., Eto, M., Shibata, K., Haruna, K., . . . Yoshikai, Y. (2009, December 9). Oral administration of xanthan gum enhances antitumor activity through Toll-like receptor 4 [Abstract].  International Immunopharmacology ,  9 (13-14), 1562–1567.  Vicente, J. G., &amp; Holub, E. B. (2013, January). Xanthomonas campestris pv. Campestris (cause of black rot of crucifers) in the genomic era is still worldwide threat to brassica crops.  Molecular Plant Pathology ,  14 (1), 2–18.  Xanthan gum. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "All you need to know about xanthan gum."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 8 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320272.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2017, December 8). "All you need to know about xanthan gum."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  