 The reduced sex drive is often caused by decreased  estrogen  levels, which can dampen arousal and result in sex being more painful.  In this article, we look at how  menopause  might affect someone's sex drive, along with what can be done to improve libido.  Menopause refers to when a woman stops having her period permanently, but it can affect more than a woman's menstrual cycle.  Menopause can cause physical and emotional changes that impact a woman's life, including her sex life.  Some symptoms and side effects associated with menopause include:  Each of these effects can impact a woman's quality of life and relationship with her partner.  Libido refers to sexual interest and sexual enjoyment.  Some women going through menopause report reduced libido, but the causes vary from person to person.  According to  one review , the reported rates of sexual problems in postmenopausal women are between 68 and 86.5 percent.  This range is much higher than in all women in general, which is estimated to be between  25 and 63 percent .  Decreased estrogen levels can result in reduced blood flow to the vagina, which can cause the tissues of the vagina and labia to become thinner. If this happens, they become less sensitive to sexual stimulation.  Decreased blood flow also affects vaginal lubrication and overall arousal. As a result, a woman may not enjoy sex as much and may have difficulty achieving orgasm. Sex may be uncomfortable or even painful.  Fluctuating hormone levels during perimenopause and menopause can also affect a woman's  mental health , which in turn, may cause a decrease in her libido.   Stress  can also impact a woman's libido, as she may be juggling a job, parenting, and be caring for aging parents. The changes in hormone levels a woman may experience during menopause may make her irritable or depressed, so dealing with everyday stress may feel more difficult.  According to an article published in the   Journal of Women's Health  , women who have more significant side effects associated with menopause are more likely to report lower libido levels.  Examples of these side effects include hot flashes, depression, anxiety, trouble sleeping, and  fatigue .  Other factors that make a woman going through menopause more likely to experience a reduced libido include:  A woman should talk to her doctor about how these conditions could affect her sex drive.  There are several steps a woman can take to increase her libido. These include medical treatments, lifestyle changes, and home remedies.  If a woman experiences changes to her vaginal tissue, such as thinning and dryness, she may wish to consider estrogen therapy.  Prescription estrogen can be applied directly to the vagina in the form of creams, pills, or vaginal rings. These usually contain lower doses of estrogen than regular  birth control  pills.  Some women may wish to take estrogen pills that contain higher levels of hormones. This treatment, known as  hormone replacement therapy , might help reduce symptoms, such as hot flashes and mood changes, but may also carry risks.  A woman thinking about hormone replacement therapy should discuss it with her doctor before starting to take any medication.   One study  found that women using hormone therapies reported higher levels of sexual desire compared with women who did not.  Less commonly, a doctor may prescribe  testosterone  therapy. However, not all women respond to this treatment, and the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  do not approve it  for treating sexual disorders in women.  A woman may not experience any changes in her sex drive after using estrogen or testosterone therapies.  A woman may also choose to see a therapist who specializes in sexual dysfunction or enhancing sex. Sometimes, couples may want to attend therapy together.  Some women may benefit from using water-soluble lubricants during sex. These can be purchased over-the-counter at most drugstores.  However, women should avoid non-water soluble and silicone-based lubricants, as these can break down condoms used to protect against  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs).  Increasing physical activity, such as getting 30 minutes or more of exercise on a routine basis, may help reduce menopause-related symptoms, including a low libido. Eating a healthful diet can also enhance a person's overall sense of well being.  There are many ways a person can foster a sense of intimacy with their partner, including:  Some women use natural supplements to try to increase their libido. It is important to keep in mind that the FDA do not regulate herbs and supplements, so women should be sure to choose a reputable brand.  Some natural remedies used to increase libido in women include:  A woman should discuss these remedies with a doctor before taking them to ensure they will not interact negatively with other prescriptions and supplements she may be taking. Soy contains estrogen, so it may react with other estrogen therapies.  A woman should speak to her doctor whenever perimenopause or menopause is having a significant impact on her day-to-day activities, including sexual activity.  Sometimes, a doctor can recommend changes in health habits as well as discuss whether prescription medications may help relieve the symptoms, including a low libido.  Speaking with a doctor can also rule out any other underlying medical conditions that may cause a reduced libido. These conditions include  urinary tract infections , uterine prolapse,  endometriosis , or pelvic floor dysfunction.  While some women do experience a decreased libido in menopause, others do not.  Some women may even experience a heightened libido after menopause. This can be due to reduced stresses over pregnancy and fewer child-rearing responsibilities.  If a woman's libido is impacted after menopause, she should talk to her doctor about treatments that could enhance her quality of life.    
 Ambler, D. R., Bieber, E. J., &amp; Diamond, M. P. (2012). Sexual function in elderly women: A review of current literature.  Reviews in Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  5 (1), 16–27.  Ambler, D. R., Bieber, E. J., &amp; Diamond, M. P. (2012). Sexual function in elderly women: A review of current literature.  Reviews in Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  5 (1), 16–27.  Menopause basics. (2017, October 20).  Menopause &amp; sex. (2015, March 15).  Menopause and sexual issues. (n.d.).  Painful sex after menopause is common and treatable, from the Harvard Women's Health Watch. (2012, May).  Strategies for staying sexual after menopause. (2009, March–April).  The reality behind testosterone. (n.d.).  When sex hurts. (n.d.).  Woods, N. F., Mitchell, E. S., &amp; Smith-Di Julio, K. (2010, February). Sexual desire during the menopausal transition and early postmenopause: Observations from the Seattle midlife women's health study.  Journal of Women's Health ,  19 (2), 209–218.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How does menopause affect sex drive?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320266.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2017, December 10). "How does menopause affect sex drive?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  