 Blind  pimples  do not initially have a head like some other types of pimples.   Acne  affects around  50 million people  in the United States each year, making it the most common skin condition.  A comedo is a typical acne lesion. Someone who has mild acne has whiteheads or  blackheads  that are called comedones. A closed comedo that stays under the skin is a whitehead, and an open comedo that reaches the surface of the skin is a blackhead.  A closed comedo that develops deep within the skin is called a blind pimple. A blind pimple may be painful if it is particularly deep in the skin's layers.  The comedo may emerge as a whitehead as it rises through the layers of the skin, or it might disappear.  A simple blind pimple can be dealt with at home and will often disappear on its own.  There is a range of home remedies that can speed up the healing process, including:  Blind pimples are usually not positioned near the skin's surface, which means that they cannot be "popped" like whiteheads.  Trying to pop a blind pimple can result in permanent scars, a more-noticeable pimple, the pimple becoming more painful, or an infection.  Squeezing the blind pimple also risks pushing the contents of the pimple — a blend of oil, dead skin cells, and bacteria — deeper into the skin. This can lead to increased  inflammation .  Applying a warm compress can help to treat a blind pimple. The heat can open up pores, which may draw the pimple closer to the skin's surface and create a head.  The formation of a head enables the sebum, cells, and bacteria to exit the skin.  The heat from the compress can also help to relieve pain.  To treat a blind pimple with a warm compress, a person should:  A pimple sticker or an acne dot is a tiny sticker that can be placed over a blind pimple. The sticker usually contains an agent that treats acne, such as salicylic acid.  Pimple stickers are thought to work by drawing out sebum, absorbing excess oil, reducing inflammation, and significantly reducing the size of blemishes.  Pimple stickers are available from drugstores. They are discreet, barely noticeable, and can be worn overnight or throughout the day.  The length of time that a person should wear a pimple sticker varies, but they usually need to be changed at least once every 24 hours. Pimple stickers are available to purchase  online .  Tea tree oil has antibacterial properties that may kill the bacteria that cause blind pimples. Two clinical trials have shown that a gel containing 5 percent tea tree oil is an  effective treatment  for mild to moderate acne.  Another study found that tea tree oil  significantly improved  mild to moderate facial acne when applied to the face twice a day for 12 weeks. Tea tree oil is available to purchase  online .  Some people find tea tree oil helpful for treating blind pimples. However, the  American Academy of Dermatology  says there is not enough evidence to recommend treating acne with tea tree oil.  Numerous topical treatments for acne are available in pharmacies, supermarkets, and  online .  If a person does not see an improvement in their skin while using one product, it can be helpful to add another product to the treatment strategy. Try a product that tackles a different cause of acne.  For example, if a person is using a product that contains benzoyl peroxide, the second treatment should include another ingredient that fights acne.  There are a variety of ingredients for acne, which each target different causes of acne:  These ingredients are present in many anti-acne washes, creams, gels, facial scrubs, lotions, and pre-moistened cloths.  A prescription is not needed for treatments that contain most of these ingredients, although many are available in prescription strength as well.  An ice pack can be useful for reducing redness, inflammation, and swelling after a pimple has emptied.  To use ice to reduce swelling and redness, a person should:  Blind pimples may seem to appear out of the blue, but steps can be taken to prevent them. To reduce the chance of getting a pimple, a person can:  Blind pimples occur in areas of the skin with more oil glands, such as the face, neck, shoulders, back, and chest.  The oil glands in the skin are called sebaceous glands. The small holes in the skin, known as pores, are connected to sebaceous glands by a canal called a follicle.  Sebaceous glands secrete oil called sebum through the opening of a follicle to protect the skin and keep it moisturized.  If a pore becomes blocked with dead skin cells, then sebum is unable to reach the skin's surface. With nowhere to go, the sebum builds up in the sebaceous gland and develops into a pimple.  In severe cases, the mixture of dead skin cells and sebum allows bacteria that normally grow on the skin to accumulate in the blocked follicle. This bacteria is called  Propionibacterium acnes  ( P. acnes ).  When this happens, the bacteria produce enzymes and chemicals, attracting white blood cells. This results in redness, swelling, heat, and pain — collectively known as inflammation.  It can be frustrating waiting for a blind pimple to clear on its own.  Warm compresses and acne stickers can help to bring a pimple to a head so that the sebum, dead skin cells, and bacteria can exit to the skin's surface. Using ice can relieve inflammation.  If blind pimples occur frequently or are particularly inflamed and painful, a person should seek advice from a dermatologist.  If you want to buy any of the over-the-counter remedies or natural treatments listed in this article then they are available online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 10 things to try when acne won't clear. (n.d.).  10 things to try when acne won't clear. (n.d.).  Acne. (n.d.).  Acne: Overview. (2016, July 28).  Acne: What is it? (2016, September 1).  American Academy of Dermatology issues new guidelines of care for acne treatment. (2016, February 17).  Dermatologists advise patients that over-the-counter acne products can have benefits and a place on their medicine shelf. (2014, February 3).  Different kinds of pimples. (n.d.).  Enshaieh, S., Jooya, A., Siadat, A. H., &amp; Iraji, F. (2007). The efficacy of 5% topical tea tree oil gel in mild to moderate acne vulgaris: A randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled study.  Indian Journal of Dermatology, Venereology, and Leprology ,  73 (1), 22–25.  How to treat boils and styes. (n.d.).  Malhi, H. K., Tu, J., Riley, T. V., Kumarasinghe, S. P., &amp; Hammer, K. A. (2017, August). Tea tree oil gel for mild to moderate acne; a 12 week uncontrolled, open-label phase II pilot study [Abstract].  Australasian Journal of Dermatology ,  58 (3), 205–210.  Pimple popping: Why only a dermatologist should do it. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nichols, Hannah. "How to get rid of a blind pimple."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320250.php&gt;    APA  Nichols, H. (2017, December 6). "How to get rid of a blind pimple."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  