 The rash that appears with  hives  can be extremely itchy and spread across large areas of someone's body.  While the symptoms of hives can be very irritating, there are many ways to treat, soothe, and get rid of hives. In most cases, the rash usually settles within a few days.  Hives is a type of skin condition usually resulting in a raised, itchy rash. There are several different types of hives, although the effects are mostly the same.  Types of hives include:   Acute urticaria . This rash lasts less than 6 weeks and is usually brought on by an adverse or allergic reaction to certain foods or medications. Infections and insect bites can also cause this type of rash.   Chronic urticaria and angioedema . These rashes last for more than 6 weeks. The rash is may be caused by an underlying medical condition, such as thyroid disease,  cancer , or  hepatitis .  Chronic urticaria and  angioedema  is a more severe form of hives than acute urticarial, as it can spread to different areas of the body, including the lungs, muscles, and gastrointestinal tract. Angioedema is not usually itchy but causes a deeper swelling of the skin.   Physical urticaria . This is due to irritation of the skin. Extreme heat or cold, overexposure to the sun,  excessive sweating , or clothes rubbing the skin during exercise can all result in an outbreak. This rash rarely spreads beyond the original location.   Dermatographism . This condition is when hives occurs due to scratching or vigorously rubbing the skin.  A hives outbreak occurs when high levels of histamine and other chemical messengers are released into the skin, causing a rash and other symptoms to surface.  The high levels of histamine cause blood vessels in the affected area to open up and start to leak. The resulting fluid in the tissues causes swelling and itchiness.  Different triggers might cause a person to have an outbreak of hives. Some common causes include:   Aspirin  and ibuprofen, some  blood pressure  medication (ACE inhibitors), and codeine are medications commonly associated with hives.  If a person breaks out in hives, it is important for them to know what has triggered the reaction. Certain things can make the symptoms of hives worse, including:  Hives affect around  15 to 20 percent  of people at some point during their lifetime. They are more likely to occur in women and children than men.  In the majority of cases, people use home remedies to treat hives and do not seek further medical attention or intervention. Effective home remedies to treat hives include:  Some people with chronic hives  have reported  reduced symptoms when taking  vitamin D  supplements.  In more severe cases of hives, medical treatment may be preferable. Some over-the-counter options include:  For more severe and persistent hives, a doctor may refer a person to a dermatologist.  The severity of a hives outbreak can vary from person to person, and while most people will be able to manage their symptoms at home, there are some cases where seeking medical attention is advisable.  A person should see a doctor if:  A doctor will examine the rash and ask questions to try to determine the cause. Blood tests and allergy tests may be used to rule out certain causes.  Hives is usually very treatable and does not cause complications on its own. However, in more severe cases, angioedema may occur.  Angioedema is a buildup of fluid in layers of the skin that causes swelling and can affect the eyes, lips, hands, feet, and genitals. Medication can be prescribed to manage and reduce the swelling.  Recurrent hives can negatively impact the quality of a person's life, causing them to feel stressed or anxious and can even lead to  depression . A person should always speak to a doctor if hives is affecting the quality of their life.  Some of the home remedies listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 de Silva, N. L., Damayanthi, H., Rajapakse, A. C., Rodrigo, C., &amp; Rajapakse, S. (2014, May 7). Leukotriene receptor antagonists for chronic urticaria: A systematic review.  Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology ,  10 (1), 24.  de Silva, N. L., Damayanthi, H., Rajapakse, A. C., Rodrigo, C., &amp; Rajapakse, S. (2014, May 7). Leukotriene receptor antagonists for chronic urticaria: A systematic review.  Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology ,  10 (1), 24.  Hives. (n.d.).  Hives and angioedema. (2016, November 9).  Hives (urticaria). (n.d.).  Hives (urticaria). (2015, October).  Maurer, M., Rosén, K., Hsieh, H. J., Saini, S., Grattan, C., Gimenéz-Arnau, A., ... &amp; Casale, T. (2013, May 7). Omalizumab for the treatment of chronic idiopathic or spontaneous urticaria [Abstract].  New England Journal of Medicine ,  368 (10), 924–935.  Rorie, A., Goldner, W. S., Lyden, E., &amp; Poole, J. A. (2014, April). Beneficial role for supplemental vitamin D3 treatment in chronic urticaria: A randomized study [Abstract].  Annals of Allergy, Asthma &amp; Immunology ,  112 (4), 376–382.  Sachdeva, S., Gupta, V., Amin, S. S., &amp; Tahseen, M. (2011, November–December). Chronic urticaria.  Indian Journal of Dermatology ,  56 (6), 622–628.  Shenefelt, P. D. (2011). Herbal treatment for dermatologic disorders.  Herbal Medicine: Biomolecular and Clinical Aspects. 2nd edition . Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press/Taylor &amp; Francis.  Urticaria (hives). (2016, February, 28).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "How to treat hives."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320268.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2017, December 11). "How to treat hives."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  