 Although some people believe that there is nothing to be done about a broken toe, this is not always the case. In fact, most toe  fractures  should be evaluated by a health professional. If left untreated, a broken toe can lead to painful problems later.  Toe injuries are common, so it is a good idea to know the symptoms of a broken toe and when to see a doctor.  Symptoms of a broken toe will vary from person to person. Some people may be able to continue walking on the toe after a break, while others may find the pain debilitating.  Factors that can affect symptoms of a broken toe include:  There are a few ways a toe could break. These include  stress  fractures, falls, and dropping an object on the foot.  Because the symptoms vary so widely and breaks can be mild to severe, it can be difficult to tell the difference between a broken toe and another injury, such as a muscle sprain or a bad bruise.  The symptoms of each type of break are as follows:  A broken toe is often the result of a painful and significant event, such as falling, stubbing the toe very hard, or dropping an object on the toe. These types of breaks are known as traumatic fractures.  Traumatic fractures can range from minor to severe. Sometimes, a person hears a "pop" or "crack" sound as the bone breaks, but this is not always the case.  The symptoms of a traumatic fracture will begin immediately after the event, and may include:  Many traumatic fractures feature a visible bruise that is dark purple, gray, or black.  These symptoms can persist for several weeks if they are left untreated.  Stress fractures are usually small hairline breaks that occur after repeated stress on the bone. They are a type of overuse injury and often occur in bones of the legs and feet.  Stress fractures may occur months or years after starting an activity, such as running, that puts stress on the bones.  Stress fractures often occur when muscles in the toe become too weak to absorb impact. Without the support of the muscle, the toe bone becomes vulnerable to pressure and impact. Too much stress on the bone eventually causes it to crack.  Symptoms of a stress fracture in the toe include:  A displaced fracture means the broken bone has moved out of place. This may occur with more severe traumatic fractures.  A displaced fracture in the toe can cause the toe to appear crooked. In some cases, a displaced fracture may break the skin and result in the bone protruding out of a wound.  In most cases, a podiatrist, orthopedic surgeon, or family doctor will diagnose a broken toe using a physical exam and an X-ray.  A doctor can often see a displaced fractures with a visual exam of the toe, but they may still recommend an X-ray to assess the damage and determine what treatment is needed.  Seeing a healthcare professional for a diagnosis and following instructions about how to care for the toe may encourage healing. Treatment for a broken toe includes:  There is a selection of  ice packs  and  tape  available for purchase online.  A broken toe that is left untreated can cause:  Injuries and accidents are not always avoidable, but the following steps may help minimize the risk of breaking a toe:  Broken toes are often able to heal on their own. Nevertheless, it is best to see a healthcare professional for correct treatment to ensure the bone heals properly.  Proper medical care ensures that a minor break now does not lead to a significant issue later.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Stress fractures. (2007, October).  Stress fractures. (2007, October).  Toe and forefoot fractures. (2016, June).  Toe and forefoot fractures. (n.d.).  Toe and metatarsal fractures (Broken toes). (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "Is it a broken toe?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320203.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2017, December 1). "Is it a broken toe?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  