 However, some medical conditions cause faulty inflammatory responses. These are called chronic inflammatory diseases.  One of the best measures a person can take to prevent or reduce  inflammation  is to try an anti-inflammatory diet. An anti-inflammatory diet involves eating certain foods and avoiding others in order to minimize the symptoms of chronic inflammatory diseases.  An anti-inflammatory diet consists of foods that reduce inflammatory responses. This diet involves replacing sugary, refined foods with whole, nutrient-rich foods.  An anti-inflammatory diet also contains increased amounts of  antioxidants , which are reactive molecules in food that reduce the number of free radicals. Free radicals are molecules in the body that may damage cells and increase the risk of certain diseases.  Many popular diets already follow anti-inflammatory principles. For example, the  Mediterranean diet  contains fish, whole grains, and fats that are good for the heart.  Research  has shown that this diet can reduce the effects of inflammation on the cardiovascular system.  Doctors, dietitians, and naturopaths recommend anti-inflammatory diets as a complementary therapy for many conditions that are worsened by chronic inflammation.  An anti-inflammatory diet can help many conditions, including:  Additionally, eating an anti-inflammatory diet can help reduce the risk of certain  cancers , including  colorectal cancer .  Good choices for a person following an anti-inflammatory diet include the following:  The main foods that people following an anti-inflammatory diet should avoid include:  Some people find that foods in the nightshades family, such as tomatoes, eggplants, peppers, and potatoes, can trigger flares in some inflammatory diseases. There is limited evidence of this, but a person can try cutting nightshades from the diet for 2–3 weeks to see if their symptoms improve.  There is  some evidence  that suggests a high-carbohydrate diet, even when the carbs are healthful, may promote inflammation. Because of this, many people on an anti-inflammatory diet choose to reduce their carbohydrate intake.  People considering an anti-inflammatory diet may also want to consider eliminating meat in favor of vegetarian protein sources or fatty fish.   Research suggests  that people following a vegetarian diet have higher levels of plasma AA, a marker of overall health that is associated with lower levels of inflammation and heart disease.   A 2017 study  found that eating animal products increased the risk of systemic inflammation, while another  study suggests  that reduced inflammation is one of the key benefits of a vegan diet.  Anti-inflammatory diets may be a big adjustment for people who tend to eat different kinds of food.  There are several things a person can do to make the transition to an anti-inflammatory diet easier, including:  Inflammation is the body's response to illnesses including infections or injuries. The body's immune system sends an increased amount of white blood cells to the area fighting off the infection or injury.  Inflammation is not usually a bad thing — it is just the body trying to protect itself from further injury or illness by increasing the immune response in the area being threatened by bacteria or injury.  However, there are several chronic inflammatory diseases, such as  arthritis , psoriasis, and  asthma  that can cause the immune system to go into overdrive and attack healthy tissues.  In addition to taking any prescribed medications, a person with an inflammatory disease can try to reduce inflammation by making changes to their diet.  Anti-inflammatory diets promote a reduction in inflammation. A person may be able to reduce their body's inflammatory response by implementing these healthful dietary changes.  Reducing inflammation may help a person feel more comfortable by alleviating some symptoms of inflammation.  Also, it may help the person avoid some of the potential health problems that chronic inflammation can cause or decrease the need for medication.  A dietitian can help a person develop a dietary plan to tackle a chronic inflammatory condition.    
 Anti-inflammatory diet. (n.d.).  Anti-inflammatory diet. (n.d.).  Casas, R., Sacanella, E., Urpí-Sardà, M., Chiva-Blanch, G., Ros, E., Martínez-González, M.-A., ... Estruch, R. (2014, June 12). The effects of the Mediterranean diet on biomarkers of vascular wall inflammation and plaque vulnerability in subjects with high risk for cardiovascular disease. A randomized trial.  PloS One ,  9 (6), e100084.  Foods that fight inflammation. (2017, August 13).  Franco-de-Moraes, A. C., de Almeida-Pititto, B., da Rocha Fernandes, G., Gomes, E. P., da Costa Pereira, A., &amp; Ferreira, S. R. G. (2017, August 15). Worse inflammatory profile in omnivores than in vegetarians associates with the gut microbiota composition.  Diabetology &amp; Metabolic Syndrome ,  9 , 62.  Glick-Bauer, M., &amp; Yeh, M.-C. (2014, November). The health advantage of a vegan diet: Exploring the gut microbiota connection.  Nutrients ,  6 (11), 4822–4838.  Gu, Y., Zhao, A., Huang, F., Zhang, Y., Liu, J., Wang, C., ... Jia, W. (2013, December 6). Very low carbohydrate diet significantly alters the serum metabolic profiles in obese subjects [Abstract].  Journal of Proteome Research ,  12 (12), 5801–5811.  Koszamy, A., Majdan, M., Suszek, D., Dryglewska, M., &amp; Tabarkiewicz, J. (2015). Autoantibodies against gliadin in rheumatoid arthritis and primary Sjögren's syndrome patients.  Wiadomosci Lekarskie ,  68 (3), 242–247.  Mullington, J. M., Simpson, N. S., Meier-Ewert, H. K., &amp; Haack, M. (2010, October). Sleep loss and inflammation [Abstract].  Best Practice &amp; Research Clinical Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism ,  24 (5), 775–784.  Szeto, Y. T., Kwok, T. C. Y, &amp; Benzie, I. F. F. (2004, October). Effects of a long-term vegetarian diet on biomarkers of antioxidant status and cardiovascular disease risk [Abstract].  Nutrition ,  20 (10), 863–866.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Anti-inflammatory diet: What to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320233.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2017, December 3). "Anti-inflammatory diet: What to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  