 It is a form of inflammatory bowel disease, which affects  1.3 percent of adults  in the United States. As ulcerative colitis affects the digestive system, it may cause  constipation .  Constipation is a common problem that has many different causes, including low-fiber diets, a lack of physical activity, certain medications, and health conditions.  Ulcerative colitis is most often associated with  diarrhea  and bloody, frequent stools.  However, for some individuals with ulcerative colitis, constipation is also a problem.  Many people think they need to have at least one bowel movement each day, and a failure to do so means they are constipated. However, the normal frequency for bowel movements ranges from  three a day to three a week .  Constipation is when a person has fewer than three bowel movements a week. These movements may be difficult or painful to pass and produce hard, dry stools.  The most common form of ulcerative colitis is distal ulcerative colitis, which only affects the left side of the colon. Distal ulcerative colitis affects  80 percent of people who are newly diagnosed  with the condition.  Some people with ulcerative colitis on the left side of their bowel can become constipated on the right side. This is called proximal constipation.  There are many ways to treat constipation in people with ulcerative colitis, depending on the severity of the symptoms and a person's lifestyle.  The first form of treatment for constipation is usually making dietary changes. These changes include:  Tracking bowel movements can help a person find out if their condition is getting better or worse.  It can also help to eat high-fiber foods at a regular time each day, such as for breakfast, and to attempt to have a bowel movement at the same time each day.  Tips to help keep bowel movements regular include:  Regular exercise can ease the symptoms of constipation. A lack of physical activity can slow down digestion.  Low-impact exercises can include walking to work, swimming regularly, or doing  yoga .  If diet, hydration, and exercise do not ease symptoms, some people with ulcerative colitis constipation may find relief by taking over-the-counter laxatives.  These include:  Laxatives of any kind, including over-the-counter medications, should always be used carefully. A person should be sure to drink plenty of fluids.  There is a range of other medications and prescription laxatives that may help a person with constipation find relief.  These include:  Having a support system that understands the experience of living with ulcerative colitis is important. IBD Healthline is a free app for people that have faced a UC diagnosis. The app is available on the AppStore and Google Play. Download here:  https://go.onelink.me/LOC7/c0a0025f .  Other conditions that may cause constipation include:   Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS)   Ulcerative colitis is a kind of inflammatory bowel disease or IBD. It is not the same as irritable bowel syndrome or IBS, which is not caused by an immune system response.  However, some of the IBS symptoms can be similar to IBD. Constipation can develop on its own or alternate with diarrhea. Ongoing abdominal pain is a common IBS symptom.  The key difference between IBS and IBD is  inflammation . IBD causes inflammation, whereas IBS does not. This inflammation can cause serious damage to the colon.   Crohn's disease   Unlike ulcerative colitis, which only attacks the large intestine and the rectum,  Crohn's disease  is another form of IBD that can occur anywhere along the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, from the mouth to the anus.  It commonly affects the small intestine. Constipation can signal that the disease is getting worse and may be due to a stricture or narrowing of the intestine, also known as an obstruction.   Celiac disease   Celiac disease is an inflammatory response to gluten in the diet and causes injury to the lining of the small intestine. When products that contain gluten, such as bread or pasta, are removed from the diet, a person's symptoms eventually disappear.  A person with ulcerative colitis should have regular checkups with their doctor to discuss changes in their symptoms, including constipation.  Symptoms that require medical treatment include:  Although the specific cause of ulcerative colitis has yet to be identified, it is widely thought to be an autoimmune disease, caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors.  In fact,  10–20 percent of people with the condition  have family members who also suffer from inflammatory bowel disease.  Many people with ulcerative colitis find that the disease starts slowly, with the symptoms getting worse over time.  With treatment, the symptoms of ulcerative colitis frequently go away for an extended time. This is called remission, and it can last for weeks, months, or even years.  For people with ulcerative colitis, constipation may be a recurring problem. However, treating the condition with medication and nutritional guidance can help people stay symptom-free for as long as possible and improve their overall quality of life.    
 Bellini, M., Gambaccini, D., Usai-Satta, P., De Bortoli, N., Bertani, L., Marchi, S., &amp; Stasi, C. (2015, October 28). Irritable bowel syndrome and chronic constipation: Fact and fiction.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  21 (40), 11362–11370.  Bellini, M., Gambaccini, D., Usai-Satta, P., De Bortoli, N., Bertani, L., Marchi, S., &amp; Stasi, C. (2015, October 28). Irritable bowel syndrome and chronic constipation: Fact and fiction.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  21 (40), 11362–11370.  Collins, P., &amp; Rhodes, J. (2006, August 12). Ulcerative colitis: Diagnosis and management.  BMJ ,  333 (7563), 340–343.  Constipation. (n.d.).  Constipation. (n.d.).  Diarrhoea and constipation. (2015, June).  Eating, diet &amp; nutrition for constipation. (2014, November).  IBD prevalence in the United States. (2017, May 12).  IBS and IBD: Two very different disorders. (2012, June 1).  Koutroubakis, I. E. (2010, April 6). Recent advances in the treatment of distal ulcerative colitis.  World Journal of Gastrointestinal Pharmacology &amp; Therapeutics ,  1 (2), 43050.  Portalatin, M., &amp; Winstead, N. (2012, March). Medical management of constipation.  Clinics in Colon and Rectum Surgery ,  25 (1), 12–19.  The facts about inflammatory bowel diseases. (2014, November).  Ulcerative colitis. (2014, September).  What is inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)? (2017, June 21).  What is ulcerative colitis? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "Remedies for ulcerative colitis constipation."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320256.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2017, December 7). "Remedies for ulcerative colitis constipation."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  