 Although it may seem unpleasant, hairy tongue is a relatively harmless condition that can be easily dealt with in most cases.  Here, we will discuss what hairy tongue is, how it can be triggered and how it may be treated or prevented.  With hairy tongue, the tiny bumps on the surface of the tongue become bigger, looking similar to small hairs. These hairs can grow  up to 18 millimeters  in length. The surface also changes color, often becoming brown or black.  The upper surface of the tongue is rough in texture because it is covered in tiny, processes or protrusions called papillae. There are several types of papillae, the most numerous of which are called filiform papillae.  Filiform papillae are elongated, cone-shaped protrusions responsible for the gripping of food on the surface of the tongue. These structures usually grow to about 1 millimeter in length before they are shed from the tongue, allowing new ones to grow.  Hairy tongue occurs when these filiform papillae do not shed properly, and there is a buildup of the skin protein known as keratin. When this happens, food, bacteria, or yeast can accumulate in the over-keratinized filiform papillae network and cause odd discoloration.  When shedding is delayed, filiform papillae continue to build up in the keratin and resemble the hair-like protrusions from which the condition takes its name.  According to the American Academy of Oral Medicine, hairy tongue is thought to affect around 13 percent of the population, but its prevalence varies in some groups. For example, hairy tongue is much more common in individuals with certain drug addictions.  The chances of hairy tongue developing increase with age, as the effects of risk factors, such as tobacco use, have more time to accumulate.  Different factors can trigger the onset of hairy tongue. These include:  Hairy tongue can take on a number of different colors, but some triggers will cause specific colors to develop. An example of this is black hairy tongue, which is associated with the consumption of tobacco, coffee, tea, or use of some mouthwashes.  A tongue with the condition called oral hairy leukoplakia is usually caused by a viral infection, such as human Immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) or Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), weakening a person's immune system.  The microscopic appearance of a tongue with oral hairy leukoplakia differs from that of hairy tongue, as the two conditions are different. However, oral hairy leukoplakia can cause the tongue to have white patches that look hairy in appearance upon close inspection.  Appearance aside, it is possible for other symptoms of hairy tongue to develop, including:  Medical treatment is often not necessary for hairy tongue, as it is typically a transient condition, which poses no serious health risk.  Treatment and prevention are typically achieved through changes to a person's lifestyle that may have trigger the onset of hairy tongue. Oral hygiene and regular visits to the dentist are the best ways to stop hairy tongue from occurring.  It is also essential to maintain a nutritious and well-balanced diet, containing a good balance of fresh fruits, vegetables, grains, and minimal sugar to promote oral health.  Consuming a sufficient amount of water throughout the day will also help to keep the mouth clean.  Other approaches may include:  In rare cases, the condition can be more persistent, and medical help should be sought from a doctor or a dentist.  If lifestyle changes have not been successful in treating the condition, a doctor or dentist may recommend further evaluation and a more focused treatment. For example, an  antibiotic  or antifungal medication may be prescribed to remove bacteria or yeast.  It is also possible in some cases to have the filiform papillae surgically removed.  The unpleasant appearance of hairy tongue may cause some psychological discomfort or embarrassment, but it is usually a harmless condition with no other symptoms.  Maintaining good oral hygiene is important in preventing and treating incidences of hairy tongue. However, in rare cases, medicine or surgery may be needed to treat the condition.    
 Cohen, B. (2013, August 2).  Pediatric Dermatology . Saunders.  Cohen, B. (2013, August 2).  Pediatric Dermatology . Saunders.  Garg, A., Wadhera, R., Gulati, S. P., &amp; Goyal, R. (2008, August 29). Hairy tongue.  Journal of the Association of Physicians of India ,  56 , 816.  Gurvits, G. E., &amp; Tan, A. (2014, August 21). Black hairy tongue syndrome [Abstract].  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  20 (31), 10845–10850.  Hairy tongue. (2015, May 13).  Ngan, V. (2005). Hairy leukoplakia.  Iwasaki, S. (2002, July 10). Evolution of the structure and function of the vertebrate tongue.  Journal of Anatomy ,  201 (1), 1–13.  Oral hairy leukoplakia (n.d.).  Thompson, D. F., &amp; Kessler, T. L. (2010, June). Drug‐induced black hairy tongue [Abstract].  Pharmacotherapy ,  30 (6), 585–593.  Winzer, M., &amp; Gilliar, U. (1988, June 1). Hairy tongue and hairy oral leukoplakia--a differential histopathologic diagnosis.  Zeitschrift fur Hautkrankheiten ,  63 (6), 517–520.  Wright, B. (2014, December). Hairy tongue.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What you should know about hairy tongue."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Nov. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320201.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2017, November 30). "What you should know about hairy tongue."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  