 Allergic shiners are caused by the pooling of blood under the eyes, due to the swelling of the tissue in the nasal cavities.  Allergic shiners are not usually considered a serious problem, although they can be unsightly. They can be treated and prevented by taking allergy medications and avoiding allergy triggers.  This article describes the symptoms and causes of allergic shiners and outlines the treatments available.  Although they may look similar, allergic shiners and black eyes are quite different.  In the case of allergic shiners, the blood has difficulty draining from the facial veins due to swelling in that area of the face and head.  Conversely, black eyes are due to trauma, and they involve bleeding under the skin caused by damaged capillaries or veins.  Allergic shiners are also usually accompanied by other symptoms of nasal allergies.  Other causes of dark circles under the eyes include:  Some people may also inherit genes from their parents that cause the skin under their eyes to appear darker.  Symptoms of allergic shiners include a blue or purple tint, resembling bruising, and what looks like dark shadows under the eyes.  Most people with allergic shiners will also have other allergy symptoms, such as:  Many people mistake the symptoms of allergies for the onset of a cold,  flu , or sinus infection. However, allergy symptoms tend to persist for more than the 1 or 2 weeks these other conditions would normally linger. Colds and infections also tend to cause body aches and a  fever , whereas allergy symptoms do not.  Depending on the time of the year and exposure to the allergen, the symptoms of an allergy may come and go or vary in severity.  Allergic shiners are caused by congestion in the nasal passages and sinuses. This congestion restricts blood drainage from these areas, causing small veins below the eyes to get wider and pool with blood.  The swelling and excess blood is visible through the thin skin below the eyes and appears as dark circles.   Allergic rhinitis , also known as nasal allergy, is one of the most common causes of nasal congestion.  Allergic reactions occur when the body's immune system responds to a foreign body, such as pollen or pet dander. The immune system mistakenly treats these substances, which are known as allergens, as if they were harmful.  Common allergens, all of which can cause allergic shiners, include:  There are also many types of allergies to food, such as to dairy, eggs, nuts, or wheat.  Furthermore, some environmental irritants can make nasal congestion and other allergy symptoms worse, such as:  People with  allergic conjunctivitis , which causes allergy symptoms that affect the eyes, are more likely to experience allergic shiners than others. Symptoms of allergic conjunctivitis include swelling, watering, itching, and redness of the eyes.  Another risk factor for the development of allergic shiners is the time of year. People with seasonal allergies will probably notice that their symptoms are only present at a particular time of year, which may help them to pinpoint the allergen responsible.  If allergy symptoms are worse in early spring, it suggests an allergy to tree pollen. Symptoms that appear in late spring and summer indicate a grass pollen allergy, while allergies during fall may be caused by a reaction to ragweed.  Indoor allergies, on the other hand, can occur year-round but may be worse in winter when there is less airflow through a home. Common indoor allergens include pet dander, mold, and dust mites.  Allergic shiners can sometimes be caused by nasal congestion due to a sinus infection, cold, or flu, but this is less common than allergy causes.  If allergic shiners persist, whether accompanied by other symptoms or not, it is necessary to see a doctor to get a proper diagnosis.  Doctors may use the following methods when they diagnose allergies:  It is also important to see a doctor for allergic shiners if:  The treatment for allergic shiners is the same as for other symptoms of allergies. It is aimed at reducing congestion in the nasal and sinus cavities.  Treatment options include:  People with severe allergies or allergies that do not respond to other treatments may benefit from immunotherapy.  It can take several years to complete immunotherapy treatment, which involves exposing the body to allergen extracts that allows it to build up tolerance gradually to the allergen.  Immunotherapy comes in two forms. either injectable treatment or sublingual treatment. Sublingual treatment involves a dissolvable tablet given orally over time. It is at least equal in effectiveness to injectable treatment.  People should be aware that many health insurers may not cover sublingual therapy if injectable therapy is available.  Preventing allergic shiners involves preventing allergic reactions from being triggered.  To prevent nasal allergy symptoms, people can take the following steps:  Depending on the specific allergy triggers, there are other prevention measures that can be taken as well as the above.  Allergic shiners are a symptom of nasal allergies, but they are not usually considered serious.  With the proper treatment, allergic shiners should resolve in a matter of weeks. However, the symptom may return upon further exposure to the allergen.  As a result, it is vital to identify the allergen responsible and take steps to avoid or limit exposure to it to prevent future allergic shiners and other allergy symptoms.    
 Chen, C.-H., Lin, Y.-T., Wen, C.-Y., Wang, L.-C., Lin, K.-H., Chiu, S.-H., ... &amp; Chiang, B.-L. (2009, March). Quantitative assessment of allergic shiners in children with allergic rhinitis.  Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology ,  123 (3), 665–671.e6.  Chen, C.-H., Lin, Y.-T., Wen, C.-Y., Wang, L.-C., Lin, K.-H., Chiu, S.-H., ... &amp; Chiang, B.-L. (2009, March). Quantitative assessment of allergic shiners in children with allergic rhinitis.  Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology ,  123 (3), 665–671.e6.  Krup, V., Prakash, L. H., &amp; Harini, A. (2013, September 12). Pharmacological activities of turmeric ( Curcuma longa linn ): A review.  Journal of Homeopathy &amp; Ayurvedic Medicine ,  2 ,   133.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What are allergic shiners?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320211.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2017, December 1). "What are allergic shiners?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  