 In this article, learn more about the uses and benefits of the nopal cactus and its fruit.  Nopales or nopalitos are the pads of the nopal or prickly pear cactus. They are eaten as a vegetable and commonly found in restaurants, grocery stores, and farmers' markets across the American Southwest and Mexico.  They can be sautéed and used in many dishes, including tacos, scrambled eggs, or as a side dish with tomatoes and  onions .  Nopales can also be eaten raw. They resemble a green pepper when diced and are turned into juice, jams, or tea.  Prickly pear fruit or the small, rounded, and often colorful part of the plant can also be consumed.  Juice extracted from the fruit is a popular drink of choice for health-conscious consumers in Mexico.  One cup of raw nopales  contains approximately :  The prickly pear fruit, which comes in a variety of colors, contains the flavonoids kaempferol and quercetin, which are  antioxidants  that have anti-inflammatory properties.   In a study  comparing three different juices from various colors of prickly pear — red-purple, white-green, and yellow-orange — the red-purple variety had the most antioxidants.  Both parts of the nopal plant — the nopales and the fruit — have been used in traditional medicine for disease treatment and prevention.  The cactus  has been used  to treat:  The purported benefits of fresh nopal juice include lowering blood sugar, healing wounds, and lowering  cholesterol .  Human studies on the nopal cactus and its ability to treat or prevent disease are limited. Nevertheless,  many studies  have confirmed the antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of the plant.  Cactus plants have been traditionally used in Mexico for the treatment of  diabetes .  In a  small study  of people with  type 2 diabetes , two groups of participants were given a high carbohydrate breakfast. One group consumed nopal with their breakfast, while the other did not.  The group who ate the nopal had significantly lower blood sugar levels after the meal, as well as lower  insulin  levels, compared to the group who did not have nopal.  People with diabetes benefit from including high-fiber foods, such as nopal and prickly pear, in their diet. High-fiber diets can improve blood sugar, lower insulin levels, and improve blood lipids.  The  Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics  recommend consuming at least 25 g of fiber per day for women and 38 g for men.  Nopal juice and other products  are available for purchase online .  The juice made from nopal is often mixed with other juices, such as pineapple, orange, or grapefruit, which can have a high amount of sugar.  People with diabetes should monitor the amount of sugar they are consuming. It is best to opt for the fresh fruit instead of juice, or squeeze fresh juice at home.  In many parts of Mexico, vendors sell fresh nopal juice after the plant is rinsed with only tap water, without pasteurization or any antibacterial processing.  As cattle manure is often used for fertilizer, researchers tested for food-borne pathogens in unpasteurized nopal juice.   Their study found  that 91 percent of their samples were positive for  E. coli  and 1 percent were positive for  Salmonella . These bacteria can cause serious illnesses, so people should be sure to buy nopal and nopal juice only from reputable sources.  Prickly pear can be eaten raw, but the skin must be removed. Prickly pears that are not as ripe tend to be less sweet, while the fruit that is red and purple is sweeter.  All prickly pears have small, hard seeds that can be removed with a juicer or strainer, or simply spat out.  If a person grows or picks their own nopal, they will have to remove the thorns and the thick green skin.  A person should rinse the nopales thoroughly to remove the slimy texture before cooking.  Diced nopal can be sautéed with olive oil, onions, jalapeños, and tomatoes to make  this salad .  Nopales make a tasty filling for  vegan tacos . Sliced nopales can be grilled like peppers for fajitas. They can also be used in  an egg scramble .  Nopales and prickly pear fruit are high in antioxidants, vitamins, minerals, and fiber.  They are a healthy addition to a balanced diet and may help decrease blood sugars when eaten with a balanced meal.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Basic report: 09287, prickly pears, raw. (2016, May).  Basic report: 09287, prickly pears, raw. (2016, May).  Basic Report: 11963, nopales, raw. (2016, May).  Dahl, W. J., &amp; Stewart, M. L. (2015, November). Position of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: Health implications of dietary fiber [Abstract].  Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,  115 (11), 1861–1870.  El-Mostafa, K., Kharrassi, Y. E., Badreddine, A., Andreoletti, P., Vamecq, J., Kebbaj, M. S. E., … Cherkaoui-Malki, M. (2014, September 17). Nopal Cactus ( Opuntia ficus-indica ) as a source of bioactive compounds for nutrition, health and disease [Abstract].  Molecules ,  19 (9), 14879–14901.  Hernández-Anguiano, A. M., Landa-Salgado, P., Eslava-Campos, C. A., Vargas-Hernández, M., &amp; Patel, J. (2016). Microbiological quality of fresh nopal juice [Abstract].  Microorganisms ,  4 (4), 46.  López-Romero, P., Pichardo-Ontiveros, E., Avila-Nava, A., Vázquez-Manjarrez, N., Tovar, A. R., Pedraza-Chaverri, J., … Torres, N. (2014, November). The effect of nopal ( Opuntia ficus indica ) on postprandial blood glucose, incretins, and antioxidant activity in Mexican patients with type 2 diabetes after consumption of two different composition breakfasts [Abstract].  Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,  114 (11), 1811–1818.  Madrigal-Santillán, E., García-Melo, F., Morales-González, J. A., Vázquez-Alvarado, P., Muñoz-Juárez, S., Zuñiga-Pérez, C., … Hernández-Ceruelos, A. (2013, October 18). Antioxidant and anticlastogenic capacity of prickly pear juice [Abstract].  Nutrients ,  5 (10), 4145–4158.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Ware, Megan. "What are the benefits of nopal?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320293.php&gt;    APA  Ware, M. (2017, December 12). "What are the benefits of nopal?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  