 Fresh fruit and vegetable juices can be purchased at most grocers, farmers' markets, and shops dedicated to fresh juice. They can also be made at home with juicing equipment.  Carrots are a common ingredient in many juices, as they provide a flavor that pairs well with many other fruits and vegetables.  Aside from taste, carrot juice may also provide numerous health benefits. Read on to learn some recipes and find out more about the potential health benefits and possible risks of drinking carrot juice.  According to  Stanford Health Care , the  vitamin  and mineral nutrients in 1 cup of carrot juice are almost equivalent to the amounts in 5 cups of chopped carrots.  While fresh fruit and vegetable juices do provide plenty of nutrients, they do not contain as much fiber as fresh fruits and vegetables. Also, they contain more sugar per cup than whole fruits and vegetables.  For example, 1 cup of carrot juice contains 2 g of fiber and 9 g of sugar, while 1 cup of cubed, raw carrots contains 3.5 g of fiber and 6 g of sugar.  Making fresh carrot juice at home requires a juice extractor. These appliances are sold online, in department stores, and at other retail stores that sell small kitchen appliances.  It is important to follow the manufacturer's instructions for using a juicer and clean it after each use. Juice extractors may also come with recipe suggestions.  Carrots can be combined with other fruits and vegetables to make tasty juices. A person can try the following recipes at home:  According to the United States Department of Agriculture  National Nutrient Database , 1 cup of canned carrot juice contains:  The same amount of juice provides a variety of vitamins and minerals, including:  Carrot juice is nutritious and may be beneficial for a range of health conditions:  Carrots contain  antioxidants , which may explain their role in  cancer  prevention. In a  review of studies , researchers looked at the effect of eating carrots on the risk for  stomach cancer .  They concluded that eating carrots was associated with a 26 percent lower risk for stomach cancer. However, they did not specify how many had to be eaten to lower stomach cancer risk. More controlled studies are needed to confirm this association.  More research is needed, but carrot juice may have a future role in  leukemia  treatment.  In  one study , researchers looked at the effect of carrot juice extracts on leukemia cells. The carrot juice extracts caused the leukemia cells to self-destruct and stopped their cell cycle.   A study  of  breast cancer  survivors looked at the effect of carrot juice on levels of carotenoids, markers of oxidative  stress , and markers of  inflammation  in the blood.  The researchers reported that higher levels of carotenoids in the blood were associated with a lower risk of breast cancer returning.  During the study, participants consumed 8 ounces of carrot juice daily for 3 weeks. At the end of the study, the women had higher blood levels of carotenoids and lower levels of a marker associated with oxidative stress.  Carrot juice is high in vitamin C.  Researchers  looked at the association between dietary vitamin C intake and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) in Korean adults aged 40 years or older.  They found that people with COPD had significantly lower intakes of multiple nutrients found in carrot juice, including carotene, potassium, vitamin A, and vitamin C, than people without COPD.  However, people with COPD also ate significantly less food overall than people without COPD.  For people who smoked heavily, the risk of COPD is lower in those who consumed more vitamin C than those who consumed very little.  People with weakened immune systems — such as those receiving cancer treatment, pregnant women, young children, and older people — may need to avoid certain foods if there is a risk of these carrying food-borne illnesses.  Fruit and vegetable juices that are freshly squeezed or have not been pasteurized may have a higher risk of carrying germs.  The  Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center  state that people who have been told to follow a low-microbial diet should avoid unpasteurized fruit and vegetable juices unless they are made at home.  According to the  U.S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) , pregnant women should choose juices that have been pasteurized or treated to have a long shelf life. Freshly squeezed juices, which may be sold at farmers' markets or juice bars, should also be avoided.  Carrots contain a type of carotenoid called  beta-carotene  that the body can convert into vitamin A.  Eating large amounts of carotenoids from  foods has not been linked  with harmful effects. However, the skin can turn yellow-orange if a person consumes large amounts of beta-carotene for a long time. This effect is called carotenoderma.  Carrot juice may offer many health benefits due to the concentrated levels of nutrients it contains.  However, carrot juice has less fiber and more sugar than whole carrots. Fiber is associated with weight management and lowering  cholesterol  levels.  Carrot juice may not be appropriate for everyone, especially pregnant women, young children, the elderly, and people with certain illnesses, depending on how it is prepared.  Carrot juice in moderation can be included as part of a healthy diet. However, drinking juice is not a replacement for eating whole fruits and vegetables.    
 A food labeling guide: Guidance for industry. (2013, January).  A food labeling guide: Guidance for industry. (2013, January).  Basic report: 11655, carrot juice, canned. (2016, May).  Butalla, A. C., Crane, T. E., Patil, B., Wertheim, B. C., Thompson, P., &amp; Thomson, C. A. (2012, January 31). Effects of a carrot juice intervention on plasma carotenoids, oxidative stress, and inflammation in overweight breast cancer survivors [Abstract].  Nutrition and Cancer ,  64 (2), 331–341.  Fallahzadeh, H., Jalali, A., Momayyezi, M., &amp; Bazm, S. (2015, December 31). Effect of carrot intake in the prevention of gastric cancer: A meta-analysis.  Journal of Gastric Cancer ,  15 (4), 256–261.  Food safety for moms-to-be: Safe eats — fruits, veggies, &amp; juices. (2017, November 8).  Gordinier, J. (2013, April 16). The juice-bar brawl.  The New York Times .  Juicing recipes. (n.d.).  Low-microbial diet. (2017, June 23).  Park, H. J., Byun, M. K., Kim, H. J., Kim, J. Y., Kim, Y.-I., Yoo, K.-H., … Ahn, C. M. (2016, October 31). Dietary vitamin C intake protects against COPD: The Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey in 2012.  International Journal of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease ,  11 , 2721–2728.  Vitamin A [Fact sheet]. (2016, August 31).  Zaini, R., Clench, M. R., &amp; Le Maitre, C. L. (2011, November 4). Bioactive chemicals from carrot ( Daucus carota ) juice extracts for the treatment of leukemia [Abstract].  Journal of Medicinal Food ,  14 (11), 1303–1312.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Ware, Megan. "How can I get the benefits of carrot juice?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320297.php&gt;    APA  Ware, M. (2017, December 13). "How can I get the benefits of carrot juice?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  