 Normal ejaculation forces semen—sometimes called ejaculate—through the man's urethra and out of the penis.  The ejaculate can move out of the penis  because a small muscle, called the bladder sphincter, closes the opening to the bladder, preventing the semen from entering the bladder.  When the bladder sphincter does not work correctly, the bladder may not close completely, which can cause ejaculate to travel into the bladder rather than coming out of the penis.  It is also called a dry orgasm. Some men with retrograde ejaculation still ejaculate but notice less fluid than they once did.  In some men, retrograde ejaculation causes  infertility . When very little or no ejaculate exits the body, the chances of sperm fertilizing an egg range from low to zero. However, retrograde ejaculation is  responsible for  just 0.3–2 percent of infertility cases.   Retrograde ejaculation is not dangerous  and is not painful. Men with the condition who ejaculate small quantities of semen might not even notice they have the condition.   Some men report  cloudy urine immediately after ejaculating, which is likely because semen has mixed with urine. Men with retrograde ejaculation may also have trouble getting their partners pregnant.  Because retrograde ejaculation can affect a man's experience of sex, some men may opt to treat the condition even if it has no serious underlying cause.  Men who want to get their partners pregnant still have options. Treatment usually begins with removing the sperm after ejaculation; this may involve isolating sperm from the bladder.  Some medications attempt to encourage forward (antegrade) ejaculation. If these attempts fail, a doctor  may try to extract  sperm without requiring the man to ejaculate. Surgical procedures for  removing the sperm include :  After a doctor has successfully removed semen, they can then help a man's partner to get pregnant in one of two ways:  Treatment for retrograde ejaculation depends on the cause of the problem. When men experience retrograde ejaculation due to medication, changing medications usually resolves the problem. When retrograde ejaculation is due to severe nerve damage,  it may not be reversible .  Retrograde ejaculation may be caused by:  Removal of part of the prostate through surgery is one of the most common causes of retrograde ejaculation.  About 10 to 15 percent  of people who undergo this surgery can expect to experience retrograde ejaculation because surgery may damage the muscles and nerves of the bladder.  Men who have had a  radical prostatectomy —prostate removal—cannot ejaculate at all. This is distinct from retrograde ejaculation and occurs because ejaculate can no longer travel to the penis.  Retrograde ejaculation is neither dangerous nor painful and does not always require treatment. It can, however, be a symptom of another medical condition.  Consult a doctor about retrograde ejaculation when:   A 2017 study  detailed a case in which retrograde ejaculation was the first and only symptom of  type 1 diabetes . So men who experience retrograde ejaculation should talk to their doctors.  Retrograde ejaculation is not entirely preventable.  Men who need treatment for an enlarged prostate should consider surgeries that are less invasive, such as  transurethral microwave thermotherapy  (TUMT) or  transurethral needle ablation  (TUNA) of the prostate. These surgeries are less likely to cause nerve and muscle damage.  Controlling medical conditions that can cause nerve damage may also prevent retrograde ejaculation. Men with  diabetes  should take the medications their doctors prescribe and should implement appropriate lifestyle changes as recommended by a doctor.  Retrograde ejaculation is not always reversible. However, the infertility it can cause is treatable. Even when a man cannot ejaculate at all, a fertility specialist may be able to help.  Men with retrograde ejaculation may have other symptoms due to an enlarged prostate, diabetes, or prostate surgery. So even if a man believes his condition is untreatable, he should report symptoms such as painful ejaculation, blood in the ejaculate, frequent urination, or  erectile dysfunction  to a doctor. These symptoms point to another diagnosis and are not due to retrograde ejaculation.  Most men associate ejaculation with orgasm, but not all orgasms involve ejaculation. It can be unnerving to orgasm without ejaculating, but it is not harmful—changing expectations may be all it takes to live comfortably with retrograde ejaculation.    
 Brehmer, M., &amp; Baba, S. (2000, October). Transurethral microwave therapy: How does it work?  Journal of Endourology ,  14 (8), 611–615.  Brehmer, M., &amp; Baba, S. (2000, October). Transurethral microwave therapy: How does it work?  Journal of Endourology ,  14 (8), 611–615.  Jefferys, A., Siassakos, D., &amp; Wardle, P. (2012, February). The management of retrograde ejaculation: A systematic review and update.  Fertility and Sterility ,  97 (2), 306–312.  Kam, J., Tsang, V. H., &amp; Chalasani, V. (2017, January). Retrograde ejaculation: A rare presenting symptom of type 1 diabetes mellitus.  Urology Case Reports ,  10 , 9–10.  Parnham, A., &amp; Serefoglu, E. C. (2016, August). Retrograde ejaculation, painful ejaculation and hematospermia.  Translational Andrology and Urology ,  5 (4), 592–601.  Retrograde ejaculation. (2012, December).  Retrograde ejaculation. (n.d.).  Sperm retrieval procedures. (n.d.).  Tomasi, P. A., Fanciulli, G., &amp; Delitala, G. (2004, March 16). Successful treatment of retrograde ejaculation with the alpha 1 -adrenergic agonist methoxamine: Case study.  International Journal of Impotence Research ,  2005 (17), 297–299.  Wehrwein, P. (n.d.). Achieving orgasm after radical prostatectomy. (2013, October 15).  Ziotta, A. R., Giannakopoulos, X., Maehlum, O., Ostrem, T., &amp; Schulman, C. C. (2003, July). Long-term evaluation of transurethral needle ablation of the prostate (TUNA) for treatment of symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia: Clinical outcome up to five years from three centers.  European Urology ,  44 (1), 89–93.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What you should know about retrograde ejaculation."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320332.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2017, December 16). "What you should know about retrograde ejaculation."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  