 In this article, we look at the symptoms and diagnosis of chronic  appendicitis , as well as how the condition is treated.  The appendix is a small pouch shaped like a finger or sausage. It is connected to the bottom of the large intestine. Appendicitis occurs when the appendix becomes inflamed and infected. The first noticeable symptom of appendicitis is usually abdominal pain.  People with chronic appendicitis have appendicitis that lasts for long periods of time. This means appendicitis that is present for longer than a week.  Chronic appendicitis is relatively rare, with just an estimated  1.5 percent of all appendicitis cases  being considered chronic appendicitis.  Chronic appendicitis may occur for many different reasons and many cases do not have a clear cause.  Often, chronic appendicitis occurs due to  inflammation  and obstruction of the appendix. Other possible causes include:  Chronic appendicitis can be difficult to diagnose, as symptoms may be fairly mild and easily mistaken for a different condition.  Many people experience mild abdominal pain at first, and this may remain as their only symptom.  The pain is usually located on the lower right side of the abdomen but can spread towards the belly button. The pain can either be dull or sharp.  As well as abdominal pain, people with chronic appendicitis may also experience the following symptoms:  Not all people with chronic appendicitis will have all of these symptoms. Symptoms may also subside on their own and then return, making it more challenging for doctors to give an accurate diagnosis if a person is not experiencing the symptoms at the time.  However, because chronic appendicitis can become life-threatening, it is important that people with recurrent abdominal pain and the above symptoms seek medical attention, particularly if the symptoms become more severe.  While chronic and acute appendicitis have similar symptoms, there are important differences between them.  Chronic appendicitis is where a person has symptoms that last for a long time, and these symptoms usually come and go. If chronic appendicitis is not diagnosed, the person can continue to experience symptoms for years.  Acute appendicitis is when a person suddenly develops severe symptoms, typically over the course of 24–48 hours. These symptoms will be impossible to ignore and require immediate emergency medical treatment.  The most typical symptom of acute appendicitis is abdominal pain that starts around the belly button and moves to the lower right side of the tummy. This pain may start out as mild and dull, but is likely to intensify.  Other symptoms of acute appendicitis include:  Appendicitis usually occurs when an obstruction, such as a foreign object or calcified stool, blocks the inner cavity or appendiceal lumen of the appendix.  Chronic appendicitis may occur when the appendiceal lumen is only partially blocked. However, the blockage is likely to worsen over time by causing pressure to build.  When this happens in people with chronic appendicitis, the pressure may overcome the partial obstruction and the symptoms will reduce in intensity or go away altogether.  The symptoms will then return the next time the blockage causes the appendix to become inflamed.  A doctor will initially do a physical exam to determine whether the abdomen is tender and where the pain is located. They will also ask questions about the symptoms and a person's medical history.  In most cases, a doctor will do several tests to rule out other medical conditions that have the same symptoms.  The conditions the doctor may attempt to rule out include:  The tests used to rule out these conditions include:  If chronic appendicitis is diagnosed, the doctor may prescribe  antibiotics  or may advise draining the  pus  that has formed around the appendix due to the infection.  The most common treatment, however, is to have the appendix removed altogether. This surgery is called an appendectomy.  An appendectomy is usually performed using laparoscopic surgery, which is minimally invasive. It is also known as keyhole surgery and is performed under general anesthetic.  The most common complications of chronic appendicitis are:  The above complications are serious and require immediate medical care. It is vital not to ignore symptoms of appendicitis, and to seek medical attention urgently.  Chronic appendicitis is a long-term condition characterized by appendicitis symptoms that come and go over time. It is different from acute appendicitis, but it can also have serious complications.  While a person may live with chronic appendicitis for years, it is important that they do not ignore the symptoms. Recurring pain in the lower abdomen can be a symptom of many underlying conditions, so it is vital to get a proper diagnosis.    
 Appendicitis. (n.d.).  Appendicitis. (n.d.).  Appendicitis. (2016, March 20).  Appendicitis. (2014, November).  Appendicitis. (2016, March 1).  Buckius, M. T., McGrath, B., Monk, J., Grim, R., Bell, T., &amp; Ahuja, V. (2012, June 15). Changing epidemiology of acute appendicitis in the United States: Study period 1993–2008.  Journal of Surgical Research ,  175 (2), 185–190.  Crohn's disease. (2015, April 17).  Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). (2017, October 9).  Kothadia, J. P., Katz, S., &amp; Ginzburg, L. (2015, May). Chronic appendicitis: Uncommon cause of chronic abdominal pain.  Therapeutic Advances in Gastroenterology ,  8 (3), 160–162.  Laparoscopy (keyhole surgery). (2015, September 24).  Ovarian cysts. (2017, April 28).  Sepsis. (2016, February 24).  Shah, S. S., Gaffney, R. R., Dykes, T. M., &amp; Goldstein, J. P. (2013, January). Chronic appendicitis: An often forgotten cause of recurrent abdominal pain.  The American Journal of Medicine ,  126 (1), e7–e8.  Shaoul, R., Rimar, Y., Toubi, A., Mogilner, J., Polak, R., &amp; Jaffe, M. (2005, November 21). Crohn's disease and recurrent appendicitis: A case report.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  11 (43), 6891–6893.  Tariq, S. (2015, January 14). Enterobiasis: Threadworm infection presenting as acute appendicitis in a 13-year-old girl.  BMJ Case Reports ,  2015 .  Toumi, Z., Chan, A., Hadfield, M. B., &amp; Hulton, N. R. (2010, September). Systematic review of blunt abdominal trauma as a cause of acute appendicitis.  Annals of The Royal College of Surgeons of England ,  92 (6), 477–482.  Ulcerative colitis. (2016, March 17).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Chronic appendicitis: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320321.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2017, December 15). "Chronic appendicitis: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  