 Dry heaves are extremely common and often occur after periods of vomiting. They can also occur alone as a symptom or side effect of an underlying medical condition or as the result of certain situations and medications.  Dry heaving is also considered the first stage of vomiting, though it does not always lead to vomiting.  Although it can be unpleasant, most cases of dry heaving only last for a short time and resolve with basic care.  For cases caused by excessive alcohol consumption, a person should immediately stop drinking alcohol and switch to clear fluids.  Moderate to severe cases of nausea and dry heaving, however, can cause serious  dehydration  and potentially damage the tissues and organs.  The most common medical treatment options for severe dry heaving are intravenous fluid (IV) fluids and anti-nausea medications (antiemetics).  If dry heaving is related to a specific condition, the underlying cause will also require specific treatment.  Common home remedies for mild to moderate cases of dry heaving include:  It is essential to treat or resolve cases of dry heaving during pregnancy  to avoid dehydration,  malnutrition , weight loss, and potential harm to the woman and baby.  The first line of treatment for dry heaving with pregnancy is typically hydration, eating a more balanced diet, and taking supplements.  Lifestyle changes, such as eating smaller meals spread evenly throughout the day may also help reduce symptoms.  Eating a high-protein snack before bed, or a few dry saltines first thing in the morning may reduce nausea and dry heaving during pregnancy.  For more severe cases, a doctor may also prescribe anti-nausea medications and  vitamins . These can include:  Though less supported by scientific study, several natural treatment options have been proposed and occasionally used to treat nausea, especially during pregnancy.  Alternative therapeutic options for nausea include:  Dry heaving generally serves to prepare the body for vomiting by helping reverse the movement of contents in the stomach and food pipe (esophagus).  Dry heaving may also occur when the brain continues to send the signal to clear the stomach even though it is already empty.  Dry heaving involves the contraction of the abdominal walls and diaphragm, which allows the lungs to expand while the stomach and esophagus relax. This forces the contents of the stomach and esophagus upward.  When there is nothing left in the stomach to throw up, the body may continue to undergo the physical motions of vomiting but cannot expel anything except occasional mucous or clear fluid. This is dry heaving.  In some cases, dry heaving can also be triggered when there is no actual reason to empty the stomach, such as in response to a smell or a sight.  Dry heaving is often caused by a combination of factors. Vomiting and nausea often accompany dry heaving, so they share many of the same risk factors.  But there are medical conditions, medications, and certain situations that can specifically increase the risk of dry heaving.  Common situations associated with dry heaving include:  Other conditions known to cause dry heaving include:   Pregnancy   Pregnancy commonly causes nausea, vomiting, and may lead to dry heaving. Nausea is typically most severe during the early stages of pregnancy and is especially common early in the morning when the stomach is empty, but it can occur anytime throughout the day.  A  2016 study  surveying more than 5,000 women during early pregnancy found that 33. 6 percent reported daily nausea and 9.6 percent experienced vomiting daily.  Researchers are not exactly sure why pregnancy causes nausea, but it is likely due to a combination of immune, hormone, and anatomical changes.   Gastrointestinal conditions   Conditions that interfere with digestion, such as  irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS), gastritis,  Crohn's disease , and gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ) are common causes of nausea and dry heaving.  Dry heaving may be especially common during flare-ups when symptoms are more severe.   Acid reflux    Indigestion  can cause stomach acids to travel back up the food pipe, which may be uncomfortable or painful. This sensation can also cause nausea.   Infection   Regardless of the location in the body, severe infection may cause the immune system to initiate nausea and vomiting in response to the problem.  The physical presence of parasites tends to cause the intestines and stomach to feel either very full or very empty, triggering unnecessary retching.   Food allergies or poisoning   Food allergens or toxins can cause intense, sudden vomiting and a complete emptying of the stomach contents and bowels.  This severe response often continues for some time after the allergen has been cleared from the stomach, resulting in dry heaving.   Liver, kidney, or pancreas disorders   Nausea and a loss of appetite are some of the most common early warning signs of chronic disease and liver, kidney, and pancreas disorders.   Migraine headaches    Migraine  headaches are a well-known cause of nausea, vomiting, and dry heaving. This is often in response to severe pain, disorientation, and light-sensitivity.   Cyclic vomiting syndrome    An estimated  80 percent of children and 25 percent of adults with cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) also have migraine  headaches .  The condition is characterized by seemingly random, sudden spells of intense vomiting, nausea, and physical exhaustion that occur every few weeks to months.   Medications   Some medications known to cause dry heaving include:   Inner ear conditions   Infection,  inflammation , or pain in the inner ear can cause  vertigo , motion sickness, and nausea.   Severe pain or shock   The body may respond to severe pain or shock by causing nausea and often dry heaving.   Intracranial conditions   Any injury or brain condition, such as trauma, bleeding, a  tumor , or viral infection, can increase pressure in the brain and cause nausea and dry heaving.  If dry heaving continues for more than a 24 hours or is severe, a person should seek medical attention.  Moderate to severe cases of dry heaving can cause dehydration, which may require medical care and monitoring to prevent complications including kidney injury.  Reasons to seek immediate medical attention for dry heaving include:  While rare, persistent nausea and dry heaving may be a sign of more serious health conditions, such as an organ disease or infection. Anyone who frequently experiences dry heaving with no apparent cause should speak to a doctor.    
 Bai, G., Korfage, I. J., Hafkamp-de Groen, E., Jaddoe, V. W. V. , Mautner, E., &amp; Raat, H. (2016, November 4). Associations between nausea, vomiting, fatigue and health-related quality of life of women in early pregnancy: The generation R study.  PLoS One ,  11 (11), e0166133.  Bai, G., Korfage, I. J., Hafkamp-de Groen, E., Jaddoe, V. W. V. , Mautner, E., &amp; Raat, H. (2016, November 4). Associations between nausea, vomiting, fatigue and health-related quality of life of women in early pregnancy: The generation R study.  PLoS One ,  11 (11), e0166133.  Beadle, K. L., Helbling, A. R., Love, S. L., April, M. D., &amp; Hunter, C. J. (2016, July). Isopropyl alcohol nasal inhalation for nausea in the emergency department: A randomized controlled trial [Abstract].  Annals of Emergency Medicine ,  68 (1), 1–9.  Cyclic vomiting syndrome. (2014, March).  Farrer, F. (2016, Summer). Nausea and vomiting in the pharmacy.  Hunt, R., Dienemann, J., Norton, H. J., Hartley, W., Hudgens, A., Thomas, S., … Divine, G. (2013, September). Aromatherapy as treatment for postoperative nausea: A randomized trial [Abstract].  Anesthesia &amp; Analgesia ,  117 (3), 597–604.  Medicines to prevent and treat nausea and vomiting. (2017, February 13).  Saberi, F., Sadat, Z., Abedzadeh-Kalahroudi, M., &amp; Taebi, M. (2013, September 5). Acupressure and ginger to relieve nausea and vomiting in pregnancy: A randomized study.  Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal ,  15 (9), 854–861.  The progression of liver disease. (n.d.)  Van den Heuvel, E., Goossens, M., Vanderhaegen, H., Sun, H. X., &amp; Buntinx, F. (2016, January 13). Effect of acustimulation on nausea and vomiting and on hyperemesis in pregnancy: A systematic review of Western and Chinese literature.  BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  16 (13).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "How to stop dry heaving."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320313.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, December 15). "How to stop dry heaving."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  