 My sedentary time is  on par  with the average person in the United States, which is worrying.  Prolonged sitting has been linked to  high blood pressure ,  type 2 diabetes ,  heart disease , and  cancer . Some studies have even associated prolonged sitting with an  increased risk of premature death .  Adding insult to injury, it seems that no matter how much exercise I do in the time that I'm not sitting on my bottom, I  can't offset these heath risks . Great.  But as I sit here (ironically) panicking about what I can do to stop my sedentary behavior becoming a health problem, I spot a study that provides some much-needed reprieve. It says that prolonged sitting is unlikely to make me pile on the pounds. Hooray!  Celebration aside, as a writer for  Medical News Today , I know that such studies should not be taken at face value. So, let's have a look at the details.  Published in the journal  Sports Medicine , the  research  was a systematic review and meta-analysis of 23 studies that investigated the effects of sedentary behavior on  body weight  and  obesity  risk among adults.  Importantly, all studies included in the analysis adjusted their results to account for physical activity, since this can influence weight.  Overall, the team only found "small, inconsistent, and non-significant associations" between sedentary behaviors — such sitting at work or watching TV — and body weight and obesity.  The scientists did identify a slight increase in waist circumference with sedentary behavior: a 0.02-millimeter increase for every 1-hour increase in sitting time per day over 5 years. But don't panic just yet; the researchers say that this increase is "basically negligible."  So, what do these findings mean for those of us who spend most of our day warming our chairs?  Put simply, "The results show [...] that the harmful effects of too much sitting is probably not caused by weight gain," explains lead study author Dr. Meredith Peddie, of the Department of Human Nutrition at the University of Otago in New Zealand.  However, the findings  do not  suggest that sitting down for long periods is harmless — much to my disappointment.   "[...] our intervention studies clearly show that sitting for long periods increases blood sugar and triglyceride levels," says Dr. Peddie.   Bottom line (pun intended), it seems that the advice to "sit less, move more" is more important than ever. I had better ask Santa for a standing desk this year.  