 If the pain lasts for more than 1 or 2 days, it is best to see a dentist immediately to have it treated.  Until then, the following simple remedies made from ingredients usually available at home may provide temporary relief from the discomfort.  A cold compress or an ice pack can help ease dental pain, especially if a toothache is due to injury or swollen gums.  A person can try holding the ice pack or a bag of frozen peas, for example, against the outside of the cheek above the painful tooth for a few minutes at a time.  The application of a  cold treatment  constricts the blood vessels, slowing the flow of blood to the affected area. This helps numb the pain and reduce swelling and  inflammation .  Rinsing the mouth with warm salt water helps to loosen debris lodged in cavities or between teeth. It may also  reduce swelling , boost healing, and relieve a  sore throat .  A saltwater rinse can be made by dissolving 1 teaspoon of salt in a glass of warm water and swish around in the mouth for about 30 seconds before spitting out. This process can be repeated as often as needed.  Over-the-counter medication, such as  acetaminophen and ibuprofen , can provide temporary pain relief for a toothache.   Aspirin  should not be given to children under 16 years old.  Garlic has been widely used for medicinal purposes throughout history. It contains a compound called allicin, which accounts for its powerful  antibacterial properties .  A fresh clove of garlic should first be crushed and then mixed with a little salt, and the mixture applied to the affected tooth.  Like cloves, peppermint has  numbing properties  that can soothe a toothache. Menthol, which gives peppermint its minty flavor and smell, is also known to be antibacterial.  One teaspoon of dried peppermint leaves can be put in a cup of boiling water and steeped for 20 minutes. After allowing to cool, it can be swished around in the mouth then spat out or swallowed.  A slightly warm, wet tea bag can also be used and held against the tooth for several minutes until the pain lessens.  A few drops of peppermint oil on a cotton ball can also be placed against the affected tooth as a temporary remedy.  Thyme is known for  its medicinal uses  and is an effective remedy for chest infections, such as  bronchitis  or  whooping cough . Thymol, the main component of the essential oil, has antiseptic and antifungal properties.  One drop of thyme essential oil can be added to a glass of water to make a mouthwash.  Another method is to sprinkle a few drops of thyme essential oil and water onto a cotton ball. After adding the water, press it against the painful tooth.  Aloe vera gel, which can be found within the succulent plant's leaves, has long been used to heal burns and minor cuts. Some people now use the gel to clean and soothe gums.   Studies have shown  that aloe vera has natural antibacterial qualities and can destroy germs that cause tooth decay.  The gel should be applied to the painful area of the mouth and gently massaged.  Rinsing with a hydrogen peroxide solution is an  effective antibacterial mouthwash , especially if a toothache is caused by an infection.  Hydrogen peroxide is dangerous if swallowed so great care must be taken when rinsing.  It should be mixed in equal parts of 3 percent hydrogen peroxide and water and swished in the mouth for about 30 seconds. After spitting it out, the mouth should be rinsed several times with plain water.  A hydrogen peroxide rinse must never be swallowed, and this remedy is not recommended for children.  Cloves are a spice native to the Maluku Islands in Indonesia. They contain eugenol, a chemical compound that acts as a natural anesthetic.  Cloves also have  anti-inflammatory and antibacterial properties , which can help fight tooth and gum infections.  A person can soak a small cotton ball with clove oil and apply it to the area affected by the painful tooth.  Dried whole cloves can also be used. Gently chew a whole clove to release its oil and hold in place against the affected tooth for up to 30 minutes.  These home remedies are meant to provide temporary relief only. It is important to seek immediate treatment from a dentist once a toothache lasts for more than a day or two.  If dental pain is not treated straight away, it might lead to more serious problems, such as  gum disease  or a  dental abscess . An abscess is caused when bacteria infect the innermost part of the tooth called a dental pulp.  The best way to prevent a toothache or dental abscesses is by keeping teeth and gums as healthy as possible. This can be done with the following steps:  If someone has a toothache that lasts longer than a couple of days, they should see their dentist for advice and treatment.    
 Abscess (toothache). (n.d.).  Abscess (toothache). (n.d.).  Bhat, G., Kudva, P., &amp; Dodwad, V. (2011 July–September). Aloe vera: Nature's soothing healer to periodontal disease.  Journal of Indian Society of Periodontology ,  15 (3), 205–209.  Cortés-Rojas, D. F, De Souza, C. R. F., &amp; Oliveira, W. P. (2014, February). Clove ( Syzygium aromaticum ): A precious spice.  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  4 (2), 90–96.  Dauqan, E. M. A., &amp; Abdullah, A. (2017, March 20 ). Medicinal and functional values of thyme ( Thymus vulgaris  L.) herb.  Journal of Applied Biology &amp; Biotechnology ,  5 (2), 17–22.  Dental abscess. (2016, March 23).  Huynh, N.C.-N., Everts, V., Leethanakul, C., Pavasant, P., &amp; Ampornaramveth, R. S. (2016, July 21). Rinsing with saline promotes human gingival fibroblast wound healing  in vitro .  PLoS One ,  11 (7), e0159843.  Ice packs vs. warm compresses for pain. (n.d.).  Rashed, H. T. (2016, May 30). Evaluation of the effect of hydrogen peroxide as a mouthwash in comparison with chlorhexidine in chronic periodontitis patients: A clinical study.  Journal of International Society of Preventive &amp; Community Dentistry ,  6 (3), 206–212.  Singh, R., Shushni, M. A. M., &amp; Belkheir, A. (2015, May). Antibacterial and antioxidant activities of  Mentha piperita  L.  Arabian Journal of Chemistry ,  8 (3), 322–328.  Toothache. (2015, April 21).  Wallock-Richards, D., Doherty, C. J., Doherty L., Clarke, D. J., Place, M., Govan, J. R. W., &amp; Campopiano, D. (2014, December 1). Garlic revisited: Antimicrobial activity of allicin-containing garlic extracts against  Burkholderia cepacia  complex.  PLoS One ,  9 (2), e112726.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Ponsford, Soccy. "How to treat a toothache at home."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320315.php&gt;    APA  Ponsford, S. (2017, December 14). "How to treat a toothache at home."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  