 The active ingredient in milk thistle is called silymarin. Milk thistle is also known as Mary thistle or holy thistle. It is mainly used to treat liver problems, but some people claim it can lower  cholesterol  and help manage  type 2 diabetes .  This article explores 10 potential milk thistle benefits and examines whether there is any scientific evidence to support its use. It also looks at how to use milk thistle and whether there are any risks to consider.  Milk thistle is a flowering plant that comes from the same family of plants as the daisy. It grows in Mediterranean countries and is used to make natural remedies.  Different parts of the milk thistle plant may be used to treat various health conditions. The most common use of milk thistle is for liver problems. Some claim it can help treat:  Other potential health benefits include protecting heart health by lowering cholesterol levels and helping people manage type 2 diabetes.  The potential health benefits of milk thistle are explored below.  One of the most common uses of milk thistle is to treat liver problems. A  2016 study  found that milk thistle improved diet-induced liver damage in mice. More evidence is needed to prove that milk thistle benefits human livers in the same way.  However,  researchers theorize  that it does. The active ingredient in milk thistle, silymarin, acts as an  antioxidant  by reducing free radical production. Scientists think this creates a detoxifying effect, which is why it is milk thistle may be beneficial for liver problems.  Until more research is carried out, however, milk thistle is not recommended as the primary treatment option for liver problems. But it may be a helpful complementary treatment to try.  Milk thistle may help to promote healthy skin. A  2015 study  found that milk thistle helped improve inflammatory skin conditions when applied to the skin of mice.  Milk thistle was also found to have antioxidant and anti-aging effects on human skin cells in a laboratory environment in  another study .  Further research on humans is needed to identify what benefits a person can expect from applying milk thistle to their skin.  High cholesterol can lead to problems with heart health and increase a person's chance of  stroke .  A  2006 study  suggests milk thistle may play an important role keeping cholesterol levels down. It found that cholesterol levels were lower in people taking milk thistle to treat  diabetes  than those taking a  placebo .   Initial animal research  conducted in 2016 found that silymarin caused weight loss in mice that were fed a diet intended to cause weight gain.  This suggests milk thistle may be beneficial for those looking to lose weight. More research into the effects of milk thistle on weight loss in humans is needed to confirm this, however.  A  study  on mice found milk thistle extract helped to reduce  insulin resistance . Insulin resistance is a problem for people with type 2 diabetes.  Although this research suggests milk thistle could play a role in diabetes management, more research is needed to confirm whether milk thistle reduces insulin resistance and supports diabetes management.  The active ingredient in milk thistle can help to reduce  inflammation . A  2012 study  found that silymarin helped to protect against inflammation in the airways of mice with allergic  asthma .  More research is needed to see if silymarin benefits asthma symptoms in humans.  Milk thistle may help to stop the spread of certain types of  cancer . A  2016 review  found that milk thistle extract inhibited the growth of cancerous cells in  colorectal cancer .  More research is needed to determine how milk thistle may be used to help fight cancer.  Milk thistle may play an essential role in supporting bone health. A  2013 study  found that milk thistle helped to prevent bone loss.  The study looked specifically at bone loss caused by a deficiency in  estrogen . It is not yet clear whether milk thistle is equally beneficial for bone loss with a different cause.  Further studies are needed before it is safe to conclude that milk thistle supports bone health in humans.  A  2015 study  found that milk thistle increased resistance to oxidative  stress . Oxidative stress is a potential cause of  Alzheimer's disease .  In this way, milk thistle may help improve cognition and treat degenerative conditions that affect the mind. More research on humans is needed to confirm the effects of milk thistle on cognition.  Milk thistle may help strengthen a person's immune response and help them fight off infection.  A  2016 study  on an animal model found that milk thistle extract improved the immunity when consumed.  An older study  found that milk thistle extract had a positive effect on immune response in humans.  More studies with human participants are needed before scientists can say with certainty that milk thistle boosts a person's immune system.  Milk thistle is available as a supplement from many health food stores. There is no standard dose of milk thistle, so it is best to read the dosage suggested on the packaging.  Milk thistle is also available as a tea. If drinking milk thistle tea, it is best to limit intake to 6 cups a day.  As milk thistle is a supplement, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not regulate it in the same way as they regulate drugs. For this reason, it is important to buy milk thistle from reputable retailers.  As with any natural remedy, people should discuss using milk thistle with a doctor before taking it.  Milk thistle may interact with some medications. This is of particular concern if a person is already receiving treatment for liver conditions.  Milk thistle has a range of potential health benefits due to its active ingredient, silymarin, which is an antioxidant.  More research needs to be carried out before a definitive list of milk thistle benefits can be confirmed. That said, it is a healthful supplement that may be worth trying alongside conventional treatments.  It is always a good idea to speak to a healthcare professional before starting to use milk thistle or any other supplement, as it may interact with other medications or conditions.  Milk thistle supplements are available for purchase in health food stores or  online .  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Abenavoli, L., Capasso, R., Milic, N., &amp; Capasso F. Milk thistle in liver diseases: Past, present, future [Abstract]. (2010, October).  Phytotherapy Research ,  24 (10), 1423–1432.  Abenavoli, L., Capasso, R., Milic, N., &amp; Capasso F. Milk thistle in liver diseases: Past, present, future [Abstract]. (2010, October).  Phytotherapy Research ,  24 (10), 1423–1432.  Choi, Y. H., Jin, G. Y., Guo, H. S., Piao, H. M., Li, L., Li, G. Z. … Yan, G. H. (2012, October 26). Silibinin attenuates allergic airway inflammation in mice.  Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications ,  427 (3), 450–455.  Guo, Y., Wang, S., Wang, Y., &amp; Zhu, T. (2016, December). Silymarin improved diet-induced liver damage and insulin resistance by decreasing inflammation in mice.  Pharmaceutical Biology ,  54 (12), 2995–3000.  Huseini, H. F., Larijani, B., Heshmat, R., Fakhrzadeh, H., Radjabipour, B., Toilat, T., … Raza, M. (2006, December). The efficacy of Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn. (silymarin) in the treatment of type II diabetes: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical trial [Abstract].  Phytotherapy Research ,  20 (12), 1036–1039.  Kim, J.-L., Kim, Y.-H., Kang, M.-K., Gong, J.-H., Han, S. J., &amp; Kang, Y.-H. (2013). Antiosteoclastic activity of milk thistle extract after ovariectomy to suppress estrogen deficiency-induced osteoporosis.  BioMed Research International .  Kumar, J., Park, K. C., Awasthi, A., &amp; Prasad, B. (2015). Silymarin extends lifespan and reduces proteotoxicity in C. elegans Alzheimer's model [Abstract].  CNS and Neurological Disorders Drug Targets ,  14 (2), 295–302.  Liu, W., Li, Y., Zheng, X., Zhang, K., &amp; Du, Z. (2015, December). Potent inhibitory effect of silibinin from milk thistle on skin inflammation stimuli by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate [Abstract].  Food and Function ,  6 (12), 3712–3719.  Mamalis, A., Nguyen, D. H., Brody, N., &amp; Jagdeo, J. (2013, July 1). The active natural anti-oxidant properties of chamomile, milk thistle, and halophilic bacterial components in human skin in vitro . Journal of Drugs in Dermatology ,  12 (7), 780–784.  Morowat, M., Chamani, M., Zarei, A., &amp; Sadeghi, A. A. (2016, February 29). Dietary but not  in ovo  feeding of  Silybum marianum  extract resulted n an improvement in performance, immunity and carcass characteristics and decreased the adverse effects of high temperature in broilers.  British Poultry Science ,  57 (1), 105–113.  Raina, K., Kumar, S., Deepanshi, D., &amp; Agarwal, R. (2016, November). Silibinin and colorectal cancer chemoprevention: A comprehensive review on mechanisms and efficacy.  Journal of Biomedical Research ,  30 (6), 452–465.  Wilasrusmee, C., Kittur, S., Shah, G., Siddiqui, J., Bruch, D., Wilasrusmee, S., … Kittur, D. S. (2002, November). Immunostimulatory effect of Silybum Marianum (milk thistle) extract [Abstract].  Medical Science Monitor ,  8 (11), 439–443.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What are the benefits of milk thistle?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320362.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2017, December 20). "What are the benefits of milk thistle?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  