 When facing a  cancer  diagnosis, many people want to do everything in their power to fight the disease. For some, this includes looking into alternative or complementary therapies on top of traditional treatments like  chemotherapy .  One complementary therapy is the Budwig diet, which adds an increased amount of flaxseed oil and cottage cheese to a person's diet while avoiding processed foods and animal fats.  In this article, we take a detailed look at what the Budwig diet is, whether there is any evidence to support its use, and the possible risks and side effects.  People following the Budwig Diet eat multiple servings of flaxseed oil mixed with cottage cheese, or sometimes yogurt or milk.  Dr. Johanna Budwig, the creator of the diet, believed eating a diet very high in polyunsaturated fat from these specific sources would help prevent cancer cells from spreading.  In addition to eating many servings of a mixture of flaxseed oil and cottage cheese, people following the Budwig diet normally eat a lot of the following foods:  At the same time, people on the Budwig diet avoid the following foods:  Dr. Budwig also encouraged those following the diet or protocol to spend more time exposing their skin to the sun to increase the amount of  vitamin D  their bodies produce.  The Budwig diet was developed as an alternative approach to treat cancer. However, it has also been used as an alternative treatment for the following:  The basis of the Budwig diet is a mix of flaxseed oil and cottage cheese or quark, which is another bland cheese.  To make the mixture for the Budwig diet, a person needs to mix 1 tablespoon of flaxseed oil for every 2 tablespoons of cottage cheese or quark until the oil is no longer visible.  People on the diet may consume upwards of 6 tablespoons of flaxseed oil and 12 tablespoons of cottage cheese or quark per day to be eaten at different times throughout the day.  The traditional medical community considers the Budwig diet to be scientifically unproven.  However, some research does suggest that flaxseed may fight cancer. For example,  a study  published in  Cancer Prevention Research Journal  shows that mice that were fed flaxseed had reduced numbers of new lung tumors compared with mice that were fed a diet without flaxseed.   Other research  also shows that hens with  ovarian cancer  that consumed an increased amount of flaxseed had fewer tumors and better outcomes after a year than hens that did not eat flaxseed.  While there is evidence that flaxseed may fight cancer in animals, there is not much research available about the effect of flaxseed in humans with cancer.  There is a  case study  that exists that followed an individual with  breast cancer  who used the Budwig diet in addition to traditional treatments, including chemotherapy and radiation. While her cancer went into remission, it is unknown whether this happened due to the Budwig diet or the traditional therapies.  Another  small trial  on 25 men with  prostate cancer  showed that flaxseed might reduce the levels of the male hormone  testosterone . Reducing the amount of this hormone helped reduce the size of the tumors.  While these results are encouraging, randomized studies need to be done on humans with cancer to reach a conclusion about the efficacy of flaxseeds, and before scientists can say categorically that the Budwig diet is a cancer treatment.  The Budwig diet is a mainly healthy way of living with limited side effects. However, it may have some side effects linked to the high consumption of flax, or the consumption of dairy for those with intolerances.  Side effects related to high intake of flax or flaxseed oil include the following:  Similar side effects are seen in those who have an intolerance to dairy and eat cottage cheese.  There are few risks of trying the Budwig diet as a complement to traditional medicine for cancer or another disease, as it follows healthful eating with the addition of a high concentration of flaxseed oil.  Nevertheless, there are some risks associated with the high intake of flaxseed oil. For example, some people on the Budwig diet have reported allergic reactions, possibly to flaxseed.  Despite this, flaxseed allergies are uncommon, so most people following the diet have a low risk of experiencing any adverse effects.  If a person has a flaxseed allergy, they may experience the following side effects with the Budwig diet:  A person should seek emergency care if they experience symptoms of an allergic reaction to flaxseed and have trouble breathing.  People following the Budwig diet should also increase the amount of water they drink. Eating flaxseed without drinking enough water can lead to an increased chance of developing a bowel obstruction.  Lastly, because the Budwig diet encourages people to spend more time in the sun, people should be aware of the risk of sun damage and  skin cancer  that comes from increased sun exposure.  While the Budwig diet is safe for most people to try, there are some people who should not increase the amount of flaxseed in their diet. These are people who could do themselves more harm than good on the Budwig diet.  Groups of people that should not follow the Budwig diet include:  Any person outside these groups who wants to try the Budwig diet should only do so after consulting a doctor.  Flaxseed has some promise as a cancer-fighting food. However, there is not enough research yet to prove that it is an effective cancer treatment.  Until further research is done, the Budwig diet should not be considered a treatment for cancer.  If someone with cancer wishes to supplement their cancer treatments by following the Budwig diet, and they do not have any condition that may make the diet unsafe, there is little harm in them trying the diet alongside other medicinal therapies.  A person should always consult their doctor before making any significant dietary changes, including following the Budwig diet.    
 Ansenberger, K., Richards, C., Zhuge, Y., Barua, A., Bahr, J. M., Luborsky, J. L., &amp; Hales, D. B. (2010, May). Decreased severity of ovarian cancer and increased survival in hens fed a flaxseed-enriched diet for 1 year [Abstract].  Gynecologic Oncology ,  117 (2), 341–347.  Ansenberger, K., Richards, C., Zhuge, Y., Barua, A., Bahr, J. M., Luborsky, J. L., &amp; Hales, D. B. (2010, May). Decreased severity of ovarian cancer and increased survival in hens fed a flaxseed-enriched diet for 1 year [Abstract].  Gynecologic Oncology ,  117 (2), 341–347.  Budwig diet. (2015, June 12).  Budwig diet. (n.d.).  Budwig diet. (2017, January 26).  Chikara, S., Mamidi, S., Sreedasyam, A., Chittem, K., Pietrofesa, R., Zuppa, A., ... Reindl, K. M. (2017, December 1). Flaxseed consumption inhibits chemically induced lung tumorigenesis and modulates expression of phase II enzymes and inflammatory cytokines in A/J mice [Abstract].  Cancer Prevention Research , 1–11.  Demark-Wahnefried, W., Price, D. T., Polascik, T. J., Robertson, C. N., Anderson, E. E., Paulson, D. F., ... &amp; Vollmer, R. T. (2001, July). Pilot study of dietary fat restriction and flaxseed supplementation in men with prostate cancer before surgery: Exploring the effects on hormonal levels, prostate-specific antigen, and histopathologic features [Abstract].  Urology ,  58 (1), 47–52.  Meiners, C. (2011, March 17). Clinical response of metastatic breast cancer to multi-targeted therapeutic approach: A single case report.  Cancers ,  3 (1), 1454–1466.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is the Budwig diet protocol?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320352.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2017, December 18). "What is the Budwig diet protocol?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  