 Many people will have heard horror stories about mold causing mysterious illnesses. When a person finds they have mold in their home, it can cause concern because of these worrying stories.  Most kinds of  Cladosporium  are not dangerous to humans, but sometimes they may lead to allergies, or they may worsen  asthma . In rare cases, the mold may lead to infections.   Cladosporium  appears in clusters of black, yellow, or green spots. The spots spread quickly when not cleaned away.  Cladosporium  often forms where moisture is present,   However, it is almost impossible to identify  Cladosporium  visually.  A person with mold in their home should consult with a mold-testing professional to identify the mold correctly, so that it can be removed safely. It may also be possible to send mold samples to a laboratory for testing.   Cladosporium  is not a single species of mold. Rather  Cladosporium  is a genus of mold that includes  more than 40 individual species  of fungus.  Some species of  Cladosporium  can grow indoors while others thrive outdoors. Either way, the genus frequently occurs in humid areas or moist places.  Places where  Cladosporium  can be found indoors include:  Outside,  Cladosporium  can be found on:  Most species of  Cladosporium  do not cause disease in humans. However, long-term exposure to a large amount of any mold, including  Cladosporium , can cause adverse health effects, including allergies and asthma symptoms.  Other ailments caused by  Cladosporium  can include the following:  The most common health issues from  Cladosporium  exposure are new or worsening allergies or asthma.   Cladosporium  exposure affects people differently. Some people experience no effects from exposure at all. Others who develop an allergy to  Cladosporium  may have any combination of the following symptoms:  In some cases, people with untreated mold allergies and prolonged exposure to molds develop allergic fungal  sinusitis .  Sinusitis of this kind results from long-term exposure to an allergen, such as  Cladosporium , that gets finely dispersed into the air. The allergen causes fungal debris to grow in a person's sinus cavities.  In these cases, a person with allergic fungal sinusitis caused by  Cladosporium  may have the following symptoms:  In other cases, people with  Cladosporium  allergies may experience asthma symptoms triggered by the exposure to the mold. In these cases, a person may have the following asthma symptoms, in addition to their allergy symptoms:  Exposure to  Cladosporium  can sometimes trigger severe asthma attacks, the symptoms of which include:  Anyone experiencing a severe asthma attack should seek emergency medical attention.  There are several ways of treating  Cladosporium -induced allergies, including the following:  There are many medications that a doctor can recommend or prescribe to a person with a  Cladosporium  allergy. These medications may include a combination of the following:  People with allergic fungal sinusitis may need surgery to remove the mold particles and blockages from their sinus cavities.  People with asthma can be prescribed rescue inhalers or inhaled steroids to manage and reduce their asthma symptoms.  If  Cladosporium  is growing inside a person's home, it can be removed to prevent further problems. A small area of mold can be treated with a vinegar solution or bleach.  A person with large areas of  Cladosporium  inside their home should consult with a mold removal professional. Many home insurance companies will cover a portion or all of the cost of mold removal.  If someone chooses to remove a large area of mold for themselves, they should remember that mold removal requires a lot of time and effort.  To remove mold, a person needs to buy bleach and antifungal agents. They should don protective clothing, including a mask and gloves, before entering the affected area to remove any item not affected by the mold first.  Next, the person must seal off the area with plastic sheets and run a negative air machine to prevent mold from spreading.  They should cut away any portion of the wall, carpet, or furniture that is damaged by the mold and dispose of it immediately. Remaining areas should be cleaned thoroughly with bleach or antifungal agents and allowed to dry completely before making any repairs.  Getting rid of mold is much more challenging than preventing it from growing or spreading in the first place. To stop  Cladosporium  or other mold from forming, a person can:  Once a person has removed  Cladosporium  from their home, their allergies or asthma symptoms should clear up.  While it may be impossible to avoid mold exposure completely, people with allergies or asthma can manage their symptoms through medicine and taking care to prevent mold from growing in their homes.    
 Allergic fungal sinusitis. (n.d.).  Allergic fungal sinusitis. (n.d.).  Bensch, K., Braun, U., Groenewald, J. Z., &amp; Crous, P. W. (2012, June 6). The genus  Cladosporium .  Studies in Mycology ,  72 (1), 1–401.  Bensch, K., Groenewald, J. Z., Braun, U., Dijksterhuis, J., de Jesús Yáñez-Morales, M., &amp; Crous, P. W. (2015, November 18). Common but different: The expanding realm of  Cladosporium .  Studies in Mycology ,  82 , 23–74.   Cladosporium cladosporioides . (2016, July 28).  Facts about Cladosporium mold and how to remove it. (2017, September).  Glass, D., &amp; Amedee, R. G. (2011). Allergic fungal rhinosinusitis: A review.  The Ochsner Journal ,  11 (3), 271–275.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is Cladosporium and what are its health effects?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320331.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2017, December 17). "What is Cladosporium and what are its health effects?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  