 Other names for this syndrome are mandibulofacial dysostosis, Treacher Collins-Franceschetti syndrome, Franceschetti-Zwahlen-Klein syndrome, and zygoauromandibular dysplasia.  Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) affects approximately  1 in 50,000 live births .  In this article, we examine the symptoms, causes, and treatments available for TCS. We also take a look at living with TCS and what the outlook is for people with the condition.  The signs and symptoms of TCS vary and range from almost unnoticeable to severe.  While some individuals may experience very mild symptoms, others have extremely severe symptoms that may have serious consequences, such as life-threatening airway problems.  Signs and symptoms of TCS include some parts of the body developing in an abnormally or incompletely: These body areas include:   Hearing loss  may occur due to abnormal development of the facial bones and incomplete or abnormal development of the ears.  TCS may also cause a delay in motor and speech development.  TCS is caused by mutations in one of three genes:  A mutation in the TCOF1 gene causes the syndrome in  90–95 percent  of people with TCS. A mutation in the POLR1C or POLR1D gene accounts for around  8 percent  of people with TCS.  All these genes play vital roles in the early development of facial bones and tissues. When they are mutated, certain cells involved in the development of bones and tissues of the face self-destruct.  Approximately  40 percent  of people with TCS have a parent, or, rarely, two parents who carry affected genes. In these cases, the gene abnormality causing TCS is inherited.  The remaining 60 percent of people develop TCS as the result of a new mutation — a mutation occurring for the first time.  If the mutation has been detected within a family, there is an increased risk of a new baby getting it and having TCS. Therefore, a prenatal consultation is recommended in case of pregnancy.  A diagnosis of TCS is made based on the following:  Radiographic exams may include different types of X-rays, or computed tomography (CT) scans to detect if the cheekbones and jawbone (mandible) have developed abnormally or incompletely way.  A craniofacial  CT scan  can be performed to analyze the  anatomy  of the head, neck, ears, and ear canal. Doctors use this scan where there is hearing loss during the  first 6 months  of a child's life.  An examination of the teeth, to look for dental abnormalities, can also be performed when teeth first appear.  Genetic tests aim to detect mutations in the three genes that are known to cause TCS. Most of the time, genetic tests are not necessary to diagnose TCS, as a doctor can easily make a diagnosis by observing a person's symptoms. Genetic testing is helpful for further family planning.  After the initial diagnosis, other tests can help determine the severity of TCS. Doctors may examine the following:  Treatment of TCS varies according to each person's needs. Care will usually involve several different health professionals, such as:  For newborn infants with TCS, treatment will include procedures for improving breathing and how the airway works. Methods include special positioning of the infant and making an opening in the windpipe.  Doctors can treat hearing loss caused by TCS with hearing aids, speech therapy, and integration into the education system.  Surgeons can correct or rebuild the following areas if they are affected by abnormal or incomplete development:  The  age of the person  will affect what surgery a doctor will recommend.  Repairs of the roof of the mouth are often carried out at 1–2 years of age. Cheek, jaw, and eye socket rebuilding is often done at 5–7 years of age. Ear corrections are usually made after 6 years of age. Jaw repositioning is typically done before 16 years of age.  Other potential treatments are still under investigation, and no scientific results have yet been confirmed. They include:  Genetic counseling may also be suggested for individual people with TCS or the whole family if the syndrome was inherited. At these meetings, people will learn about the outlook for a genetic disorder, and experts will advise them about what the chances are of passing the condition on.  Most children with TCS have normal development and intelligence.  The outlook for each person depends on their specific symptoms and the severity of the syndrome. Unless there is a severe abnormality in the jaw that affects breathing, life expectancy for people with TCS tends to be similar to people without the condition.    
 Cobb, A. R., Green, B., Gill, D., Ayliffe, P., Lloyd, T. W., Bulstrode, N., &amp; Dunaway, D. J. (2014, September). The surgical management of Treacher Collins syndrome [Abstract].  British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery ,  52 (7), 581–9.  Cobb, A. R., Green, B., Gill, D., Ayliffe, P., Lloyd, T. W., Bulstrode, N., &amp; Dunaway, D. J. (2014, September). The surgical management of Treacher Collins syndrome [Abstract].  British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery ,  52 (7), 581–9.  Damlar, I., Altan, A., Turgay, B., &amp; Kiliç, S. (2016, December 27). Management of obstructive sleep apnea in a Treacher Collins syndrome patient using distraction osteogenesis of the mandible.  Journal of the Korean Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons ,  42 (6), 388–392.  Herlin, C., Genevieve, D., Vincent, M., Chaput, B., &amp; Captier, G. (2016, August). Treacher Collins syndrome: A systematic review of evidence-based treatment and recommendations.  Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery ,  138 (2), 374e–376e.  Jones, N. C., Lynn, M. L., Gaudenz, K., Sakai, D., Aoto, K., Rey, J.-P., … Trainor, P. A. (2011, May 13). Prevention of the neurocristopathy Treacher Collins syndrome through inhibition of p53 function.  Nature Medicine ,  14 (2), 125–33.  Kadakia, S., Helman, S. N., Badhey, A. K., Saman, M., &amp; Ducic, Y. (2014, June). Treacher Collins Syndrome: The genetics of a craniofacial disease [Abstract].  International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology ,  78 (6), 893–8.  Hutson Katsanis, S., &amp; Wang Jabs, E. (2012, August 30). Treacher Collins syndrome.  GeneReviews .  Ligh, C. A., Swanson, J., Yu, J. W., Samra, F., Bartlett, S. P., &amp; Taylor, J. A. (2017, May). A morphological classification scheme for the mandibular hypoplasia in Treacher Collins syndrome [Abstract].  Journal of Craniofacial Surgery ,  28 (3), 683–687.  Plomp, R. G., van Lieshout, M. J., Joosten, K. F., Wolvius, E. B., van der Schroeff, M. P., Versnel, S. L., … Mathijssen, I. M. (2016, January). Treacher Collins syndrome: A systematic review of evidence-based treatment and recommendations [Abstract].  Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery ,  137 (1), 191–204.  Renju, R., Varma, B. R., Kumar, S. J., &amp; Kumaran, P. (2014, October–December). Mandibulofacial dysostosis (Treacher Collins syndrome): A case report and review of literature.  Contemporary Clinical Dentistry ,  5 (4), 532–534.  Treacher Collins syndrome. (2016).  Treacher Collins syndrome. (2017, November 28.).  Tse, W. K. (2016, December). Treacher Collins syndrome: New insights from animal models [Abstract].  International Journal of Biochemistry and Cell Biology ,  81 (Pt A), 44–47.  van Gijn, D. R., Tucker, A. S., &amp; Cobourne, M. T. (2013, July). Craniofacial development: Current concepts in the molecular basis of Treacher Collins syndrome [Abstract].  British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery ,  51 (5), 384–8.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "What is Treacher Collins syndrome?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320306.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2017, December 14). "What is Treacher Collins syndrome?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  