 The human body requires a variety of  vitamins  to keep working properly. There are two types of vitamins: water-soluble and fat-soluble vitamins.  Vitamins are often obtained through regular food intake. Some people require or want additional vitamins provided through supplements.  Though both types of vitamin are important to the body, this article focuses on the types, functions, and sources of fat-soluble vitamins.  Fat-soluble vitamins will not dissolve in water. Instead, fat-soluble vitamins absorb best when taken with higher-fat foods.  Once absorbed into the body, fat-soluble vitamins are stored in fatty tissues and liver. The body can use these stores for future use. The water-soluble vitamins are vitamins B and C.  There are four types of fat-soluble vitamins:  Each type of fat-soluble vitamin promotes different functions in the body. People deficient in the fat-soluble vitamins may require supplements to boost their supply.  However, it is possible to take in too much of a fat-soluble vitamin, which could lead to toxicity and adverse reactions.  Vitamin A plays an important role in maintaining healthy vision. Without vitamin A, a person would suffer from severe vision issues.   Types   Vitamin A does not refer to one single vitamin but is a collection of compounds known as retinoids. Retinoids can be found both in the human body and in some food sources.   Function   Vitamin A supports several functions throughout the body. Some of the most important functions it supports include vision and the immune system.   Dietary sources   Vitamin A can be obtained through natural sources. Some sources include:  Animal sources provide the active components to help create retinols within the human body.  Some plants also provide pro-vitamin A compounds known as carotenoid  antioxidants . The most common is called  beta carotene , which can be found in foods such as:   Recommended intake   The recommended intake of vitamin A varies by age and gender. The following are some  recommended daily allowance values :   Deficiency   Vitamin A deficiency is not common in developed countries. However, vegetarians are at a higher risk of a deficiency because they do not get some kinds of vitamin A through their normal diet.  Similarly, people in developing countries with limited food sources or people whose diet is low in meat intake may also suffer from vitamin A deficiencies.  Some signs of vitamin A deficiency include:   Overdose   It is possible to reach toxic levels of vitamin A. This condition is called hypervitaminosis. People who take vitamin A supplements or eat copious amounts of fish liver oils are at the highest risk.  Pregnant women should not double up on their prenatal vitamins. High levels of vitamin A are harmful to a growing fetus.  If a person experiences an overdose, they may experience symptoms ranging from  headaches  and  fatigue . In severe cases, hypervitaminosis in a pregnant woman may result in a baby with birth defects.  Vitamin D is produced naturally in the human body when the skin is exposed to the sun. Vitamin D aids in bone health and development.   Types   Similar to vitamin A, vitamin D is a collective term used to describe a collection of compounds. Collectively, these are often referred to as calciferol.  There are two types found naturally:   Function   Once vitamin D is absorbed into the bloodstream, the liver and kidneys change calciferol into calcitriol, the biologically active form of vitamin D.  When used in the body, vitamin D performs two major roles:   Dietary sources   Vitamin D absorption is one of the only arguments for a person exposing large, unprotected areas of skin to the sun. When exposed regularly, people can actually absorb enough rays to produce vitamin D to function properly, without need for supplements.  However, many people do not spend hours in the sun. When people do, they are also often covered in sunscreen and clothing. As a result, a person is not likely to absorb as much vitamin D through sunlight alone.  Instead, people can obtain vitamin D through some food sources, including:   Recommended intake   Recommended daily values of vitamin D vary by age, though not by much. Some  general guidelines  indicate the following daily values:   Deficiency   It is not very common for a person to develop vitamin D deficiency. When it happens, most cases involve older adults or people who have been admitted to the hospital for extended amounts of time.  Some people are at a higher risk of developing a vitamin D deficiency. These include:  Some of the most common signs and symptoms of vitamin D deficiency include:   Overdose   Toxic levels of vitamin D rarely occur. They are most likely to occur in people who take too many vitamin D supplements.  An overabundance of vitamin D in the body can lead to a condition called hypercalcemia. This condition is marked by excessive levels of  calcium  in the blood.  When hypercalcemia occurs, a person may experience:  Vitamin E is an antioxidant that can help the body destroy free radicals. Free radicals are unstable atoms that may cause the formation of  cancer  cells. As such, vitamin E could play an important part in preventing cancer.   Types   Vitamin E is broken down into eight different types, with the two main kinds being tocopherols and tocotrienols. Tocopherol contains the most abundant form of vitamin E.   Function   As an antioxidant, vitamin E protects fatty tissues from free radicals that can cause cancer. Some water-soluble vitamins, such as C and B, help aid vitamin E's functions.  In higher doses, vitamin E can also function as a blood thinner.   Dietary sources   Vitamin E is most abundant in seeds, vegetable oils, and nuts. Some of the best sources of vitamin E include:   Recommended intake   Similar to vitamin D,  recommended daily values  for vitamin E vary by age.  Here are some of the breakdowns of recommended daily values:   Deficiency   Vitamin E deficiency is extremely rare in otherwise healthy individuals. Those with specific illnesses that block the liver from absorbing vitamin E are most at risk.  Symptoms of deficiency include:  There are also several long-term health issues that can result from vitamin E deficiency, including  anemia  and  heart disease .   Overdose   It is nearly impossible for a person to overdose on vitamin E through natural sources. Most people who experience an overdose do so because of taking vitamin E supplements.  However, people taking blood thinners may be more prone to overdose. In high doses, vitamin E may actually increase the risk of a person developing cancer.  Vitamin K helps the body form blood clots. This necessary function prevents a person from bleeding out from small scratches.   Types   Vitamin K has a variety of types. The two most common groups are:  There are additional man-made types of vitamin K.   Function   The main role that vitamin K plays in the body is blood clotting. However, vitamin K can also help with:   Dietary sources   Vitamin K-1 and K-2 are found in a variety of sources. Some of these sources include:   Recommended intake   Unlike the other vitamins mentioned, vitamin K recommended values are thought of as adequate intake.  When a supplement is measured in adequate intake, it means there is less evidence to support the specified amount.  Some  recommended adequate intakes  include:   Deficiency   Vitamin K is not stored in as great an amount in the body as vitamin A or D. This can lead a person to experience a vitamin K deficiency very quickly.  If a person has a vitamin K deficiency, they have a greater risk of excess bleeding and reduced bone density that can lead to fractures.   Overdose   Naturally occurring vitamin K has no known issues with overdose. Synthetic vitamin K-3, however, may cause overdose when taken in excess.  In general, vitamin K is considered safe to consume.  Fat-soluble vitamins play an essential role in a person's overall health.  It is important to manage the amount of each vitamin to avoid deficiencies and overdosing. Both can have adverse effects that may require medical attention.  Before starting a vitamin supplement, a person should speak to a doctor, and seek medical attention if a deficiency or overdose is expected.    
 Booth, S. L., Golly, I., Sacheck, J. M., Roubenoff, R., Dallal, G. E., Hamada, K., … Blumberg, J. B. (2004, July). Effect of vitamin E supplementation on vitamin K status in adults with normal coagulation status.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  80 (1), 143–148.  Booth, S. L., Golly, I., Sacheck, J. M., Roubenoff, R., Dallal, G. E., Hamada, K., … Blumberg, J. B. (2004, July). Effect of vitamin E supplementation on vitamin K status in adults with normal coagulation status.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  80 (1), 143–148.  Cheung, A. M., Tile, L., Lee, Y., Tomlinson, G., Hawker, G., Scher, J., ... Josse, R. (2008, December 23). Vitamin K supplementation in postmenopausal women with osteopenia (ECKO trial): A randomized controlled trial.  PLoS medicine ,  5 (12), e247.  Institute of Medicine (U.S.) Committee to review dietary reference intakes for vitamin D and calcium. (2011). Dietary reference intakes for calcium and vitamin D. Washington (DC): National Academies Press.  Institute of Medicine (U.S.) Panel on dietary antioxidants and related compounds. (2000). Dietary reference intakes for vitamin C, vitamin E, selenium and carotenoids. Washington (DC): National Academies Press.  Institute of Medicine (U.S.) Panel on micronutrients. (2001). Dietary reference intakes for vitamin A, vitamin K, arsenic, boron, chromium, copper, iodine, iron, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium, and zinc. Washington (DC): National Academies Press.  Pastori, D., Carnevale, R., Cangemi, R., Saliola, M., Nocella, C., Bartimoccia, S., ... Pignatelli, P. (2013, October 28). Vitamin E serum levels and bleeding risk in patients receiving oral anticoagulant therapy: A retrospective cohort study.  Journal of the American Heart Association ,  2 (6), e000364.  Pilz, S., Frisch, S., Koertke, H., Kuhn, J., Dreier, J., Obermayer-Pietsch, B., ... Zittermann, A. (2011). Effect of vitamin D supplementation on testosterone levels in men.  Hormone and Metabolic Research ,  43 (3), 223–225.  Tee, E.-S., &amp; Lee, C. Y. (2009, September 29). Carotenoids and retinoids in human nutrition.  Critical Reviews in Food Science &amp; Nutrition ,  31 (1–2), 103–163.  Vitamin E. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2016, November 3).  Vitamin K. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2016, February 11).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "All you need to know about fat-soluble vitamins."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320310.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2017, December 14). "All you need to know about fat-soluble vitamins."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  