 Tubular breasts may appear elongated in shape, be overly "droopy," or have very large or protruding nipples with a larger-than-normal areola (the pigmented skin around the nipple).  Sometimes the condition causes one breast to be misshapen, while other times, both breasts are affected.  Additional names for tubular breasts include the following:  According to one study published in   Current Concepts in Plastic Surgery  , many women visit their doctors for breast asymmetry that is actually due to tubular breasts. In some instances, the disorder can cause a person significant  anxiety  and  stress .  Treatments are available to correct tubular breasts, and the approach depends on what shape the breasts are.  Breasts can come in all shapes and sizes, which is usually determined at the time of  puberty . Tubular breasts can be any size and have some general characteristics in common. These include:  Some doctors classify tubular breasts into three category types based on multiple features observed, such as in the  example below . These include:  Other doctors may choose to use a different classification system for categorizing tubular breasts. The von Heimburg classification has  four categories  that look at specific breast features, including the degree of deficiency of breast glandular volume, the skin in the breast below the areola, and how constricted the breast base is.  If a person desires surgery to correct their breast(s), a doctor will use one of the classification systems to identify which type of tubular breast a person has. This will help them determine the best surgical treatment approach  Doctors Rees and Aston first described tubular breasts in  1976 , but researchers still do not know precisely what causes the condition.  Currently, doctors have not confirmed a genetic link between tubular breasts. If a person's parent or a close relative has tubular breasts, there is no evidence that the person will be at any greater risk of developing it.  However, a study published in the   Canadian Journal of Plastic Surgery  , suggested a genetic link when tuberous breasts were identified in twin brothers.  The same article suggests that tubular breasts are caused by an excess of  collagen  in the fascia and the other connective tissue components inside the breast. This results in abnormal gland development that changes the breast's shape.  Doctors do not typically associate tubular breasts with any other breast problems. Although tubular breasts may not cause physical problems, they can have damaging effects on a person's  mental health .  People who have one or two abnormally-shaped breasts can develop great anxiety in their friendships and romantic relationships. A person may feel uncomfortable in their clothes and may fear that others will find out they have tubular breasts.  Since 1976, when tubular breasts were first described, doctors have developed and improved surgical techniques to improve tubular breasts.  Because tubular breasts do not threaten a person's overall health, many people do not seek medical treatment for the condition.  However, approaches are available that can temporarily or permanently correct the appearance of tubular breasts.  For example, a woman may choose to wear extra padding or inserts in her bra to make her breasts appear more symmetrical. For a more permanent solution, plastic surgeons can perform procedures to correct the tubular appearance of the breasts.  Doctors can take a number of approaches to corrective surgery. One such surgical technique includes:  Sometimes, a surgeon will also correct the appearance of the areola, reducing its size.  Often, a surgeon can correct the breast's appearance in one surgery. However, if someone has breasts that differ significantly from each other, a doctor may recommend a two-step procedure.  In the first procedure, the surgeon will place a tissue expander in the chest; the second procedure involves fitting the implants.  Any person considering surgery must be aware of the risks involved. Risks from the procedure include bleeding, scarring, infection, and risk of further deformities.  For some people, tubular breasts can be a source of anxiety and mental discomfort. Although tubular breasts are not harmful from a physical health standpoint, an individual may desire surgery to make their breasts appear more symmetrical.  According to a chapter in the book, " Current Concepts in Plastic Surgery ," correction of tubular breasts can help a person build self-esteem and enjoy their social life more.    
 Galych, S. P., Dabizha, O. Y., Kostenko, A. A., Gomolyako, I. V., Samoko, K. A., &amp; Borovyk, D. V. (2016, October 1). Surgical treatment of tubular breast type II. [Abstract].  Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery ,  4 (10), e1024.  Galych, S. P., Dabizha, O. Y., Kostenko, A. A., Gomolyako, I. V., Samoko, K. A., &amp; Borovyk, D. V. (2016, October 1). Surgical treatment of tubular breast type II. [Abstract].  Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery ,  4 (10), e1024.  Klinger, M, Caviggioli, F., Klinger, F., Villani, F., Arra, E., &amp; Di Tommaso, L. (2011, Summer). Tuberous breast: Morphological study and overview of a borderline entity.  Canadian Journal of Plastic Surgery ,  19 (2), 42–44.  Knipe, H., &amp; Skandhan, A. K. P. (n.d.). Tuberous breasts.  Kolker, A. R., &amp; Collins, M. S. (2015, January). Tuberous breast deformity: classification and treatment strategy for improving consistency in aesthetic correction.  Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery ,  135 (1), 73–86.  Rees, T. D., &amp; Aton, S. J. (1976, April). The tuberous breast.  Clinics in Plastic Surgery ,  3 (2), 339–347.  Von Heimburg, D., Exner, K., Kruft, S., &amp; Lemperle, G. (1996, September). The tuberous breast deformity: Classification and treatment.  British Journal of Plastic Surgery ,  49 (6), 339–345.  Zoccali, G. &amp; Giuiani, M. (2012, March 23). Chapter 7: Tuberous breast: clinical evaluation and surgical treatment.  Current Concepts in Plastic Surgery .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What you should know about tubular breasts."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320309.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2017, December 13). "What you should know about tubular breasts."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  