 In this article, we look at the function of  vitamin  K in the body, as well as the symptoms and treatments for a  vitamin  K deficiency.  Vitamin K comes in two forms.  The first type is known as vitamin K-1 or phylloquinone and can be found in plants, such as spinach and  kale .  The second is known as vitamin K-2 or menaquinone and is found in the body and created naturally in the intestinal tract.  Both vitamin K-1 and vitamin K-2 produce proteins that help the blood to clot. Blood clotting or coagulation prevents excessive bleeding internally and externally.  While vitamin K deficiency is rare, it means a person's body cannot produce enough of these proteins, increasing the risk of excessive bleeding.  Most adults obtain an adequate supply of vitamin K through the foods they eat and through what their body naturally produces.  Certain medications and medical conditions can reduce vitamin K production and inhibit absorption, meaning adults can become deficient.  However, vitamin K deficiency is much more likely to occur in infants. When it does, it is known as vitamin K deficiency bleeding or VKDB.  Adults are at an increased risk of vitamin K deficiency and the associated symptoms if they:  Other people who may be diagnosed with vitamin K deficiency have a condition that results in the body being unable to absorb fat properly. This is known as fat malabsorption.  People who have problems absorbing fat may have an associated condition, such as:  There are several reasons why newborn babies are more prone to vitamin K deficiency. These are:  Dieticians and  nutrition  experts recommend that adult males consume at least 120 micrograms (mcg) per day of vitamin K and women consume 90 mcg per day.  Foods that are high in vitamin K include green, leafy vegetables, prunes, and fermented dairy products.  There are several symptoms associated with vitamin K deficiency, but the main one is excessive bleeding. Excessive bleeding may not be immediately evident, as it may only occur if a person is cut or wounded.  Additional signs of excessive bleeding can also include:  When looking for signs of vitamin K deficiency in newborn babies and infants, doctors will also look for:  To diagnose a vitamin K deficiency, a doctor will ask about a person's medical history to see if they have any risk factors.  The doctor may use a coagulation test called the prothrombin time or PT test. This test draws blood using a small needle. Chemicals are added to the blood, which is then observed to see how long it takes to clot.  If a person's blood takes longer than 13.5 seconds to clot, the doctor may suspect a vitamin K deficiency.  Certain foods have high levels of vitamin K and should not be eaten before a test. These include some liver products, cauliflower, broccoli, chickpeas, kale,  green tea , and soybeans.  If a person is diagnosed with vitamin K deficiency, they will be given a vitamin K supplement called phytonadione.  Phytonadione is usually taken orally, though it can also be given as an injection if a person has difficulty absorbing the oral supplement.  The dosage given depends on the age and health of the individual. The usual dose of phytonadione for adults ranges from 1 to 25 mcg.  A doctor will also consider whether a person is taking anticoagulants, as these can interact with vitamin K.  Vitamin K administered at birth can prevent a deficiency occurring in newborn babies. It is usually given as a shot.  The American Academy of Pediatrics recommend that newborns receive a  single shot of 0.5 to 1 mcg  of vitamin K-1 at birth.  A vitamin K shot is especially important for newborns under certain conditions. Risk factors for vitamin K deficiency bleeding include:  It is up to the parents to decide whether or not their baby receives a vitamin K injection, although it is usually recommended.  Vitamin K deficiency in adults is very rare. However, if a deficiency is left untreated, it may result in excessive bleeding.  In infants, it is essential to administer vitamin K at birth to prevent poor outcomes from excessive bleeding, such as intracranial hemorrhage, brain damage, and infant death.    
 Facts about vitamin K deficiency bleeding. (2017, December 5).  Facts about vitamin K deficiency bleeding. (2017, December 5).  Johnson, L. E. (2016, September). Vitamin K.  Lippi, G., &amp; Franchini, M. (2011, January). Vitamin K in neonates: Facts and myths.  Blood Transfusion ,  9 (1), 4–9.  Nutrient intakes from food and beverages: Mean amounts consumed per individual, by gender and age, in the United States, 2013–2014. (2016).  Pazirandeh, S., &amp; Burns, D. L. (2016, April 13). Overview of vitamin K.  Vitamin K [Fact sheet]. (2016, February 11).  Vitamin K: Injection or oral dose for newborns. (n.d.).  Why do parents decline vitamin K for their newborns? (2014, January 22–29).  JAMA ,  311 (4), 351.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Vitamin K deficiency: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320394.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2017, December 23). "Vitamin K deficiency: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  