 In this article, we look at the causes of jugular vein distention (JVD), additional symptoms, and how it is treated.  A person has jugular veins on both sides of their neck. They act as passageways for blood to move from a person's head to the superior vena cava, which is the largest vein in the upper body. The superior vena cava then transports the blood to the heart and lungs.  The blood flow from the head to the heart is measured by central venous pressure or CVP.  Jugular vein distention or JVD is when the increased pressure of the superior vena cava causes the jugular vein to bulge, making it most visible on the right side of a person's neck.  The appearance of the vein is similar to a rope or raised tube below the surface of the skin, and its height can be measured to indicate the CVP.  An increased volume of blood and high CVP are signs of  heart failure . However, there are other reasons why JVD might occur, such as a blockage.  There are several reasons why JVD may occur, including:  As well as the appearance of a bulging jugular vein, other symptoms may occur in a person with JVD. These additional symptoms can help determine the underlying cause of JVD.  Some symptoms that may occur alongside JVD are considered an emergency and require immediate medical attention. These symptoms include:  Other symptoms that may occur alongside JVD are:  JVD can be the sign of a severe condition, including heart failure, so it is vital that a person is seen by a medical professional as soon as possible.  While heart failure can happen to anyone, risk factors for heart failure include:  Complications, including with a person's circulation, can occur alongside JVD and may result in  fatigue . They can also cause cognitive or memory difficulties, as well as potential liver and kidney problems.  The appearance of a bulging vein in a person's neck is enough to diagnose them with JVD. However, determining the underlying cause usually requires further testing.  To find out if there is any immediate cause for concern, a doctor can estimate a person's CVP by measuring the height of the bulge.  This measurement will be taken when a person is lying down with their head elevated at an angle of  45–60 degrees .  If the CVP is higher than normal, it may indicate heart failure or that there is high pressure in the lungs that is affecting the right side of the heart.  A doctor will ask about other symptoms, such as chest pain and shortness of breath to help make a diagnosis.  Additional tests may also be carried out to determine the underlying cause of JVD. Listening to the heart can help a doctor pick up signs, such as a heart murmur.  A blood test can also reveal problems with the kidney, liver, or thyroid, which may affect the heart and cardiovascular system, causing JVD.  A doctor may carry out other tests, including an electrocardiogram, which can reveal any problems with the rate or rhythm of the heartbeat, or an echocardiogram, which can help diagnose heart failure and show signs of valve disease or a previous heart attack.  In cases where heart failure is thought to be the underlying cause of JVD, a doctor will work closely with a person to help improve their health. Treatments include:  In the most severe cases, a heart transplant may be necessary.  The most common underlying cause of JVD is heart failure. A person's outlook depends on how early this is diagnosed, the extent of the damage, their overall health, and how well they respond to treatment.  Early diagnosis is more likely to have a more positive outlook. Anyone experiencing the symptoms of JVD should see a doctor as soon as possible.    
 Beta-blockers. (2016, July 8).  Beta-blockers. (2016, July 8).  Diuretics - blood pressure medication. (2009, May).  Dunlap, B., &amp; Weyer, G. (2016, September 15). Pulmonary Hypertension: Diagnosis and Treatment.  American Family Physician ,  94 (6), 463–469.  Peterson, K. J. (2012, June). Measuring central venous pressure with a triple-lumen catheter.  Critical Care Nurse ,  32 (3), 62–64.  Pulmonary hypertension. (2017, March 14).  Techniques: Jugular venous pressure measurement. (n.d.).  What causes heart failure? (2015, June 22).  What is an arrhythmia? (2011, July 1).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What to know about jugular vein distention (JVD)."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320320.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2017, December 16). "What to know about jugular vein distention (JVD)."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  