 Celeriac that has been washed and peeled can be eaten raw or cooked using different methods.  This article explores the nutritional content of celeriac, its possible health benefits, and how to use it in recipes.  Celeriac has green leaves and stalks that grow above ground, and a root covered in rough, brown skin that grows underground.  The edible part of the celeriac plant is the root. Inside it is pale in color, similar to that of a potato or turnip. Its flavor is similar to celery and parsley.  Celeriac contains multiple nutrients that may offer health benefits, as part of a healthy diet, including:  Celeriac originated in Mediterranean and north European countries. Ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Italians used it for medicinal and religious purposes. Scientists first wrote about it as food in the 1600s, and it remains popular throughout Europe.  While celery is grown for its edible leaves and stalks, celeriac is grown for its roots. Celeriac is sometimes called celery root, but it is not the root of celery stalks.  Other names for celeriac are knob celery and turnip-rooted celery, and it is the same family as carrots and related to celery, parsley, and parsnips.  Vitamin K intake may impact bone health. Celeriac is high in vitamin K with a 1 cup of raw celeriac containing  64 micrograms (mcg) .  Researchers  reviewed studies  that looked at the relationship between vitamin K and  bone fractures . They found that people with higher dietary vitamin K intake had a lower risk of fractures.  Specifically, they noted that risk of fracture reduced by 22 percent in people with the highest vitamin K intake compared with those with the lowest.   Diabetes  affects millions of people around the world. A healthful diet may lower the risk for  type 2 diabetes .  In one  large study  in Europe, scientists examined the association between fruit and vegetable intake, including root vegetables, and risk for type 2 diabetes.  They found that people who ate the most root vegetables had a 13 percent lower risk of developing type 2 diabetes than those who consumed the least amounts.  Eating the root of the celeriac plant is one way to increase intake of root vegetables.  In  one study , scientists looked at the association between plasma ascorbic acid, a marker of vitamin C in the blood, and risk for  high blood pressure . They found that people with higher blood levels of ascorbic acid had a lower risk of developing high blood pressure.  Consuming foods that are high in vitamin C, such as celeriac, could help lower the risk for high blood pressure by improving ascorbic acid levels.  According to the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)  National Nutrient Database , 1 cup of raw celeriac provides:  Celeriac is a concentrated source of many nutrients. A 1-cup serving of raw celeriac provides the following  daily value (DV)  percentages:  Celeriac is high in vitamins C and K, providing 21 and 80 percent of the DV for those nutrients, respectively.  Celeriac is a versatile vegetable that can be eaten raw or cooked.  Raw celeriac is commonly used in salads. It may be best known for its use in a French dish called celerie remoulade.  Cooked celeriac can be prepared by baking, boiling, frying, or steaming. It can also be mashed and served as a side dish, or chopped and added to soups.  See below for a few celeriac recipes:  If celeriac is not available, celery and parsley root can be switched for a similar flavor in soups. For mashing or roasting, parsnips or potatoes could be used in place of celeriac.  Often, celeriac and potatoes are prepared using similar methods, or they can be substituted for one another in recipes. Celeriac can also be used as an alternative to potatoes for people trying to lower their calorie or carbohydrate intake.  According to the  USDA National Nutrient Database , one cup of boiled celeriac pieces provides 42 kcal and 9.14 g of carbohydrate. The same amount of boiled potatoes  provides  134 kcal and 31.22 g of carbohydrate.    
 A food labeling guide: Guidance for industry. (2013, January).  A food labeling guide: Guidance for industry. (2013, January).  Basic report: 11141, celeriac, raw. (2016, May).  Basic report: 11142, celeriac, cooked, boiled, drained, without salt. (2016, May).  Basic report: 11367, potatoes, boiled, cooked without skin, flesh, without salt. (2016, May).  Buijsse, B., Jacobs, Jr, D. R., Steffen, L. M., Kromhout, D., &amp; Gross, M. D. (2015, December 18). Plasma ascorbic acid,  A priori  diet quality score, and incident hypertension: A prospective cohort study.  PLoS One ,  10 (12), e0144920.  Celeriac. (2015, October).  Cooper, A. J., Forouhi, N. G., Ye, Z., Buijsse, B., Arriola, L., Balkau, B., … Wareham, N. J. (2012, August 1). Fruit and vegetable intake and type 2 diabetes: EPIC-InterAct prospective study and meta-analysis.  European Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  66 (10), 1082–1092.  Hao, G., Zhang, B., Gu, M., Chen, C., Zhang, Q., Zhang, G., … Cao, X. (2017, April 28). Vitamin K intake and the risk of fractures: A meta-analysis.  Medicine ,  96 (17), e6725.  Manning, J., Brainard, D., &amp; Heilig, G. (2016, May 20). How to grow celery.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Ware, Megan. "What are the health benefits of celeriac?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320374.php&gt;    APA  Ware, M. (2017, December 21). "What are the health benefits of celeriac?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  