 Products that claim to detox the liver might even be dangerous, and the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not regulate them.  In this article, we look at how liver cleanses claim to work and what evidence exists to support them.  The liver is the body's natural detoxifier, as it cleanses the body of toxins and produces bile to support healthy digestion. A healthy liver can detoxify almost everything that a person encounters. The liver is on the right side of the body, just under the rib cage,  When the liver is diseased, the body cannot filter out toxic substances as efficiently. This can cause a wide range of symptoms, including:  A variety of natural health practitioners, supplement companies, and medical websites argue that the liver accumulates toxins during the filtering process.  They insist that over time, these toxins can cause a range of nonspecific symptoms and may even cause serious diseases or increase the risk of  cancer . There is little evidence to support this.  Over time, however, exposure to chemicals can damage the liver. For example, drinking alcohol is a well-known way to ruin liver function over time.  In most cases, a liver detox involves one or more of the following:  While liver failure is a serious health problem, there is no evidence that dangerous toxins accumulate in otherwise healthy livers without specific exposure to large amounts of these chemicals.  Mainstream medical practitioners argue that the liver does not need detoxing and that doing so  might even be dangerous .  A healthy liver naturally cleanses itself. An unhealthy liver will not get better with a liver cleanse. A person with liver disease needs proper medical treatment and  may require  lifestyle or dietary changes.   Some evidence  suggests that supplements, such as milk thistle, may improve liver health. However, there is no evidence that these supplements will detox the liver, or that they can cure any liver condition.  Liver cleanses also pose some health risks:  Some liver cleanses promise to aid weight loss by improving a person's metabolism. Supporters believe that flushing the liver of toxins can improve metabolism, but there is no evidence to support this claim.  In fact, very low-calorie diets can  slow the body's metabolism . This is because the body adjusts to the low nutrient intake by absorbing nutrients more slowly.  Some diets that claim to improve liver health require people to consume few  calories  for several days. This can result in temporary weight loss.  Much of the weight loss, however, is water weight, which will return once a person begins to eat normally again.  While it is not possible to cleanse the liver with any specific food or combination of foods, doctors may recommend dietary changes to people with liver disease.   For most people , avoiding very fatty foods and alcohol can reduce the risk of liver disease.  Doctors may offer dietary recommendations to people with specific liver diseases:  People with healthy livers do not need to adopt specific diets. Simply eating a balanced, whole food, varied diet and limiting alcohol intake will help preserve liver health.  Some simple strategies that can reduce the risk of liver disease and help the liver rid the body of toxins include:  A healthy liver is crucial for maintaining a person's overall health, but expensive cleanses or diets are just not necessary. In some cases, they may even be dangerous.  A healthy lifestyle, balanced diet, and regular consultations with a doctor are far more valuable to the health of the liver than any fad diet or cleanse.  Liver cleanses offer no proven benefits. To protect liver health, people can adopt a more comprehensive, long-term health strategy.    
 Albassam, A. A., Frye, R. F., &amp; Markowitz, J. S. (2017, June 1). The effect of milk thistle ( Silybum marianum ) and its main flavonolignans on CYP2C8 enzyme activity in human liver microsomes [Abstract].  Chemico-Biological Interactions ,  271 , 24–29.  Albassam, A. A., Frye, R. F., &amp; Markowitz, J. S. (2017, June 1). The effect of milk thistle ( Silybum marianum ) and its main flavonolignans on CYP2C8 enzyme activity in human liver microsomes [Abstract].  Chemico-Biological Interactions ,  271 , 24–29.  Detoxing your liver: Fact versus fiction. (n.d.).  Gavura, S. (2013, July 11). Ask the (science-based) pharmacist: What are the benefits of coffee enemas?  Liver disease diets. (n.d.).  The dubious practice of detox. (2008, May).  Symptoms of liver failure. (n.d.).  Your liver. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Do liver cleanses work? Evidence and risks."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320371.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2017, December 21). "Do liver cleanses work? Evidence and risks."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  