 Both procedures target hair follicles under the surface of the skin to curb or prevent their growth. Although electrolysis is the only hair removal method endorsed by the  U. S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  for permanent hair removal, and according to the  American Society for Dermatologic Surgery , laser hair removal is currently the more popular option in the United States.  Keep reading to discover the advantages and disadvantages of each procedure.  Laser hair removal uses a laser to damage hair follicles sufficiently to reduce hair growth.  It will permanently diminish hair growth, but does not eliminate unwanted hair forever — eventually, the hair will grow back.   What does the procedure involve?   Before the procedure, the technician performing the laser surgery will trim the hair that is being treated close to the skin.  The technician will then adjust the laser's settings based on the color and thickness of the hair being removed, as well as the area being treated. Preparations will likely also take into account the color of the person's skin.  The technician will then apply a cold gel to the skin to protect it. Some people may be given a topical anesthetic to minimize discomfort. Anyone having their hair removed with a laser will need to wear eye protection during the treatment.   Aftercare   After the procedure, it may be necessary to apply ice packs to alleviate discomfort. For severe pain, a doctor may recommend over-the-counter pain relievers or a steroid cream.  Most people will require up to 8 follow-up treatments to get the best results, which can be scheduled 4 to 6 weeks apart. Once hair growth has been sufficiently restrained, a person may require a once-or twice-yearly maintenance session.  Some of the benefits of laser hair removal include:  Laser hair removal is not suitable for everyone, and there are some risks involved. Its main disadvantages include:  People should use a fully trained, certified laser technician working under the direction of a board-certified healthcare provider to reduce the risk of severe and long-lasting side effects following laser hair removal.  Insurance companies consider laser hair removal to be a cosmetic procedure, and so they do not cover it.  Costs vary according to the area of the body being treated and the number of sessions required but can cost $200 to $400 per visit. Prices also vary depending on the geographic location of the laser treatment center.  It is also necessary to factor in the price of the yearly maintenance procedures when calculating the total cost of this treatment.  At-home therapies or salon treatments, although significantly cheaper, carry more significant risks.  Electrolysis involves passing an electrical current through a hair follicle, which damages the follicle and prevents new hair growth.  Electrolysis is the only method of permanent hair removal available. To ensure efficacy and safety, a licensed, board-certified dermatologist or electrologist should carry out the procedure.   What does the procedure involve?   Before the procedure, a person will typically have a consultation with an electrologist to discuss their health and medical history.  The procedure itself involves the technician placing an ultra-thin needle into the targeted hair follicle. An electric current passes through the probe, killing the hair root.   Aftercare   Very little aftercare is necessary. Although the skin may feel irritated and appear slightly red, these symptoms tend to resolve within a few hours.  For permanent hair removal, a person will need several treatments. This is because the skin has multiple follicles for each hair, so dormant follicles may begin to grow hair between sessions. Follow-up sessions treat these newly active follicles.  The majority of people will require follow-up sessions  every week or every other week  for several weeks to eliminate hair on the target area.  Electrolysis has the following advantages:  Although there are many benefits to electrolysis, there are some risks and drawbacks to consider:  Most insurance will not cover electrolysis hair removal. However, depending on the area and the type of hair being treated, it can work out less expensive than laser hair removal.  For example, a 30-minute session targeting a small area can cost as little as $45.  People should keep in mind that they might require more sessions than they would with laser treatment.  Both laser hair removal and electrolysis treatments provide a long-term solution to unwanted hair growth.  All things considered, despite being a slower method of hair removal, electrolysis is more versatile, and permanently removes hair. It also typically causes fewer adverse reactions.  Those considering long-term hair removal treatments should speak with a skincare specialist about the best options for their needs.    
 ASDS: Laser hair removal popularity on the rise. (n.d.).  ASDS: Laser hair removal popularity on the rise. (n.d.).  Electrolysis. (2012, December 10).  Removing hair safely. (2017, November 29).  What is electrolysis?  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What you should know about laser hair removal versus electrolysis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320329.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2017, December 16). "What you should know about laser hair removal versus electrolysis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  