 Agitated  depression  is not a medical term, but some people use it to describe this combination of  anxiety  and depression.  Mixed depression, or major depressive disorder with  mixed features , is another way to describe depression that also involves agitation and physical restlessness.  A  study  from 2004 found that out of 434 people with major depressive disorder or  bipolar disorder  (which can also involve depression), 34.7% had symptoms of agitation.  Agitation can occur with major depression, bipolar disorder, and  schizophrenia .  In this article, learn more about agitation, how it affects a person, and what to do if it occurs.  The  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition  (DSM-5) lists  criteria  to help a doctor diagnose various  mental health  conditions.  For a diagnosis of depression, a person needs to have experienced low mood or loss of interest or pleasure in life for at least 2 weeks.  Also, they will have experienced at least five of the following symptoms:  Agitation can be one sign of depression. What others might occur?  Learn more here.   Symptoms of agitation  include :  Symptoms can appear suddenly or over time. They can also range from a nagging sense of unease to aggression.  If agitation leads to impulsive or aggressive behavior, it could result in harm to the person or to others.  Frequent agitation can affect a person's:  Agitation is not a condition, but it may be a symptom of depression or another mental health condition, such as bipolar disorder or schizophrenia.  Causes of depression may  include  biological, genetic, environmental, and psychological factors.  Aside from depression and other mental health conditions,  other causes  of agitation may include:  Some medical conditions also increase the risk of agitation, such as:  People with some of these conditions, such as dementia and substance use, may also have depression and anxiety.  Very often, the individual, their doctor, and the people around them  do not know  exactly why agitation develops.  Agitation often occurs alongside depression, but it can also be a feature of bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, dementia, and other conditions — some of which can also involve depression.  Agitation  can also occur  with substance abuse disorder,  personality disorder ,  autism , and other conditions.  A 2018  study  looked at data for 583 people with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder who also experienced agitation.  Of these people, over half reported feeling:  People also reported feeling:  In fewer than 20% of cases, people said they had felt:  Less commonly, they reported feeling aggressive or violent.  Symptoms ranged from mild to severe. Around half of the participants said they had visited a hospital in the previous year due to agitation.  In total, 71% were aware when they were becoming agitated, and 61% knew what their triggers were. Most said that they knew what to do to control their agitation, but around 16% felt that there was nothing they could do.  Bipolar disorder has many features, but one of the key symptoms is mood changes. Agitation, or agitated depression,  may have links  with this condition.  Bipolar disorder can involve fluctuations between a low and high mood, but  mixed states  are also possible. Some people experience hypomania, a high mood that is less extreme than mania.  Agitation is a common feature of hypomania.  Schizophrenia involves disorganized thinking, agitated movements, delusions, and in some cases, hallucinations.  Agitation can also be a feature of schizophrenia. It is often related to symptoms of the condition, such as disturbing auditory hallucinations.  Learn more about the  symptoms of schizophrenia here .  If agitation is making daily life difficult, or if a person is at risk of harming themselves or someone else, they should see a doctor.  A loved one may need to help them understand how this will help.  A doctor will ask a person to describe the symptoms they are experiencing, asking questions such as:  Sometimes, a loved one can help by describing the changes or behaviors they have observed in the other person.  Criteria from the DSM-5 can help a doctor diagnose depression or another mental health condition, but they do not address agitation or agitated depression.  A variety of approaches can help a person with agitated depression. We discuss these in more detail in the sections below:  Medications may help calm a person quickly.  Examples include:  These medications work quickly to help a person feel more calm. They can provide temporary relief.  Doctors may prescribe a variety of drugs to relieve depression, including  antidepressants .  If these medications do not help, a doctor may change the drug or add another one. They may prescribe an anti-anxiety medication or a mood stabilizer, depending on the diagnosis.  Antidepressants can take  2–4 weeks  to start working. A person may need to continue taking them for 6–12 months.  A qualified and experienced counselor can help a person identify thoughts and feelings that can signal the start of agitation or depressive symptoms.  Therapy can help a person focus on thoughts and behaviors that can help them feel better when they experience agitated depression.  The following tips can help some people when they start to experience agitation:  Tips for relieving  stress , anxiety, and depression include:  There is no one single way to relieve agitated depression, as each person's situation will be different. A doctor will likely recommend a variety of approaches, including medication and counseling.  Sometimes, it can take time to find the right combination of medications, therapy, and stress relieving techniques that will help.  A person should persevere with their treatment plan as much as possible, and they should speak to a doctor if they feel that, after giving it a good try, is it not working.  Agitation can occur alongside depression and various other mental health conditions. There is no cure, but suitable treatment can help improve a person's quality of life.  Anyone who experiences thoughts of suicide or is at risk of harming themselves or others should receive emergency medical attention.  A medical professional can help identify ways to help a person feel calm and reduce the risk of harm.   My best friend has bipolar disorder and often experiences agitation. They stopped taking medication, as they felt it did not suit them. Sometimes, it makes me feel angry or afraid when the tension starts rising. What can I do to help both of us?   My best friend has bipolar disorder and often experiences agitation. They stopped taking medication, as they felt it did not suit them. Sometimes, it makes me feel angry or afraid when the tension starts rising. What can I do to help both of us?   This can be a serious challenge, and although there is no “one-size-fits-all” approach, communication is key. First, wait until your friend is not agitated and their symptoms are stable. During these times, discuss your concerns with them and describe how you feel when they stop taking their medications and their symptoms of agitation start to return. 
 Being honest with your friend is important. Remind them that if they do not like the way medications make them feel, they should discuss this with their prescriber. Discuss how you have noticed their behavioral changes when they stop taking medication. 
 If, after all else, you continue to feel afraid, you need to take care of yourself and be certain that you are not in harm’s way. This may include limiting your contact with your friend during these times, or if things get worse, dissolving the friendship entirely in order to stay safe.   This can be a serious challenge, and although there is no “one-size-fits-all” approach, communication is key. First, wait until your friend is not agitated and their symptoms are stable. During these times, discuss your concerns with them and describe how you feel when they stop taking their medications and their symptoms of agitation start to return.  Being honest with your friend is important. Remind them that if they do not like the way medications make them feel, they should discuss this with their prescriber. Discuss how you have noticed their behavioral changes when they stop taking medication.  If, after all else, you continue to feel afraid, you need to take care of yourself and be certain that you are not in harm’s way. This may include limiting your contact with your friend during these times, or if things get worse, dissolving the friendship entirely in order to stay safe.   Article last updated by Yvette Brazier on Tue 20 August 2019.  Visit our  Depression  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Depression.   
 Benazzi, F. (2004). Agitated depression: A valid depression subtype?  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0278584604001460  
 Depression. (2018).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml  
 DSM-IV to DSM-5 major depressive episode/disorder comparison. (2016).  DSM-5 changes: Implications for child serious emotional disturbance  [Internet].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK519712/table/ch3.t5/  
 Roberts, J.,  et al.  (2018). Characterizing the experience of agitation in patients with bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.  https://bmcpsychiatry.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12888-018-1673-3  
 San, L.,  et al.  (2016). State of acute agitation at psychiatric emergencies in Europe: The STAGE study.  https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/570c/477c422ef818f4bcd9e2c8fdc5ef7b3873bd.pdf  
 Siddiqui, W., &amp; Huecker, M. R. (2019). Agitation.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK493153/  
 Understanding agitation. (2019).  https://www.dbsalliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/agitation.pdf  
 Verdolini, N.,  et al.  (2015). The state of the art of the DSM-5 “with mixed features” specifier.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4562096/     Benazzi, F. (2004). Agitated depression: A valid depression subtype?  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0278584604001460   Depression. (2018).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml   DSM-IV to DSM-5 major depressive episode/disorder comparison. (2016).  DSM-5 changes: Implications for child serious emotional disturbance  [Internet].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK519712/table/ch3.t5/   Roberts, J.,  et al.  (2018). Characterizing the experience of agitation in patients with bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.  https://bmcpsychiatry.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12888-018-1673-3   San, L.,  et al.  (2016). State of acute agitation at psychiatric emergencies in Europe: The STAGE study.  https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/570c/477c422ef818f4bcd9e2c8fdc5ef7b3873bd.pdf   Siddiqui, W., &amp; Huecker, M. R. (2019). Agitation.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK493153/   Understanding agitation. (2019).  https://www.dbsalliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/agitation.pdf   Verdolini, N.,  et al.  (2015). The state of the art of the DSM-5 “with mixed features” specifier.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4562096/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "All you need to know about agitated depression."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320370.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2019, August 20). "All you need to know about agitated depression."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  