 The facet joints, which are located along the back of the spine, keep special bones called vertebrae together and allow for a range of motion in the spine.  Facet arthropathy occurs when the facet joints degenerate or become worn down. In particular, the protective cushion between the facet joints that are made up of cartilage and fluid may become thinner or damaged through wear and tear.  As a result, the bones in the joints may rub together or not move as they should, which causes pain, swelling, and stiffness.  And though there is no cure, treatment for pain and stiffness can significantly improve quality of life.  Facet arthropathy is thought to be a  common cause  of back or neck pain in older adults.  Facet arthropathy happens when the cartilage between the facet joints breaks down or gets damaged. This may be caused by:  Pain is the most common symptom of facet arthropathy. People with facet arthropathy may experience:  It can be difficult to know whether back pain is caused by facet arthropathy or something else.  Other problems, such as back muscle injuries, sprains, or disc problems can cause similar symptoms, and the pain can vary greatly from person to person.  There is no single, obvious cause for facet arthropathy. Risk factors may exist, but they vary depending on which area of the back is affected.  The top of the spine contains the vertebrae of the neck and is known as the cervical area of the spine. Facet arthropathy that affects this area does not appear to have obvious risk factors.  In fact,  one review  states that studies show no link between cervical facet arthropathy and gender, age,  body weight , or physical activity.  However, no studies have looked at whether strenuous activities, such as lifting, pulling, or carrying, might cause cervical facet arthropathy.  The lumbar area of the spine is located in the small of the back, where the spine curves in. This area is designed to support much of the body's weight. The vertebrae in this area are bigger and wider than other vertebrae in the spine.  Facet arthropathy that affects the lumbar area may have several risk factors, though more research is needed to confirm them.  Possible risk factors include:  Some people may be prone to developing facet arthropathy due to their genetics or have a family history of the condition. Heredity may play a role in the breakdown or degeneration of discs in the back, which can lead to facet arthropathy.  Other forms of osteoarthritis may occur alongside facet arthropathy. These other types of osteoarthritis, which may affect the hip and knee, are linked to genetics. It is possible that facet arthropathy also carries this risk factor.  A doctor can make a diagnosis of facet arthropathy using imaging tests. These tests look at the bones and joints in the spine to identify damage to the facet joints.  To diagnose facet arthropathy, a medical professional may use one or more of the following:  The results of these tests can reveal which facet joints are damaged, if any, as well as the severity of the damage.  Treatment for facet arthropathy focusses on relieving pain and stiffness and helping a person stay as active as possible.  Treatment may include:  Although it is not always possible to prevent facet arthropathy, there are steps a person can take to reduce their risk of developing it. These include:  Unfortunately, the facet joints cannot heal once they become damaged. This does not mean, however, that there is no chance for relief.  Many treatment options exist to help manage the pain of facet arthropathy, including medications and  physical therapy .  Working with a healthcare professional and following an individualized treatment plan can increase the chance of leading a healthier, more active life.    
 Gellhorn, A. C., Katz, J. N., &amp; Suri, P. (2013, November 13). Osteoarthritis of the spine: The facet joints.  Nature Reviews. Rheumatology ,  9 (4), 216–224.  Gellhorn, A. C., Katz, J. N., &amp; Suri, P. (2013, November 13). Osteoarthritis of the spine: The facet joints.  Nature Reviews. Rheumatology ,  9 (4), 216–224.  Loh, J. T., Nicol, A. L., Elashoff, D., &amp; Ferrante, F. M. (2015, October 7). Efficacy of needle-placement technique in radiofrequency ablation for treatment of lumbar facet arthropathy.  Journal of Pain Research ,  8 , 687–694.  Manchikanti, L., Nampiaparampil, D. E., Manchikanti, K. N., Falco, F. J. E., Singh, V., Benyamin, R. M., … Hirsch, J. A. (2015, May 7). Comparison of the efficacy of saline, local anesthetics, and steroids in epidural and facet joint injections for the management of spinal pain: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials.  Surgical Neurology International ,  6 (Suppl 4), S194–S235.  Suri, P., Miyakoshi, A., Hunter, D. J., Jarvik, J. G., Rainville, J., Guermazi, A., … Katz, J. N. (2011, September 13). Does lumbar spinal degeneration begin with the anterior structures? A study of the observed epidemiology in a community-based population.  BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders ,  12 , 202.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "What is facet arthropathy?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320355.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2017, December 19). "What is facet arthropathy?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  