 The  hepatitis C  (HCV) window period is typically  6 to 9 weeks  from the moment the person became infected. During this time, a hepatitis C antibody test may bring up a negative result.  In this article, we look at how the window period can affect the diagnosis of HCV, and when people should consider getting tested.  When a person is exposed to HCV, it takes time for the body to recognize it as a virus and begin developing antibodies to fight the infection.  Antibodies are chemicals released by the body in response to an infection. The body begins to release antibodies after the virus particles called HCV RNA are detectable.  If testing is done too soon, during the window period, an early negative result may occur. As a result, testing may need to be repeated in some people.  Those with an HCV infection will be contagious even if they have yet to develop symptoms. If someone believes that they might have contracted the virus, they should speak to a doctor to determine the need and timing for testing.  The HCV virus is transmitted through contact with the blood of an infected person. It can be  spread through :  It is important to point out that the HCV virus cannot be spread through breast milk, food, water, hugging, kissing, or sharing food or drinks with a person who has the virus.  Some people are at a higher risk for getting hepatitis C and should be tested for the disease. These people include:  If a person suspects or is told that they have been exposed to someone with HCV, they should speak to their doctor about testing.  People who have been in prison or have tattoos and piercings may require HCV testing, depending on the circumstances.  While there are rapid antibody tests available to some people, doctors will typically test a person with a blood test called a hepatitis C antibody test.  The hepatitis C antibody test is used to see if a person has made any antibodies to HCV. If they have, it shows that they have been infected at some point in their lives.  If a person has what is called a non-reactive or negative test result, the person will not appear to have HCV. However, if the test is given during the window period, the result could be inaccurate.  When a person has been exposed to HCV within the previous 6 weeks, re-testing might be recommended.  A reactive or positive result tell a doctor that someone has been infected with the HCV at some point in their lives. The result indicates that their body has created antibodies to fight the virus.  It is important to know that this only means that someone has been infected at some point in time and not that a person still has active HCV. If the infection is present the person may have been cured or got rid of the virus, but they will always have the antibodies.  More tests, such as a nucleic acid test for HCV ribonucleic acid (RNA), will show if an HCV infection is still present. This test measures the amount of the virus in the blood.  Further testing, such as blood tests and a liver biopsy, may be needed to determine the health of a person's liver.  There are six strains of HCV, and each one responds to treatment differently. Testing may be recommended to work out which strain a person has and to help doctors determine the best treatment options.  Although many people affected with HCV do not show symptoms, some may experience the following after an initial infection:  Many people who have been infected with HCV and have a long-term infection may not show symptoms until liver damage occurs.  The time between exposure to the virus and the first appearance of symptoms is known as the incubation period. For hepatitis C, incubation ranges from  2 weeks to 6 months . On average, however, symptoms occur after around 6 to 7 weeks.  Prevention of HCV includes avoiding doing things that may place a person at higher risk of being infected. To reduce the risk of HCV infection, people should:  Some people who are infected with HCV spontaneously clear the infection from their system without treatment.  Acute HCV infections typically occur within the first 6 months after exposure and lead to a chronic form of the disease. Of those who are exposed to the virus,  15 to 45 percent  will clear the virus without treatment within 6 months.  For others, treatment is needed. Chronic HCV infections remain in a person's body for a long time. Many infections are lifelong and can lead to significant liver damage, including  liver cancer .  Around  60 to 80 percent  of those affected by HCV will develop a chronic HCV infection that increases their risk of liver damage.  Currently, there are no hepatitis C vaccinations. However, there are new medications approved by the  United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  that can offer advanced treatment options.    
 Hepatitis C [Fact sheet]. (2017, October).  Hepatitis C [Fact sheet]. (2017, October).  Hepatitis C and baby boomers (1945–1965). (2015, January 27).  Hepatitis C: An in-depth guide. (2016).  Hepatitis C FAQs for the public. (2016, October 17).  Hepatitis C treatments give patients more options. (2017, December 5).  How long does it take to test positive? Hepatitis C. (n.d.).  Management of acute HCV infection. (2017, September 21).  Testing recommendations for hepatitis C virus infection. (2015, October 15).  The ABCs of hepatitis. (2016).  Viral hepatitis. (2015, May 31).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Smith, Lori. "When to get tested for hepatitis C after exposure."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320375.php&gt;    APA  Smith, L. (2017, December 21). "When to get tested for hepatitis C after exposure."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  