 Shilajit was traditionally sourced in India and Tibet, though it is now found in many other countries.  Shilajit has been used in traditional Indian Ayurvedic medicine for centuries, and the compounds in it appear to be beneficial for many conditions. In this article, learn about the benefits and possible side effects of this naturally-occurring substance.  When it is used correctly, shilajit may have several benefits for the body. This may be due in part to the high concentration of fulvic and humic acids, as well as many minerals.  The numerous compounds found in shilajit may be helpful for brain function, and may even aid Alzheimer's therapy.  A study in the   International Journal of Alzheimer's Disease   noted that shilajit is traditionally used for longevity and to slow aging. The compounds in it may help control cognitive disorders, such as Alzheimer's.  Researchers expect shilajit to have an impact in preventing cognitive disorders, but more research is needed to explore these possibilities.   One study  noted that fulvic acid, one of the key compounds in shilajit, acts as an  antioxidant  and anti-inflammatory compound. As such, it may help reduce free radicals and cellular damage in the body, which are two key factors in aging.  Daily supplementation of shilajit may contribute to overall vitality and a slower aging process in some people.   Anemia  develops when the blood does not have enough healthy cells or hemoglobin. There are many causes of anemia, including iron deficiency.  Iron deficiency anemia can cause numerous symptoms in the body, including:  Shilajit contains high levels of humic acid and iron, which may be helpful in treating iron deficiency anemia. It is important to explore this option with a doctor before taking supplements, however.  The wide range of minerals and compounds found in shilajit may also help fight off viruses. A  research study noted  that shilajit could fight off and kill many different viruses in isolated environments, including some  herpes  viruses.  Researchers commented that while it does appear to be effective, more studies carried out with live subjects are needed to back up these claims.  A 2012 study published in the   Journal of Ethnopharmacology   found that shilajit helped reduce symptoms of  chronic fatigue syndrome  in test subjects.  Researchers noted that shilajit might help improve cell functions in the body, which means it may reduce fatigue at the source of the problem and increase energy levels naturally.  One of the claims made by traditional practitioners is that shilajit can help alleviate altitude sickness. The changes in pressure at high altitudes can greatly affect some people. Symptoms of altitude sickness range from body pain and fatigue to lung congestion and low oxygen in the brain.  Shilajit is a complex substance that contains more than 80 different minerals, as well as fulvic acid and humic acid. Because of this broad spectrum of beneficial components, shilajit is thought to help reduce many symptoms of altitude sickness.  It may help improve the brain's cognitive processes, boost the immune system, and reduce  inflammation , all of which could lessen altitude sickness.  Shilajit also shows promise in fighting against certain types of  cancer  cells.  One study  found that shilajit helped force the destruction of cancerous cells in the liver.  It also stopped these cancer cells from multiplying. Researchers noted that their results show that shilajit has an anti-cancer effect, but more studies are needed.  Shilajit may also protect the heart and improve heart health.  A recent study  using rats noted the protective effects shilajit has on the heart.  Animals who were treated with shilajit prior to cardiac injury had less damage to the heart than those who were not given shilajit.  It is important to note that shilajit may reduce  blood pressure  in some cases and should not be taken by anyone who has an active heart condition.  Carrying extra weight can tire the muscles and put  stress  on the bones. A study in the   Journal of Medicinal Food   noted that people who were obese who took an oral supplement of purified shilajit responded better to exercise than those who did not.  Researchers noted that the shilajit seemed to activate genes in the body that helped the skeletal muscles quickly adapt to the new workout. This could mean less fatigue and more strength over time.  Shilajit has also been studied to increase male fertility.  One study  gave 60  infertile  men shilajit twice a day for 90 days.  After the test period, almost half of the men who completed the treatment showed an increase in total sperm count and sperm motility, or how many and how well the sperm move towards the egg, both of which are factors in male fertility,   Another study  looked at the ability of shilajit to increase  testosterone  levels in healthy volunteers. Men between 45 and 55 years old were given shilajit for 90 days. At the end of this period, researchers noted significant increases in the levels of total testosterone.  Shilajit is available as a powder or as a supplement that can be dissolved in milk or water.  A person can dissolve a pea-sized portion of shilajit in liquid and drink it up to three times a day, depending on the instructions on the package.  The recommended dose of shilajit is  300 to 500 milligrams per day . However, it is important that a person speaks with a doctor before taking any natural supplements.   Research suggests  that shilajit is safe for long-term use as a dietary supplement. However, there are some potential side effects of using shilajit.  Shilajit may lower blood pressure, which can be dangerous for people on  high blood pressure  medications. People with an active  heart disease  or with a history of  hypotension  should avoid taking shilajit to prevent a drop in blood pressure.  The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not monitor natural supplements, so it is important to get the supplement from a reputable source. Low-quality shilajit may be tainted with heavy metals, free radicals, and even arsenic in some cases.  Shilajit has several health benefits and is a safe and effective supplement when used correctly. It is always best to speak to a doctor about the correct dosage in each case.  Working directly with a doctor can also help a person monitor any potential side effects.    
 Biswas, T. K., Pandit, S., Mondal, S., Biswas, S. K., Jana, U., Ghosh, T., ... Auddy, B. (2010, February). Clinical evaluation of spermatogenic activity of processed Shilajit in oligospermia [Abstract].  Andrologia ,  42 (1), 48–56.  Biswas, T. K., Pandit, S., Mondal, S., Biswas, S. K., Jana, U., Ghosh, T., ... Auddy, B. (2010, February). Clinical evaluation of spermatogenic activity of processed Shilajit in oligospermia [Abstract].  Andrologia ,  42 (1), 48–56.  Cagno, V., Donalisio, M., Civra, A., Cagliero, C., Rubiolo, P., &amp; Lembo, D. (2015, May 26).  In vitro  evaluation of the antiviral properties of Shilajit and investigation of its mechanisms of action.  Journal of Ethnopharmacology ,  166 , 129–134.  Carrasco-Gallardo, C., Guzmán, L., &amp; Maccioni, R. B. (2012, February 23).  Shilajit : A natural phytocomplex with potential procognitive activity.  International Journal of Alzheimer's Disease ,  2012 , 674142.  Das, A., Datta, S., Rhea, B., Sinha, M., Veeraragavan, M., Gordillo, G., &amp; Roy, S. (2016, July 1). The human skeletal muscle transcriptome in response to oral Shilajit supplementation.  Journal of Medicinal Food ,  19 (7), 701–709.  Joukar, S., Najafipour, H., Dabiri, S., Sheibani, M., &amp; Sharokhi, N. (2014, September). Cardioprotective effect of mumie (shilajit) on experimentally induced myocardial injury [Abstract].  Cardiovascular Toxicology ,  14 (3), 214–221.  Khaksari, M., Mahmmodi, R., Shahrokhi, N., Shabani, M., Joukar, S., &amp; Aqapour, M. (2013, July). The effects of shilajit on brain edema, intracranial pressure and neurologic outcomes following the traumatic brain injury in rat.  Iranian Journal of Basic Medical Sciences ,  16 (7), 858–864.  Meena, H., Pandey, H. K., Arya, M. C., &amp; Ahmed, Z. (2010, January–March). Shilajit: A panacea for high-altitude problems.  International Journal of Ayurveda Research ,  1 (1), 37–40.  Pandit, S., Biswas, S., Jana, U., De, R. K., Mukhopadhyay, S. C., &amp; Biswas, T. K. (2016, June). Clinical evaluation of purified Shilajit on testosterone levels in healthy volunteers.  Andrologia ,  48 (5), 570–575.  Pant, K., Gupta, P., Damania, P., Yadav, A. K., Gupta, A., Ashraf, A., … Venugopal, S. K. (2016, May 27). Mineral pitch induces apoptosis and inhibits proliferation via modulating reactive oxygen species in hepatic cancer cells.  BMC Complementary &amp; Alternative Medicine ,  16 (1), 148.  Surapaneni, D. K., Adapa, S. R. S. S., Preeti, K., Teja, G. R., Veeraragavan, M., &amp; Krishnamurthy, S. (2012, August 30). Shilajit attenuates behavioral symptoms of chronic fatigue syndrome by modulating the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis and mitochondrial bioenergetics in rats [Abstract].  Journal of Ethnopharmacology ,  143 (1), 91–99.  Velmurugan, C., Vivek, B., Wilson, E., Bharathi, T., &amp; Sundaram, T. (2012, March). Evaluation of safety profile of black shilajit after 91 days repeated administration in rats.  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  2 (3), 210–214.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Ten benefits of shilajit."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320318.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2017, December 16). "Ten benefits of shilajit."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  