 There are many common digestive problems associated with epigastric pain, as well as a range of other underlying conditions that can cause pain in that area.  Serious cases may be life-threatening, and it is important to work with a doctor to understand the difference between a simple cause of epigastric pain and a more serious underlying condition.  Epigastric pain is a common symptom of an  upset stomach , which can be due to long-term gastrointestinal problems or just the occasional bout of  indigestion .  Indigestion usually occurs after eating. When a person eats something, the stomach produces acid to digest the food. Sometimes, this acid can irritate the lining of the digestive system.  Indigestion can cause symptoms such as:  These symptoms are often felt alongside epigastric pain. While indigestion happens to everyone from time to time, it may be a sign that a person is intolerant of something they have recently eaten.   Acid reflux  occurs when the stomach acid used in digestion gets backed up in the food pipe (esophagus). Acid reflux usually causes pain in the chest and throat, which is commonly known as  heartburn . This feeling may accompany epigastric pain or be felt on its own.  Other common symptoms of acid reflux include:  Ongoing acid reflux can damage the food pipe and may cause gastroesophageal reflux disease, or  GERD . People with GERD experience epigastric pain and symptoms of indigestion frequently and may require treatment and dietary changes to manage the condition.  Some cases of GERD can lead to a condition called Barrett's esophagus, where the tissue of the food pipe starts to look like the tissue in the intestines.  The stomach is very flexible. However, eating more than necessary causes the stomach to expand beyond its normal capacity.  If the stomach expands considerably, it can put pressure on the organs around the stomach and cause epigastric pain. Overeating can also cause indigestion, acid reflux, and heartburn.   Lactose intolerance  can be another cause of epigastric pain. People who are lactose intolerant have trouble breaking down lactose, a sugar found in milk and other dairy products.  For people with lactose intolerance, eating dairy can cause epigastric pain and other symptoms, including:  Moderate drinking is usually not enough to upset the stomach or intestines. However, drinking too much alcohol at once or excess alcohol over long periods of time can cause  inflammation  in the lining of the stomach. This inflammation can lead to epigastric pain and other digestive issues.   Esophagitis  is inflammation of the lining of the food pipe. Gastritis is inflammation of the lining of the stomach. Esophagitis and gastritis can be caused by acid reflux, infections, and irritation from certain medications. Some immune system disorders may also cause inflammation.  If this inflammation is left untreated, it can create scar tissue or bleeding. Other common symptoms include:  A hiatal  hernia  occurs when part of the stomach pushes up through the diaphragm and into the chest. This may be due to an accident or weakened diaphragm muscles.  In addition to epigastric pain, other common symptoms of hiatal hernias include:  Hiatal hernias typically affect older people and may not cause epigastric pain in every case.   Peptic ulcer  disease is when the lining of the stomach or small intestine has been damaged by a bacterial infection or by taking too much of certain medications, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ).  Symptoms of peptic ulcer disease can include epigastric pain and signs of internal bleeding, such as stomach pain,  fatigue , and shortness of breath.  Issues with the gallbladder may also cause epigastric pain.  Gallstones  may be blocking the opening of the gallbladder, or the gallbladder may be inflamed. Specific gallbladder symptoms can include:  It is very common to feel mild epigastric pain during pregnancy. This is commonly caused by acid reflux or pressure on the abdomen from the expanding womb. Changes in hormone levels throughout pregnancy can also aggravate acid reflux and epigastric pain.  Severe or persistent epigastric pain during pregnancy can be a sign of a more serious condition, so a woman should visit her doctor if experiencing any unusual symptoms.  Diagnosing the cause of epigastric pain is essential to ensure proper treatment. A healthcare professional will likely ask a series of questions about the pain and any additional symptoms.  If the cause is unclear, they may order tests, including:  Treating epigastric pain will vary according to the cause. For instance, if overeating frequently causes epigastric pain, a person may wish to eat smaller portions and ensure they are eating filling foods, such as lean proteins. They may also want to avoid foods that cause gas.  Conditions such as GERD, peptic ulcers, and Barrett's esophagus may require long-term treatment to manage symptoms. A person should work with their doctor to find a treatment plan that works for them.  If a doctor thinks that taking certain medications is causing the condition, they may recommend switching to a new drug or reducing the dosage.  Over-the-counter or prescription antacids to help reduce frequent acid reflux and epigastric pain caused by stomach acid may be helpful.  Occasional epigastric pain is not usually a cause for concern, but anyone with severe or persistent epigastric pain should see their doctor.  Symptoms that last more than a few days or that occur more than twice a week on a regular basis would be considered persistent.  A visit to the emergency room may be necessary in some cases. Signs of severe complications that require prompt treatment include:  Many cases of epigastric pain can be treated and prevented by making small changes in the diet or lifestyle. Even chronic symptoms can be managed well with medications and dietary changes.    
 Acid reflux (GER &amp; GERD) in adults. (n.d.).  Acid reflux (GER &amp; GERD) in adults. (n.d.).  Caufield, S. P., &amp; Schafer, T. W. (2012, December). Peptic ulcer disease.  Esophageal cancer - patient version. (n.d.).  Gastritis. (2015, July).  Lactose intolerance. (2014, June).  Mol, B. W. J., Roberts, C. T., Thangaratinam, S., Magee, L. A., de Groot, C. J. M., &amp; Hofmeyr, G. J. (2016, March 5-11). Pre-eclampsia.  The Lancet ,  387 (10022), 999–1011.  Symptoms &amp; causes of Barrett's esophagus. (2017, March).  Symptoms &amp; causes of indigestion. (2016, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Ten causes of epigastric pain."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320317.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2017, December 14). "Ten causes of epigastric pain."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  