  Bursitis  is an  inflammation  of the bursae. The bursae are small, fluid-filled sacs found near joints. They act as a cushion between moving parts in the joint to stop muscles, bones, and tendons from rubbing together.  When a shoulder bursa gets irritated, it becomes inflamed and grows in size. This means there is less space in the shoulder for muscles and tendons to move around, which can cause pain and a loss of movement in the shoulder.  Overuse of the shoulder joint, an injury, or chronic conditions, such as  rheumatoid arthritis , can cause shoulder bursitis.  This article gives key information about symptoms and management of shoulder bursitis.  Key symptoms of shoulder bursitis include:  The pain may become worse at night, especially when lying on the affected shoulder. It may also get worse after the shoulder has been kept still for a while.  Shoulder bursitis is most common in the subacromial bursa. This is a large bursa at the tip of the shoulder. It helps with smooth movement when the arm is lifted above the head.  If the above symptoms are coupled with a  fever , the bursa may be infected. This is called septic bursitis, and a doctor should investigate the situation.  Bursitis of the shoulder is treatable at home or by a doctor. Symptoms are often relieved using the  RICE method : rest, ice, compression, and elevation.  More specifically, the following treatments may help with shoulder bursitis:  Once the pain starts to go away, some gentle strengthening exercises can help speed up recovery. Doing daily exercises can keep the shoulder active without putting too much pressure on the shoulder joint.  Common exercises include:   Shoulder rotation    Door presses    Stick lifts   The  most common cause  of shoulder bursitis is repetitive movement or overuse of the shoulder joint. Physical injury, such as a car crash or fall, can also cause bursitis.  Hobbies that put repeated  stress  on the shoulder, such as baseball, tennis, knitting, and weight training, can cause bursitis. People with manual professions are more prone to bursitis of the shoulder, including athletes, painters, and musicians.  Other medical conditions can cause or make someone more at risk for shoulder bursitis. These include rheumatoid arthritis,  diabetes , and  gout .  When bursitis of the shoulder is caused by a physical injury, it can be treated within a few days.  Recovery time is longer if bursitis is caused by overuse. It may take several weeks or more to heal, especially if the shoulder joint is still being used.  Shoulder bursitis may take longer to heal if other shoulder problems are present, including  tendinitis  or bone problems.  Bursitis can be chronic when it is caused by medical conditions, particularly rheumatoid arthritis.  When diagnosing bursitis of the shoulder, a doctor may ask about risk factors, including medical history, profession, and hobbies.  Diagnostic tests can include:  The key to preventing bursitis of the shoulder is reducing strain on the shoulder joint. The following prevention strategies can help:  Full recovery from shoulder bursitis is very likely. Symptoms usually subside within a few weeks.  Bursitis of the shoulder usually responds well to rest and anti-inflammatory medication. When there is another shoulder problem, such as bone problems or tendinitis, longer-term  physical therapy  may be needed.  Finding the right activity level is key to preventing bursitis and improving the outlook. People should look out for key lifestyle triggers that can cause bursitis to avoid overuse of the shoulder joint.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bursitis. (2017, February 28).  Bursitis. (2017, February 28).  Shoulder bursitis. (n.d.).  Shoulder bursitis exercises. (2014).  Töpke, F. (2014, September). RICE therapy.  What are bursitis and tendinitis [Fact sheet]? (2014, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Smith, Amy. "What is bursitis of the shoulder?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320495.php&gt;    APA  Smith, A. (2018, January 3). "What is bursitis of the shoulder?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  