 Stones can occur anywhere in these areas and can vary significantly in size. Most stones occur due to a buildup of minerals or other substances, such as uric acid, which stick together in the urine, creating a hard mass.  There are many treatment options for urinary stones. Many stones pass without surgical intervention, making managing renal  colic  a primary concern during treatment.  Symptoms of renal colic can vary based on the size of the stone and its location in the urinary tract. Some small stones cause only mild renal colic, and a person may pass them in the urine without much discomfort.  Larger stones can cause excruciating pain, especially if they get stuck and block any small points in the urinary tract, such as where it meets the kidney or urinary bladder, or the ureter — the tube through which the urine passes between the kidney and the bladder.  The most common presentation of renal colic is pain that occurs on the affected side of the body between the lower ribs and hip that radiates to the lower abdomen and groin.  The pain tends to come in waves that can last from  20 to 60 minutes  before subsiding until the next wave.  Renal colic is just one of the symptoms caused by urinary stones. Other symptoms that typically occur alongside renal colic include:  Signs of a related  urinary tract infection  may show up in some cases. These include  fever , chills, and cold sweat. Anybody experiencing any of these symptoms should talk to a doctor.  Anyone experiencing the following symptoms in addition to renal colic should contact emergency medical services immediately:  Renal colic is caused by a stone getting stuck in the urinary tract. This commonly occurs in a ureter, where the stone stretches the surrounding area of tissue while trying to pass through;  inflammation  and pressure from urine flow restriction may also occur.  The ureter may also spasm. This situation is painful, as the ureter is not meant to have stones inside of it.  Urinary stones can be made up of numerous chemicals and minerals caused by a few different risk factors. Risk factors for developing a urinary stone include:  Doctors will often use blood tests to check for increased levels of stone-forming substances in a person's body. An imaging test such as a plain film X-ray, a computed tomography (CT) scan, or  ultrasound  can help locate any significant stones in the urinary tract.  Medical treatment will often depend on the type of stone a person is experiencing. There are some different types of stones, including:  Most small stones are considered passable. In fact,  up to 80 percent  of stones will pass out of the body in the urine. Doctors will recommend proper hydration and may prescribe pain-relieving medications to help deal with the pain while monitoring the stone until it passes.  There is a range of procedures to help remove larger stones and relieve renal colic. These include:  Treatment may also include medications designed to help relieve symptoms or reduce the accumulation of stones. These treatments may include:  Pain management is an essential step in treatment, as it can increase a person's quality of life until the stone passes. While a person is still dealing with symptoms, doctors may also recommend medications to calm the GI tract and manage any nausea and vomiting.  Some people may also respond to placing a heat pack on their side or lower back, as it may calm the muscle spasms associated with renal colic.  Avoiding renal colic starts with preventing the stones that caused it. Doctors may recommend that a person increases their fluid intake and reduces their sodium intake.  A doctor may prescribe a thiazide diuretic if a person has calcium oxalate urinary tract stones. While drinking more fluid may or may not improve renal colic or help flush stones out of the urinary tract, it will at least prevent dehydration.  Many people also benefit from eating a healthful diet rich in a variety of whole grains, vegetables, fruits, and lean proteins. Doctors may also recommend increasing the intake of citrus fruits in the diet, such as oranges, lemons, or grapefruits.  Many stones will pass on their own, but may still result in renal colic. Doctors will often explore the best combination of both medical and surgical treatment options to help break down larger stones and let them pass.  It is possible for stones in the urinary tract to happen again after successful treatment. Taking preventative measures can help avoid developing stones in the future and reduce symptoms of renal colic.    
 Barnela, S. R., Soni, S. S., Saboo, S. S., &amp; Bhansali, A. S. (2012, March–April). Medical management of renal stone.  Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism ,  16 (2), 236–239.  Barnela, S. R., Soni, S. S., Saboo, S. S., &amp; Bhansali, A. S. (2012, March–April). Medical management of renal stone.  Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism ,  16 (2), 236–239.  Bultitude, M., &amp; Rees, J. (2012, August 29). Management of renal colic [Abstract].  BMJ ,  345 , e5499.  Cervellin, G., Comelli, I., Comelli, D., Meschi, T., Lippi, G., &amp; Borghi, L. (2012, March). Mean temperature and humidity variations, along with patient age, predict the number of visits for renal colic in a large urban Emergency Department: Results of a 9-year survey.  Journal of Epidemiology and Global Health ,  2 (1), 31–38.  Dalziel, P. J., &amp; Noble, V. E. (2012). Bedside ultrasound and the assessment of renal colic: A review [Abstract].  Emergency Medicine Journal ,  30 (1), 3–8.  Golzari, S. E. J, Soleimanpour, H., Rahmani, F., Mehr, N. Z., Safari, S., Heshmat, Y., … Bakhtavar, H. E. (2014, February 13). Therapeutic approaches for renal colic in the emergency department: A review article.  Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine ,  4 (1).  Kirschner, J., &amp; Wilbur, L. (2013, July). Do fluids facilitate stone passage in acute ureteral colic?  Annals of Emergency Medicine ,  62 (1), 36–37.  Preminger, G. M., &amp; Glenn, J. F. (n.d.). Stones in the urinary tract.  Semins, M. J., &amp; Matlaga, B. R. (2014, March). Kidney stones during pregnancy.  Nature Reviews Urology ,  11 , 163–168.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "What is renal colic? Symptoms and relief."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320421.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2017, December 25). "What is renal colic? Symptoms and relief."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  