 Symptoms of dumping syndrome include cramps,  diarrhea , and nausea after eating, particularly after eating high-sugar foods.  Dumping syndrome can be treated through dietary and lifestyle changes. More severe cases may require medication or surgery.  Read on to learn more about the symptoms and causes of dumping syndrome, and the available treatment options.  There are  two phases  of dumping syndrome:  According to the  National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases , approximately 75 percent of people with dumping syndrome experience early dumping syndrome, and around 25 percent experience late dumping syndrome. Some people experience both phases.  Dumping syndrome symptoms vary depending on the individual and the phase of the condition.  Symptoms are quick to come on after eating, especially if the meal was high in sugar. People with early dumping syndrome may experience:  Occurring within 3 hours of meals, late dumping syndrome can cause low blood sugar, which may lead to the following symptoms:  Some people may experience  symptoms of both  early and late dumping syndrome.  In healthy individuals, food moves from the stomach into the intestines over the course of several hours. With dumping syndrome, however, food particles are not stored in the stomach for long enough and are emptied into the duodenum too quickly.  Early dumping syndrome is caused by the sudden arrival of a large amount of food in the stomach. This leads to the rapid movement of fluid into the intestine, which causes discomfort, bloating, and diarrhea.  Late dumping syndrome results from the body releasing a large amount of  insulin . Insulin is a hormone that helps the body absorb the sugars released from food. An increased level of insulin in the bloodstream leads to low blood sugar.  The most common cause of dumping syndrome is surgery, with the condition arising in at least  15 percent  of people who have part of their stomach removed.  The following types of surgery increase the risk of dumping syndrome:  Some people may not develop dumping syndrome until years after surgery.  To diagnose dumping syndrome, a doctor may carry out some or all of the following:  Lifestyle and dietary changes can be used to ease the symptoms of dumping syndrome and are often very effective.  More severe cases that are not improved with lifestyle and dietary changes may require medications or surgery.  The following may help relieve symptoms of dumping syndrome:  As dumping syndrome can affect nutrient absorption, nutritional supplements may be beneficial. However, it is advisable to discuss this with a doctor first.  If dietary changes do not improve symptoms, a doctor may prescribe an octreotide injection. This is an anti-diarrheal drug that slows the rate at which food empties into the small intestine. It can also prevent the release of insulin to reduce the risk of low blood sugar levels.  Adverse reactions to this drug include nausea and vomiting.  If dumping syndrome does not respond to other treatments, or if it is caused by previous surgery, a doctor may suggest surgery as a treatment.  There are several surgical procedures that can treat the condition. The type that is required usually depends on the initial gastric surgery performed.  However, the  National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases  warn that corrective surgery for dumping syndrome is often unsuccessful.  Dumping syndrome is a common complication of gastric surgeries. Other complications that may arise with dumping syndrome, and as a result of surgery, include:  It is important to contact a doctor if:  Many people with early dumping syndrome recover within a few months, especially if they make changes to their lifestyle and dietary habits.  In some cases, medicine or surgery may be necessary to relieve dumping syndrome.    
		Dumping syndrome. (2013, September).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What you should know about dumping syndrome?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320479.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2017, December 30). "What you should know about dumping syndrome?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  