 Tonsil  cancer  is part of a group of cancers that originate in the mouth and throat. These are known as oral and oropharyngeal cancers and are often grouped under head and neck cancers.  The tonsils are part of the immune system. They defend the body against bacteria and viruses that enter the mouth or throat.  If cancer is found at an early stage, there are usually more options available to treat it. This increases the chance of successful treatment and recovery.  Tonsil cancer begins with cancerous cells or a  tumor  in the tonsils. It can still affect people who have had their tonsils removed, as some tissue is often left behind after surgery.  People who drink alcohol, smoke, or have  human papillomavirus  (HPV) have a greater risk of developing tonsil cancer.  The tonsils are found towards the back of the throat, one on either side. Each tonsil is made up of a collection of lymphoid tissue. This is tissue containing lymphocytes, which are cells that fight off disease.  Tonsils catch and destroy bacteria and viruses. They can change in size and often swell with blood to help trap germs, such as when someone has a cold.  Many of the symptoms of tonsil cancer can be caused by other illnesses or medical problems, such as  strep throat  or  tonsillitis .  Listed below are some of the symptoms that may indicate tonsil cancer:  A person should see a doctor if any of these symptoms last for more than 2 weeks.  There is no definitive cause of tonsil cancer, but a person's age, genetics, and many environmental factors can influence whether cancer develops.  Risk factors for tonsil cancer include:  When someone smokes a cigarette or drinks alcohol, the substance enters the mouth first. Tobacco and alcohol can harm the DNA or genetic coding in cells, and this damage is linked to cancer. Oropharyngeal and oral cancers happen when cells in the mouth or throat become cancerous.  HPV is a group of viruses that are spread by sexual contact. A significant number of cases of head and neck cancer are linked to HPV, but scientists are still not sure why.  A doctor will ask a person about their medical history, symptoms, and any known risk factors. They will conduct a physical examination by looking at the mouth and throat, and feeling for lumps or anything unusual.  If the doctor thinks there is a possibility of tonsil cancer, they will recommend that a person sees a specialist. A specialist may then do other tests and exams to check for cancer, including a biopsy.  A biopsy is a small sample of tissue taken from the affected area, in this case, the tonsils. The sample is examined under a microscope to look for cancer cells.  Imaging tests that can see inside the body are sometimes used to help determine the extent of the disease. These can check to see how far cancer may have spread or to look for a tumor.  The stage of the cancer depends on its severity and whether it has spread to other parts of the body. Knowing the stage can help doctors determine the best course of treatment.  The stages of tonsil cancer are:  Treatment for tonsil cancer varies and depends on the stage and where tumors are found. Cancer can be complex so different doctors, specialists, and health professionals are likely to be involved in a person's treatment.  Surgery to remove the tumor is usually the first treatment for cancer affecting the mouth and throat. It is likely that the tonsils will be removed if the cancer has not spread.  Surgery also removes some tissue around the tumor, even if it looks normal, to reduce the risk of any cancer cells being left behind.   Radiation therapy  may be used to stop the growth of a tumor or to destroy cancer cells.   Chemotherapy  uses medication to kill cancer cells, slow their spread, or shrink the size of a tumor to make it easier to operate. It is often used alongside radiation therapy for cancers of the mouth and throat.  New drugs called targeted therapy are being developed to target cancer cells in a precise and selective way. For this reason, targeted therapy may have fewer side effects than chemotherapy.  It is also vital that a person who has advanced cancer is supported to manage their pain. This is often known as palliative treatment and focuses on relieving symptoms and improving quality of life.  Tonsil cancer and its treatment make it hard to eat and drink normally. Some people may need a feeding tube that goes directly into the stomach through the skin to ensure a person is getting enough  nutrition .  Tonsil cancer is relatively rare and living with a rare form of cancer can be particularly hard. Understanding the disease and getting information about the treatments available can make the process easier.  Finding cancer in its early stages often means that it is easier to treat. This improves the chances of recovery. Diagnosing tonsil cancer early is critical, and it can be clear that the tonsils are enlarged by looking at them or feeling the throat.  However, the tonsils can swell for many other reasons, including a common cold. Anyone worried about their symptoms should speak to a doctor.    
 Cancer staging. (2015, March 9).  Cancer staging. (2015, March 9).  How are oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers diagnosed? (2016, August 8).  How do the tonsils work? (2015, January 7).  Lymphocyte. (n.d.).  Mouth cancer. (2016, October 8).  Parfenova, M., Pedamallu, C. S., Gehlenborg, N., Freeman, S. S., Danilova, L., Bristow, C. A., ... Kucherlapati, R. (2014, October 28). Characterization of HPV and host genome interactions in primary head and neck cancers.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America ,  111 (43), 15544–15549.  Signs and symptoms of oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer. (2016, August 8).  Surgery for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer. (2016, August 8).  Treating oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer. (n.d.).  What are oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers? (2016, August 8).  What is targeted cancer therapy? (2016, June 6).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "Can you get cancer on the tonsils?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320431.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2017, December 26). "Can you get cancer on the tonsils?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  