 Scalloped tongue is sometimes called rippled tongue, crenated tongue, piecrust tongue, or lingua indenta.  The condition is rarely painful or a sign of more serious complications, but knowing the cause of scalloped tongue can help prevent or treat any underlying conditions.  A scalloped tongue can be the result of macroglossia, which is an  inflammation  or abnormal enlargement of the tongue. It can be a symptom of other conditions that do not enlarge the tongue.  If these conditions lead to compression of the tongue against the teeth, tongue scalloping will result. Scalloping can be caused by a variety of things, including:  Better known as bad habits, parafunctional activities are considered the leading cause of scalloped tongue. Bad habits include  teeth grinding , cheek sucking, and picking at the teeth.  Many things can lead to a person performing parafunctional activities, such as  stress , sleep disorders, systemic disease, poor tooth alignment or tooth loss, and trauma.  The immune system causes inflammation in response to infection, injury, and allergens. Certain reactions will lead to swelling of the tongue.  As the tongue swells and enlarges, it presses up against the teeth, often causing indentation or pitting.  Scalloped tongue can occur when the body does not get enough of certain  vitamins  and minerals, especially B vitamins, which can lead to tongue enlargement.  Common nutritional deficiencies that cause scalloped tongue include:   Dehydration  can cause swelling, which may cause the tongue to become compressed in the mouth and indented by the teeth.  Smoking causes an immune response and irritates the mucosal tissues, increasing the risk of swelling and inflammation.  Smoking also increases the risk of dehydration, a factor known to influence the likelihood of developing scalloped tongue.  Injuries or chronic conditions involving the temporomandibular joint that connects the jaw to the skull may cause scalloped tongue.  People with temporomandibular joint dysfunction (TMD) may develop indents in their tongues because of dehydration, teeth grinding, or because the tongue is pushing against the lower teeth to accommodate for the misaligned joint.  Scalloped tongue is most commonly associated with TMD cases in women and those involving frequent  headaches .  Scalloped tongue may be a sign of sleep apnea. Some studies suggest this may occur because the body retains more water when it lacks oxygen, which in turn leads to fluid swelling in the head, neck, and tongue.  A  2017 study  examining over 1,000 Japanese adults found a higher prevalence of moderate to severe nocturnal intermittent hypoxia (NIH), the primary sign of sleep apnea, in people with scalloped tongues.  Conditions that cause chronic or long-term inflammation increase the risk of developing scalloped tongue.  Several infiltrative conditions (conditions that cause an abnormal buildup of cells or tissues) are also known to cause scalloped tongue.  Many of the medical conditions considered risk factors for scalloped tongue are hereditary or passed on through genes. Many congenital disabilities are also thought to cause scalloped tongue either directly or indirectly.  Inflammatory and infiltrative conditions associated with scalloped tongue include:  Scalloped tongue generally does not cause any major symptoms. However, it can be related to an underlying condition, which can cause symptoms.  Aside from scalloped or rippled edges, additional mild symptoms sometimes associated with scalloped tongue include:  To diagnose scalloped tongue, a doctor will first need to rule out all other potential conditions.  A doctor will ask a person to describe all their symptoms and will review their medical history.  Additional tests a doctor may include:  The recommended treatment for scalloped tongue depends on the cause. For severe cases caused by genetic, inflammatory, or infiltrative conditions, surgery may be necessary to restore the tongue's shape.  Potential medical treatment options for scallop tongue include:  Scalloped tongue caused by serious conditions, such as tuberculosis and  cancer , will require those underlying conditions to be treated.  Depending on the cause, there may be more natural ways to treat or reduce the symptoms of scalloped tongue.  Home remedies for scalloped tongue include:  In general, it is a good idea for anyone with a scalloped tongue to seek medical attention, especially if they have experienced long-term or painful symptoms.  It is especially important to see a doctor if symptoms do not resolve once habits, such as teeth grinding, have stopped, or if symptoms do not respond to hydration and anti-inflammatory medications.  While rare, severe symptoms that accompany scalloped tongue may indicate more serious conditions.  The presence of a scalloped tongue may help doctors recognize and diagnose other medical conditions, such as hypothyroidism (low levels of thyroid hormones).  A doctor can also help identify or assess habits that may contribute to the condition, such as teeth grinding, or make a referral to specialists.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Gopal, K. S., &amp; Sundaram, M. S. (2016, September 30). Oral cavity as a diagnostic tool for systemic disorders.  Asian Journal of Science and Technology ,  7 (9), 3507–3517.  Gopal, K. S., &amp; Sundaram, M. S. (2016, September 30). Oral cavity as a diagnostic tool for systemic disorders.  Asian Journal of Science and Technology ,  7 (9), 3507–3517.  Khanal, R., Pathak, R., Young, J., Mainali, N. R., &amp; Forman, D. A. (2015, February 3). Clue in the tongue.  Journal of Community Hospital Internal Medicine Perspectives ,  5 (1).  Pooja, V. K., Vanishree, M., Ravikumar, S., Koneru, A., Hunasgi, S., &amp; Sunrekha, R. (2014, September–December). Evaluation of the orofacial lesions in treated leprosy patients.  Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology ,  18 (3), 386–389.  Singh, A., Tandon, R., Singh, A., &amp; Gupta, B. (2014, October). Bruxism: An ignored malady.  Orthodontic Journal of Nepal ,  4 (1), 48–51.  Tomooka, K., Tanigawa, T., Sakurai, S., Maruyama, K., Eguchi, E., Nishioka, S., … Saito, I. (2017, August). Scalloped tongue is associated with nocturnal intermittent hypoxia among community-dwelling Japanese: The Toon Health Study.  Journal of Oral Rehabilitation ,  44 (8), 602–609.  White, L. H., &amp; Bradley, T. D. (2013, March 1). Role of nocturnal rostral fluid shift in the pathogenesis of obstructive and central sleep apnoea [Abstract].  The Journal of Physiology ,  591 (5), 1179–1193.  Wieckiewicz, M., Grychowska, N., Wojciechowski, K., Pelc, A., Augustyniak, M., Sleboda, A. &amp; Zietek, M.. (2014, July 9). Prevalence and correlation between TMD based on RDC/TMD diagnoses, oral parafunctions and psycho-emotional stress in Polish university students.  BioMed Research International ,  2014 (472346).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Scalloped tongue: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320428.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, December 25). "Scalloped tongue: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  