 In this article, we examine why exercise benefits people with  Parkinson's disease  (PD), and how it affects the brain. We also take a look at some examples and tips for exercising with the condition.   The Parkinson's Foundation  say there is growing evidence of the short and long-term benefits of exercise for people with PD.  A study, known as the  Parkinson's Outcomes Project , by the same organization, found that people with PD who did exercise for at least 2.5 hours a week experienced a slower decline in their mobility and quality of life than others.  One of the main benefits of exercise for people with PD is symptom management. This includes improvement of:  Exercise not only helps the physical aspects of PD but the mental ones as well. It has  been shown  to help relieve symptoms of  fatigue , mood, sleep problems, and  mental health .  Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that controls the brain's reward and pleasure centers, as well as regulating movement and emotional responses. In PD, there is a dopamine deficiency.  While exercise has not been shown to increase the amount of dopamine in the brain, research  does show  that it helps it to be used more efficiently.  The exercises that someone with PD should undertake will depend on how limiting their symptoms are. In all cases, the exercise should focus on three areas:  There are many different types of exercise that involve all three of these areas. These exercises include:  The exercise type known as "random practice" has been shown to  benefit people with PD  particularly. This is an aerobic exercise that challenges the individual to change speed, activity, or direction.  It is also essential for someone with PD to vary activities. This is because people with the condition may have trouble changing activity and doing two activities at the same time. As a result, random practice and variation will help to challenge those symptoms.  There is no specific exercise program that someone with PD should undertake. The best exercises to do will take into consideration an individual's symptoms.  The support charity  Parkinson's UK  recommend that people with mild symptoms should focus on vigorous exercise, such as working out in a gym.  People with moderate symptoms should focus on exercises that target those symptoms. Individuals with more complex symptoms should simply focus on using exercises to help them complete daily activities that are problematic.  It is worth noting that cycling, in particular, requires both balance and reaction time. These two qualities are both impaired by PD. As a result, using a traditional bicycle could be a safety risk. Alternatives include three-wheeled bikes and tandems.   The University of California  also say that weight training is not the best choice for people with PD, although strengthening exercises do have value.  Strengthening exercises that are alternatives to weight training include:  Swimming is a good exercise for coordination, but it does not require balance. As such, it may not be the best exercise for people with PD.  The ideal time for someone with PD to exercise is when their mobility is best, which is often around  an hour  after they have taken their medication. This can vary, however, so every individual will have to work out when their mobility is at its best.   Be safe   Before someone with PD begins a new exercise program, they should speak with their neurologist, doctor, and physical therapist about what would be the best for them individually.   Use a pedometer   Also known as a step counter, this will tell the person how many steps they take on an average day. They can then work their way upwards from there.   Consistency   The best way for people with PD to see benefits from exercise is to do it on a consistent basis. People with PD who have been on exercise programs for 6 months or more have  shown significant gains  in comparison with those who do shorter programs.   Greater intensity, greater benefit   People with PD should exercise, as often as possible, for as long as possible. The amount they can do will vary, depending on their symptoms, but the general rule is that the more the person does, the more they will benefit.   Integration and variation   People with PD can start to add exercise to their lives with minor changes, such as:  Also, varying the exercises and where they are, for example, indoor or outdoor, will not only help PD symptoms but also ease boredom and increase motivation.   Cool down   Allowing a proper cool down slowly decreases the heart rate and stops the muscles from becoming stiff. A proper warm-up and doing stretches are also vital for this.   Have fun   Enjoyment of exercise will make it easier to undertake. Group activities, including exercise classes, are often beneficial for this.  When someone is first diagnosed with PD, they should also have an appointment with a physical therapist to work out an exercise program tailored to them.  All people with PD should ideally have an exercise program for their individual needs. Seeing a physical therapist will help them avoid risks, get advice about their specific type of PD, and give them confidence.  As the disease progresses, a person should continue to meet with the physical therapist to maximize the benefits from their exercise program by changing it whenever necessary.  There are so many benefits of exercise for people with PD. Those with the condition should speak with their doctor or an advisory group to work out a specific program to help them start or maintain an exercise program.  It is also helpful to find out more information about the many PD-specific exercise classes going on throughout the country. There may be a group nearby that someone can link with for advice and support.    
 Exercise. (n.d.).  Exercise. (n.d.).  Exercise and physical therapy. (2012).  Neuroprotective benefits of exercise. (n.d).  Parkinson's Outcomes Project. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "What exercises are good for Parkinson's disease?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320469.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2017, December 30). "What exercises are good for Parkinson's disease?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  