 Heels spurs may happen independently or may be related to an underlying health condition. People often assume that heels spurs are the cause of any pain in the heel, but other factors can also cause  heel pain .  This article explores the symptoms of heel spurs, as well as other causes of heel pain. It also discusses the causes, risk factors, and treatments for the condition.  A heel spur is a bony outgrowth that can occur on the underside of a person's foot. They are also known as calcaneal spurs or osteophytes.  Heel spurs may be pointy, hooked, or shelf-like. The outgrowth of a heel spur extends from the underneath of the heel towards the arch (the middle of the foot). This area of the foot is called the plantar fascia.  When seen on an X-ray, a heel spur may be up to half an inch long. If an X-ray is unable to confirm a suspected heel spur, a doctor may refer to the condition as "heel spur syndrome."  Symptoms of heel spurs can include:  If a person experiences these symptoms, a doctor may take an X-ray of their foot to determine the problem. Seeing the protrusion on an X-ray is the only way to be sure a person has heel spurs.  Not everyone with a heel spur will experience all of these symptoms. Some people with heel spurs may experience no symptoms at all. These people may only discover they have heel spurs if they have an X-ray for another reason.  Heel spurs happen when long-term muscle and ligament strain wears out the soft tissues in the heel. Tearing the membrane that covers the heel bone is also a cause.  The heel can also become more vulnerable with age. A  2015 review  of heel pain noted that as a person ages, the pads in the heel wear down and fail to provide shock absorption.  Over time,  calcium  deposits can build up under the heel. These deposits form bony protrusions, which are heel spurs.  There is a range of things that increase the risk of developing heel spurs. These include:  There are also some underlying medical conditions that may cause heel spurs. These include:  Heel spurs are often confused with a condition called plantar fasciitis. Having plantar fasciitis increases a person's risk of developing heel spurs. Heel spurs often occur in people who already have plantar fasciitis.  Up to  15 percent  of people with foot symptoms that require medical attention have plantar fasciitis.  There are important distinctions between heels spurs and plantar fasciitis. A heel spur is a calcium deposit that forms a bony protrusion along the plantar fascia.  In contrast, plantar fasciitis is a condition where the plantar fascia gets irritated and swollen, which causes pain in the heel.  Doctors often describe the plantar fascia as a bowstring-like tissue. It stretches underneath the sole and attaches to the heel. Plantar fasciitis results from an unusual amount of force on this part of the foot.  Possible causes of significant force include:  Having  diabetes  is also a risk factor for plantar fasciitis.  Plantar fasciitis usually goes away without treatment. Heel spurs, on the other hand, are permanent unless medically treated.  Treatments for heel spurs may include:  If heel spurs are caused by an inflammatory type of arthritis, treatments for the underlying condition may also improve symptoms.  The outlook for heel spurs is positive. The calcium deposit will always be there unless surgically removed, but this is not normally problematic, as treatments to reduce pain and swelling tend to be effective.  In cases where treating the symptoms is not effective, surgery to remove the heel spur is possible.    
 Agyekum, E. K., &amp; Ma, K. (2015, June). Heel pain: A systematic review.  Chinese Journal of Traumatology ,  18 (3), 164–169.  Agyekum, E. K., &amp; Ma, K. (2015, June). Heel pain: A systematic review.  Chinese Journal of Traumatology ,  18 (3), 164–169.  Menz, H. B., Zammit, G. V., Landorf, K. B., &amp; Munteanu. (2008, August 11). Plantar calcaneal spurs in older people: Longitudinal traction or vertical compression?  Journal of Foot and Ankle Research ,  1 (7).  Tahririan, M. A., Motififard, M., Tahmasebi, M. N., &amp; Siavashi, B. (2012, August). Plantar fasciitis.  Journal of Research in Medical Sciences ,  17 (8), 799–804.  Toumi, H., Davies, R., Mazor, M., Coursier, R., Best, T. M., Jennane, R., … Lespessailles, E. (2014, March 15). Changes in prevalence of calcaneal spurs in men &amp; women: A random population from a trauma clinic [Abstract].  BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders ,  15 (87).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Heel spurs: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320411.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2017, December 24). "Heel spurs: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  