 We ate good food, shared drinks and stories, and then belted out some tunes at our favorite karaoke place. We celebrated each other and all of our accomplishments over the past year.  And there are certainly many achievements to celebrate.  MNT  has climbed to the number 11 spot for top health websites in the world, and we are well on our way to being in the top 10.  Over the past year, our team has grown by over threefold, and we have branched out in the topics that we are covering. Our resident scientist has been doing  deep scientific analyses  on hot topics.  One of our editors has also started trying out strange therapies and writing about them — like earlier this month, when he  tricked me into doing cryotherapy  with him.  Of all our accomplishments this year, however, the one that makes me the happiest is the way that our editorial team has grown. I get to work with the kindest and most curious people around. It is a genuine joy to be surrounded by editors who care about our readers, who care about each other, and who are really invested in what they put out into the world.  All of this culminates in content on  MNT  that is reliable, authoritative, and crafted with care for you, dear reader.  We want to pique your curiosity, we want to be there at 3 a.m. when you need an answer to a health query, and we want to give you the information you need to make informed decisions.  Some of the topics that grabbed your attention this month included a finding that (rejoice!)  eating cheese every day may help to protect heart health , as well as a  new approach that halts tumor growth .  You were interested in the finding that  psoriasis could be prevented with an artificial vanilla extract . We also helped you get to the bottom of  masturbation myths and facts , as well as  the causes of, and ways to prevent, white hair .  Our News team also compiled a  year in review  to cover the most important medical findings of 2017.  What do you want to know as 2018 arrives?  Let us know , and we'll be on the case. You can also contact us on  Twitter  and  Facebook .   We hope you have a joyful, healthful end to 2017 and a wonderful start to 2018!   