  Biotin  also helps metabolize fat and amino acids, which the body uses to build protein. Protein is needed to repair and maintain cells.  It is rare for a healthy person eating a balanced diet to suffer from biotin deficiency.  B vitamins help convert  carbohydrates  into glucose, which the body uses for energy.  B vitamins also help the body process fats and protein, and the nervous system to function. Sometimes referred to as B complex vitamins, they are needed for healthy skin, hair, eyes, and for liver functioning.  Biotin is available in small amounts in some foods. Additionally, the microbiome, which is the bacterial population living in the intestines, makes biotin  Similarly to all B vitamins, biotin is water-soluble. That means it dissolves in the water inside the body and cannot be stored.  People with health conditions that impact how the body absorbs nutrients, or who are on certain medications, can be at risk of developing biotin deficiency.  Biotinidase deficiency (BTD) is the most common cause of biotin deficiency. BTD is a rare inherited disorder where the body is not able to use biotin and leads to biotin deficiency. It is caused by a mutation in the BTD gene. This gene instructs the body on how to make the enzyme biotinidase, which the body needs to extract biotin from food.  BTD affects approximately  one in 60,000 newborn babies .  Babies with BTD tend to start showing symptoms of the condition in the first weeks or months of life. The most common symptoms include:   Between 25 and 50 percent  of babies born with BTD exhibit one or more of the following:  Between 10 to 25 percent of babies with BTD experience:  In fewer than 10 percent of cases, children with BTD suffer:  Without treatment, BTD can lead to a  coma  or be fatal.  All newborns in the United States are screened for BTD. A doctor usually diagnoses BTD by taking a family history and a blood test. Prenatal testing of sample fluid from the womb for biotinidase activity is also available.  Though symptoms of biotin deficiency typically appear in the first few months of life, symptoms can also appear later in childhood.  Other factors that put people at risk of developing biotin deficiency include:   At least one–third  of pregnant women will develop marginal biotin deficiency.  Symptoms of biotin deficiency start gradually and can build up over time.  Symptoms can include thinning hair, progressing to loss of hair across the body, and a scaly, red rash around body openings, including the eyes, nose, mouth, and anus.  Conjunctivitis  can also develop.  Adults with biotin deficiency may suffer:  While symptoms of BTD may disappear with medical assistance, a person may need to take biotin for the rest of their life.  Biotin multivitamins and supplements are available over-the-counter or  online . However, a balanced diet is considered the best source of B vitamins.  An adult's recommended daily intake  is 30 micrograms  (mcg), while a child's recommended intake is 5 mcg per day. Pregnant women should aim for 35 mcg per day.  People should talk to their doctor before taking a biotin supplement. Biotin may be present in adult or prenatal vitamins, and there may be dangers in taking high doses.  Anyone who suspects they may have a deficiency is advised to speak to their healthcare team.  Good sources of biotin include:  It is important to bear in mind that some food processing techniques can destroy biotin. It is also worth noting that raw egg whites contain a protein called avidin that interferes with how the body absorbs biotin.  Biotin supplements are often promoted for hair, skin, and nail health, but there is little evidence to show that they are effective.  Biotin deficiency is reversible. People with BTD will be prescribed biotin supplements, which will stop the symptoms, but they will usually need to take the supplements long-term. The FDA does not monitor supplements as closely as they monitor food and drugs so a person should choose from a reputable source.  They should also talk to their doctor about all supplements, vitamins, herbs, and medications before beginning new courses.  A range of biotin supplements are available for  purchase online .  Most of the other causes of biotin deficiency can be treated with dietary changes, though a short period of taking supplements may be recommended at diagnosis.  Anyone who suspects they have biotin deficiency should speak to a healthcare professional about what to do next.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Biotin [Fact sheet]. (2017, December 8).  Biotin [Fact sheet]. (2017, December 8).  Biotinidase deficiency. (2017, December 19).  Biotinidase deficiency. (n.d.).  Dietary reference intakes (DRIs): Recommended dietary allowances and adequate intakes, vitamins. (2011).  Vitamin H (biotin). (2013, July 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "All you should know about biotin deficiency."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320462.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2017, December 29). "All you should know about biotin deficiency."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  