 Many parts of the clary sage plant can be used,  including  the leaves, flowers, stems, and seeds. In alternative health practices, clary sage essential oil is used in aromatherapy.  In this article, we take a look at the uses and suggested health benefits of clary sage oil. We will also look at whether there is any scientific evidence to back these claims up. We also examine how the oil is used, and what side effects could occur.  Aromatherapists and related alternative health practitioners often use clary sage as an essential oil in their treatments, and supporters believe it has many health benefits.  People may use the oil for one or more of its potential properties, including:  Below is a list of possible health benefits for clary oil. It is worth noting that many of the studies listed below either involved small numbers of participants or were carried out on animals rather than humans.  A  2010 study  published in the  Journal of Ethnopharmacology  investigated the antidepressant and stress-fighting effects of several different essential oils in rats. The oils used included clary sage, chamomile, rosemary, and lavender.  The study found that out of all the oils tested, clary sage oil had the most potent anti-stress effect.  The researchers concluded that clary sage oil could be an effective treatment for people experiencing  depression . They also suggested that the effect of the oil was closely linked to the feel-good hormone dopamine.  A  study  published in 2013 in the  Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine  found that inhaled clary sage oil significantly lowered  blood pressure  and calmed the breathing of women with  urinary incontinence  undergoing assessment. The paper includes the suggestion that inhaled clary sage oil may be an effective way of promoting relaxation.  Another  piece of research  published in the  Journal of Medicinal Food  found that including clary sage oil in the food of animal subjects lead to a significant reduction in dominant and anxious behavior.   Research  published in the  Journal of Ethnopharmacology  in 2017 found that an extract of clary sage had significant anti-inflammatory effects in rats. The researchers concluded that the clary sage extract could be an effective treatment for the inflammatory gum condition  periodontitis .  It is worth noting that the study also found that applying the same clary sage extract 3 days before infection did not appear to have a preventive effect.  Different sage plants have long been thought to improve mental function in various ways. A  2017 review  looked at the effects of various sage plants, including clary sage. The author found that sage plants seem to be associated with improved memory, greater alertness, and potential Alzheimer's-fighting effects.  The same review also noted the anti-depressant and anti-stress effects of clary sage mentioned above.  Many essential oils, including clary sage oil, are thought to have antibacterial qualities. A  2015 study  looking at the antibacterial effects of clary sage essential oil found that its antibacterial qualities worked against all strains of bacteria tested.  Clary sage essential oil was also found to reduce the growth of  E. coli  significantly and appeared to attack bacteria cells in several different ways.   Other research  has also suggested that some of the chemical components of clary sage have anti-fungal effects.  A  2017 study  comparing the antibacterial and antifungal effects of six different essential oils also found clary sage to have antibacterial and antifungal effects. However, these effects were less significant than most of the other oils that were tested.  As research has found positive effects of clary sage oil when inhaled, taken via the mouth, and applied directly to inflamed areas of the body, there are many options for how someone can use it. Users should make sure to select 100 percent essential oil.   Aromatherapy : Around 2 to 3 drops of clary sage oil,  such as these , can be mixed with water and other essential oils and diffused into the air via an essential oil burner. When vaporized, clary sage oil can help to fight bacteria and other germs in the air   Skin : Add about 6 drops of clary sage oil to 1 oz. of carrier oil, such as  coconut oil , and rub directly onto a wounded area, or massage into skin. Add 3 to 5 drops of essential oil to the bathwater to soothe sore muscles and improve mood. When rubbed onto an injured area, it can have a direct antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, and anesthetic effect.   Oral : Add around 1 to 2 drops of 100 percent essential oil to tea, smoothies, or food for a soothing effect, and to help reduce  inflammation  in the gums. The  Natural Standard Herb and Supplement Guide  state that 25-50 microliters (or 1/2 to 1 drop) can be taken orally one to three times daily.  All of these uses appear to be safe and may be beneficial.  Clary sage oil appears safe for use.  Various sources make claims about clary sage oil increasing  estrogen  in the body, but at least one  2017 study  that investigated the estrogen-boosting effects of different essential oils did not seem to agree. The study did, however, suggest that geranium and rose otto essential oils might boost estrogen.  Other supposed risks or side effects of clary sage oil seem to be largely anecdotal and appear not to be well supported by research.  A reasonable precaution would be to test a small area of skin before applying the oil to large areas of skin and avoid using clary sage oil before driving or operating heavy machinery. People should also stop using clary sage oil and consult with a medical professional if any issues arise.  The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not regulate essential oils. People who wish to use them should speak to their healthcare provider first and be sure to obtain the oils from a respected supplier.  A large body of research suggests that clary sage oil could have many health benefits.  These benefits include anti-depressant and anti-stress effects, likely connected to the hormone dopamine. These effects could make clary sage an effective natural remedy for low moods. It is worth noting that many studies do not involve large groups of humans, however.  Clary sage oil has also been shown to lower blood pressure, relieve  anxiety , and be a great all-around stress buster. There's some suggestion that, as a member of the sage family, it may even have a positive impact on memory and mental function.  Finally, clary sage oil has been shown to have excellent anti-inflammatory and moderate antibacterial effects, as well as anesthetic properties. It is worth keeping in mind, though, that clary sage oil does not appear to prevent inflammation but instead acts as a treatment for it.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Cui, H., Zhang, X., Zhou, H., Zhao, C., &amp; Lin, L. (2015, December). Antimicrobial activity and mechanisms of  Salvia sclarea  essential oil.  Botanical Studies ,  56 (16).  Cui, H., Zhang, X., Zhou, H., Zhao, C., &amp; Lin, L. (2015, December). Antimicrobial activity and mechanisms of  Salvia sclarea  essential oil.  Botanical Studies ,  56 (16).  Fraternale, D., Giamperi, L., Bucchini, A., Ricci, D., Epifano, F., Genovese, S., &amp; Curini, M. (2005, September–October). Composition and antifungal activity of essential oil of  Salvia sclarea  from Italy [Abstract].  Chemistry of Natural Compounds ,  41 (5), 604–606.  Gross, M., Nesher, E., Tikhonov, T., Raz, O., &amp; Pinhasov, A. (2013, March 11). Chronic food administration of  Salvia sclarea  oil reduces animals' anxious and dominant behavior [Abstract].  Journal of Medicinal Food ,  16 (3), 216–222.  Kostić, M., Kitić, D., Petrović, M. B., Jevtović-Stoimenov, T., Jović, M., Petrović, A.,…Živanović, S. (2017, March 6). Anti-inflammatory effect of the Salvia sclarea L. ethanolic extract on lipopolysaccharide-induced periodontitis in rats [Abstract].  Journal of Ethnopharmacology , 199, 52–59.  Lopresti, A. L. (2017, March). Salvia (sage): A review of its potential cognitive-enhancing and protective effects.  Drugs in R&amp;D ,  17 (1), 53–64.  Puškárová, A., Bučková, M., Kraková, L., Pangallo, D., &amp; Kozics, K. (2017, August 15). The antibacterial and antifungal activity of six essential oils and their cyto/genotoxicity to human HEL 12469 cells.  Scientific Reports ,  7 .  Seol, G. H., Lee, Y. H., Kang, P., You, J. H., Park, M., &amp; Min, S. S. (2013, July). Randomized controlled trial for  Salvia sclarea  or  Lavandula angustifolia : Differential effects on blood pressure in female patients with urinary incontinence undergoing urodynamic examination.  Journal of Alternative and Complementary Therapy ,  19 (7), 664–670.  Seol, G. H., Shim, H. S., Kim, P.-J., Moon, H. K., Lee, K. H., Shim, I.,…Min, S. S. (2010, July 6). Antidepressant-like effect of  Salvia sclarea  is explained by modulation of dopamine activities in rats [Abstract].  Journal of Ethnopharmacology ,  130 (1), 187–190.  Shinohara, K., Doi, H., Kumagai, C., Sawano, E., &amp; Tarumi, W. (2017, January). Effects of essential oil exposure on salivary estrogen concentration in perimenopausal women [Abstract].  Neuro Endocrinology Letters ,  37 (8), 567–572.  Tulukcu, E., Yalcin, H., Ozturk, I., &amp; Sagdic, O. (2012, September). Changes in the fatty acid compositions and bioactivities of clary sage seeds depending on harvest year [Abstract].  Industrial Crops and Products ,  39 , 69–73.  Ulbricht, C. E. (2016, July 28). Natural Standard herb and supplement guide: An evidence-based reference. 635.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Wessels, Dan. "What are the possible benefits of clary sage oil?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320423.php&gt;    APA  Wessels, D. (2017, December 26). "What are the possible benefits of clary sage oil?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  