 Allergy shots are a long-term treatment that aims to decrease the symptoms of allergies over time. They  have been shown  to reduce allergy sensitivity and provide lasting relief once treatment has finished.  When an allergy shot is given, a small amount of the specific allergen in question is injected into a person's arm, in a similar way to a vaccine.  Over time, the dosage of the allergen will be given in increasing amounts to build up the person's immunity or tolerance.  The treatment will be split into 2 phases.   Build-up phase   Injections will usually be given  once a week for the first 7 months , although in some cases they can be more frequent. Individuals often notice a decrease in the symptoms of their allergy, during the build-up phase.   Maintenance phase   After the initial 7 months, an injection  every 2 weeks  is usually sufficient. Eventually, injections can be given every 4 weeks, and the whole course of treatment will usually last for between 3 and 5 years.  The maintenance phase can often be ongoing for as long as  12 months  before a person starts to notice an improvement.  An allergy specialist will decide on the specific dosage and time gaps between the injections and also when to stop allergy shots being given.  Both adults and children can be given allergy shots, although they are not usually recommended for  children under the age of 5 . This restriction is because of the difficulty of getting young children to cooperate and communicate if they have side effects.  An allergist or immunologist using proper equipment in their office, including treatment for adverse reactions, should give allergy shots.  Allergy shots are an extremely good way of treating allergies. They can also prevent the development of new allergies, and in children can stop allergen  rhinitis  turning into  asthma .  They are effective in the treatment of allergic asthma and can relieve allergic reactions that lead to asthma episodes. These benefits can enhance breathing and lessen the need for people with asthma to take asthma medication.  A study conducted by the  American College of Allergy Asthma and Immunology (ACAAI)  also found that pregnant women, who have allergy shots, during pregnancy, might decrease the chance of their baby developing allergies.  The effectiveness of the treatment does vary. Often this is to do with the length of the program a person is undertaking or the dose of the allergen.  Some people will have lasting relief while others may have a relapse after treatment has stopped. If a person experiences no improvement after 12 months of allergy shots, it could be due to  several factors :  If allergy shots are not working, for whatever reason, then an allergist or immunologist will be able to discuss alternative treatment options.  Normally, the only side effect that people experience after having an allergy shot is redness or swelling at the site of the injection. This can happen immediately after the injection or a few hours afterward.  In some cases, people can experience increased allergy symptoms,  such as :  In rare instances, a person can have a serious reaction to an allergy shot. These will mostly occur within  30 minutes  of the injection, which is why they are given in the allergist's office, and a person is asked to wait for 30 minutes before leaving.  If a serious reaction occurs, such as  anaphylaxis , it will require emergency medical attention.  An anaphylactic shock is when someone has a severe and life-threatening allergic reaction known as anaphylaxis.  Allergens most frequently associated with anaphylaxis  include :  Symptoms of anaphylaxis  include :  Anaphylactic shock needs to be treated immediately with an injection of epinephrine, which is also called adrenaline.  A second anaphylactic reaction called a biphasic reaction can occur  up to 12 hours  after the initial shock.  Allergy shots have traditionally been the most common form of immunotherapy and are known as subcutaneous immunotherapy or SCIT.  This treatment is when an allergen is injected under the skin.  There is now a newer form of immunotherapy called sublingual immunotherapy or SLIT.  With this, instead of the allergen being injected under the skin, it is administered, as a tablet or a drop, under the tongue.  The issue with SLIT treatments is that they are  limited to one type of allergen , but most people with allergies will have more than one. In contrast, allergy shots can give relief to more than 1 type of allergen at the same time.  It is important for someone to speak to their allergist about what the best course of immunotherapy is for them.  In some cases, it may require a co-pay or deductible, depending on the specific insurance plan, so it is worth contacting the insurance provider to determine the benefits they have.  The cost of allergy shots without insurance can vary considerably.  Healthsparq  has estimated that the price ranges from $15 to $170.  It is also worth bearing in mind that while allergy shots can be expensive, the overall cost of medical treatment may be less, as this treatment can cut down on the cost of other medication needed for allergies.    
 Allergy shots (n.d.).  Allergy shots (n.d.).  Allergy shots during pregnancy may decrease allergies in children (2013, November 8).  Allergy shots (immunotherapy) (n.d.).  Anaphylaxis (n.d.).  Severe spring allergies drive people to comparison shop for tests, therapies to save money (2015, July 1).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "What to know about allergy shots."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320402.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2017, December 24). "What to know about allergy shots."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  