 There can be many causes of  erectile dysfunction  or ED, ranging from restricted blood flow to medications being taken by the man, to psychological and emotional concerns.  While some ED causes may require medical treatment, men are exploring alternative medicine techniques to reduce ED. One such example is  yoga .  Research does not currently exist about specific yoga poses and their benefits in reducing ED. However, researchers writing in the   Journal of Ayurveda and Integrated Medical Sciences   have made observations on the body of knowledge about yoga,  stress  relief, and sexual function. The five poses listed below are based on their recommendations.  This pose is intended to promote digestion and blood flow to major organs, including the liver, spleen, pancreas, and pelvic region:  The Siddasana is a classic yoga position, sometimes called Perfect Pose, and can be maintained for a long time. For men, it has the benefit of stimulating the pelvic region and promoting flexibility:  A man can remain in this position and practice deep breathing. He may wish to uncross the legs and repeat by crossing the right leg first.  Also known as Eagle Pose, this standing pose requires balance. A man should perform it near a wall or sturdy piece of furniture if he is developing his balance. This pose is known for increasing blood flow to the pelvis, making it potentially beneficial for those with ED.  The pavanamuktasana is also known as Wind-Relieving Pose because it promotes intestinal motility and can relieve stomach pains from gas.  Additionally, it helps to mobilize and warm the pelvic muscles and reproductive organs.  Also known as Corpse Pose, this is often the last pose performed in a yoga class.  While almost anyone can perform the shavasana, it can be one of the most difficult to do well.  This is because it involves being quiet, introspective, and focusing on one's breathing.  While there are not necessarily yoga poses that will negatively impact a man's sexual performance, any pose performed incorrectly could overstretch or strain the body.  For this reason, it is often best for someone beginning yoga practice to seek the advice of a professional yoga instructor.  According to a study published in the   Journal of Sex &amp; Marital Therapy  , yoga has been shown to help reduce:  Because  high blood pressure  and excess weight are both linked with ED, the benefits highlighted above could help a man reduce the incidence of ED.  The journal article also suggests that yoga increases blood flow to the genitals, which could enhance sexual function.  Research published in the   Journal of Sexual Medicine   studied 65 men from 24 to 60 years old who participated in 12 weeks of yoga sessions.  The participants were asked to score their sexual function before and after their yoga practice. At the end of the 12 weeks, men reported increases in ejaculatory control, erection, and orgasm.  Another article published in the journal   Andrologia   asked men diagnosed with ED to take the medication tadalafil (Cialis) or to take tadalafil and to take part in a stress management program as well.  After 8 weeks, men participating in the stress management program showed a reduction in their stress and in the stress hormone cortisol, which resulted in better sexual function measurements.  While the men did not participate in yoga specifically as part of their stress management, yoga is a stress-managing practice.  A man should talk to his doctor about his overall health to ensure he is healthy enough for certain yoga practices. For example, there are Bikram and "hot" yoga practices that involve performing yoga in a very hot studio. For men with blood pressure and heart concerns, this yoga approach may not be recommended, as it might be too strenuous.    
 Abdo, C. H. N., Afif‐Abdo, J., Otani, F., &amp; Machado, A. C. (2008, April 11). Sexual satisfaction among patients with erectile dysfunction treated with counseling, sildenafil, or both [Abstract].  The Journal of Sexual Medicine ,  5 (7), 1720–1726.  Abdo, C. H. N., Afif‐Abdo, J., Otani, F., &amp; Machado, A. C. (2008, April 11). Sexual satisfaction among patients with erectile dysfunction treated with counseling, sildenafil, or both [Abstract].  The Journal of Sexual Medicine ,  5 (7), 1720–1726.  Brotto, L. A., Mehak, L., &amp; Kit, C. (2009, September 3). Yoga and sexual functioning: A review [Abstract].  Journal of Sex &amp; Marital Therapy ,  35 (5), 378–390.  Dhikav, V., Karmarkar, G., Verma, M., Gupta, R., Gupta, S., Mittal, D., … Anand, K. (2010, July 14). Yoga in male sexual functioning: A noncompararive pilot study [Abstract].  The Journal of Sexual Medicine ,  7 (10), 3460–3466.  Ernst, E., Posadzki, P., &amp; Lee, M. S. (2011, September). Complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) for sexual dysfunction and erectile dysfunction in older men and women: An overview of systematic reviews [Abstract].  Maturitas ,  70 (1), 37–41.  Kalaitzidou, I., Venetikou, M. S., Konstadinidis, K., Artemiadis, A. K., Chrousos, G., &amp; Darviri, C. (2014, August). Stress management and erectile dysfunction: A pilot comparative study [Abstract].  Andrologia ,  46 (6), 698–702.  Rakshith, K. R., Sinha, K., Shivakumar., &amp; Vijeth Kumar, L. A. (2017). Yogic Intervention in Sexual Dysfunction — A Review.  Journal of Ayurveda and Integrated Medical Sciences ,  2 (4), 243–250.  Singh, M., &amp; Kumar, A. (2017, July 26). Yoga and Sexual Health.  Basics of Human Andrology , 509–516. Springer, Singapore.  Symptoms and causes of erectile dysfunction? (2017, July).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What to know about yoga for erectile dysfunction."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320438.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2017, December 26). "What to know about yoga for erectile dysfunction."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  