  Vertigo  is a feeling of dizziness and spinning, occurring with or without any movement. It is caused when the brain feels the body is off-balance even though it is not.  When feeling dizzy, a person should sit down immediately to reduce the chances of getting hurt if they fall.  Usually, vertigo is a symptom of an underlying medical condition or several different conditions. Sometimes, vertigo will only occur once, but for other people, it will reoccur until the underlying cause is determined.  Vertigo can be managed naturally with a variety of home remedies.  One of the most common ways to manage vertigo is a technique called the Epley maneuver. This involves a set of steps done before bed each night until the symptoms of vertigo resolve for at least 24 hours.  A report from the Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care says  52 out of every 100 people  who use the Epley maneuver gain relief from vertigo symptoms.  If symptoms of vertigo occur from the left side and left ear, the Epley maneuver can be done by:  If vertigo starts on the right side in the right ear, these directions should be done in reverse.   Ginkgo biloba  is a Chinese herb known for resolving the symptoms of vertigo. It works by managing blood flow to the brain to relieve dizziness and balance issues.  A study reported in the   International Journal of Otolaryngology   finds  Ginkgo biloba  is just as effective as the medication betahistine in managing vertigo.  Research published in the   Journal of Acupuncture and Tuina Science   finds  ginger  root can reduce the effects of vertigo better than manual repositioning, such as the Epley maneuver, alone.  Ginger root can be steeped in a cup of boiling water for 5 minutes. Honey can help with the bitter taste. Drinking ginger tea twice a day may help dizziness, nausea, and other vertigo symptoms.  Almonds are rich sources of  vitamins  A, B, and E. Eating a daily handful of almonds can help with vertigo symptoms.  How almonds help is unknown, but it is possible the vitamin content can combat the causes of vertigo.   Dehydration  can cause symptoms of vertigo. Even mild dehydration can trigger the condition.  Staying hydrated can help minimize dizziness and balance issues.  The body needs 8 to 12 cups of liquid per day. While this includes all liquids, water is the best option because it is calorie- and caffeine-free and not a diuretic. Diuretics increase the amount of water and salt the body expels as urine.  Essential oils are natural and affordable options for managing the symptoms of vertigo, including nausea,  headaches , and dizziness.  Some of the options available for managing vertigo include peppermint, ginger, lavender, and lemon essential oils.  Essential oils are inhaled through an infuser or diluted in a carrier oil before being applied topically. A person may have to experiment with a variety of oils to find the best one to treat their vertigo symptoms.  Both apple cider vinegar and honey are believed to have curative properties to relieve blood flow to the brain. Two parts honey and one part apple cider vinegar can prevent and treat vertigo symptoms.  Acupressure applies the same concepts as  acupuncture , but it is without the needles. The goal of acupressure is to promote wellness and relaxation. It can help manage vertigo by stimulating pressure points throughout the body.  One common method, called the  P6 acupressure method , involves an effective pressure point located in the two tendons between the inner forearm and the wrist.  In addition to causing a person feelings of being unbalanced or spinning, vertigo can lead to the following symptoms:  Benign positional paroxysmal vertigo or BPPV is the most common type of vertigo. A buildup of deposits in the inner ear causes BPPV.  The inner ear is responsible for the body's sense of balance. With BPPV, certain movements may cause dizziness and a spinning sensation for a short time.  BPPV is a common condition. Most people have a  lifetime prevalence of 2.4 percent , according to researchers from the University of British Columbia. Also, BPPV  recurs 50 percent of the time , according to a 2014 report published in the journal  Advances in Otolaryngology .  Other conditions that may cause vertigo include:  Most of the time, vertigo resolves without treatment, as the brain can compensate for changes to the inner ear to restore someone's balance.  Medications, such as steroids, can reduce inner ear inflammation, and water pills can reduce fluid buildup.  For people who have recurrent episodes of vertigo, a  physical therapy  called vestibular rehabilitation can help. Vestibular rehabilitation encourages the  central nervous system  to compensate for inner ear problems.  Anyone who has reoccurrences of vertigo should see their doctor. For most people, vertigo is usually not harmful, but the underlying cause needs to be identified. A doctor can also prescribe medications and other treatments to lessen symptoms, especially if home remedies do not help.  The home remedies listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 10 home remedies to treat vertigo (n.d.).  10 home remedies to treat vertigo (n.d.).  Are repositioning procedures effective in benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV)? (2017, September 7).  Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). (n.d.).  Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo: Overview. (2017, September 7).  Brain stem stroke. (2012, October 23).  Hain, T. C. (2012, October). Post-traumatic vertigo.  Hain, T. C. (2012, October). Vestibular neuritis and labyrinthitis.  Meniere's disease. (2017).  Micarelli, A., Viziano, A., Pavone, I., &amp; Alessandrini, M. (2013, June 27). Possible perspectives of P6 acupressure.  Nursing &amp; Midwifery Services ,  2 (2), 244–245.  Ni, F.-l., Zhang, L.-P., &amp; Hu, S.-S. (2016, February). Clinical observation on ginger-partitioned moxibustion plus manual repositioning for benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV).  Journal of Acupuncture and Tuina Science , 14 (1), 31–35.  Parham, K. (2014, July 17). Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo: An integrated perspective.  Advances in Otolaryngology ,  2014 (2014).  Sokoloya, L., Hoerr, R., &amp; Mishchenko, T. (2014, June 25). Treatment of vertigo: A randomized, double-blind trial comparing efficacy and safety of  Ginkgo biloba  extract EGb 761 and betahistine.  International Journal of Otolaryngology ,  2014 , 682439.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "What are the home remedies for vertigo?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320492.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, January 2). "What are the home remedies for vertigo?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  