 This type of  hernia  is also sometimes called a lateral ventral hernia. Unlike most hernias, spigelian hernias do not typically develop below layers of fat but rather between muscles and the fascia — tissue that connects them.  If left untreated, a spigelian hernia can block a portion of the bowel or cut off the blood supply to other organs and tissue. This condition can be life-threatening.  The symptoms of a spigelian hernia can be similar to other hernias in the abdomen. This means that it is impossible to diagnose a spigelian hernia based on symptoms alone.  Because of their location between muscle layers, spigelian hernias tend not to cause noticeable swelling. Very thin people with visible abdominal muscles may notice some swelling, however.  Most people with a spigelian hernia experience abdominal pain or vague discomfort, especially when straining the abdominal muscles, such as when lifting or straining to have a bowel movement.  Some symptoms to watch for include:  Most people do not feel a swelling, and there does not need to be a noticeable swelling for there to be a spigelian hernia.  A spigelian hernia can occur on either side of the abdomen, but most people feel pain in the lower abdomen.  A spigelian hernia can block the bowel or other vital organs. When this occurs, it is a life-threatening complication that requires immediate medical attention.  Symptoms of a blockage include:  Spigelian hernias develop within a weakened area in the abdominal wall muscles.  The weakened area can be something a person is born with, or it can develop over time. If it develops over time, it can be because of an injury or increased pressure within the abdominal cavity. This weakened area allows tissue and organs to poke through the spigelian fascia.  Risk factors for a spigelian hernia include:  Diagnosing a spigelian hernia  can be difficult , so it is important to report symptoms to your doctor. An  ultrasound  or  CT scan  of the abdomen can help with a diagnosis.  It may also be useful to consult a general surgeon, as these specialists have extensive knowledge of hernias, including spigelian hernias.  A spigelian hernia may also be discovered during surgery or procedures performed for other reasons, including:  To diagnose a spigelian hernia, a doctor will take a complete medical history and will perform an exam to rule out other medical issues.  An ultrasound can detect  most cases . Doctors also sometimes use computed tomography or CT scans. Both are safe and non-invasive diagnostic tests that allow a doctor to visualize the muscles, intestines, and abdominal wall.  However, if the diagnosis is not clear, a doctor may suspect that a hernia is present without knowing which type. They may decide to carry out exploratory surgery to locate and  repair the hernia .  A spigelian hernia requires surgery for it to be repaired.  A minimally invasive surgery called laparoscopic hernia repair uses a small incision to guide a tube and a camera into the abdomen. With the assistance of the camera, doctors locate the hernia then use a mesh patch or stitches to repair the weakened abdominal wall.  A more invasive alternative involves a larger incision into the stomach. This surgery allows a doctor to directly view the hernia then make repairs to the damaged tissue.   A 2002 study  compared laparoscopic and more conventional invasive surgery to repair spigelian hernias in two groups of 11 people. Laparoscopic surgery produced fewer complications. This suggests that it may be a preferred option for most people without complex hernias.  When a spigelian hernia traps a portion of the bowel, surgery may need to be performed immediately. Surgery may also take longer and be more complex, depending on how extensive the involvement is of the bowel and other tissues and organs.  The recovery period for laparoscopic spigelian hernia surgery tends to be relatively short, lasting just 1 to 2 weeks. People who have more extensive surgery often have a longer recovery period.  People who experience complications, such as a bowel obstruction or an infection, may also require longer recovery times.  A person should report any new symptoms to a doctor.  Fever , intense pain, or unexplained bleeding may mean that there are complications with recovery.  Most people can resume normal activities within 4 to 6 weeks and can begin light activities, such as walking and driving,  1 to 2 weeks  following surgery. A person should strictly follow their surgeon's recommendations and advice for the best possible outcomes during recovery.  People who have previously had a hernia are more likely to experience another hernia. However,  a 2002 study  followed up with 76 people who had undergone spigelian hernia surgery an average of 8 years later. It found just three had experienced another hernia.  The results suggest that most people who receive surgery for a spigelian hernia are unlikely to have another hernia in the following years. Their risk, however, remains higher than that of people with no history of hernias.  It can feel tempting to delay seeking treatment for sudden abdominal pain. This reaction may be especially true if the pain goes away for a while. However, spigelian hernias present serious medical risks.  They are relatively easy to treat, and most people will not need surgery again. So, when signs of a spigelian hernia appear, people should see a doctor.    
 Bhardwaj, A., Kalhan, S., Bhatia, P., Khetan, M., John, S., Bindal, V., … Arora, P. (2015, April). Topic: Abdominal wall hernia — Spigelian hernia, anatomy, incidence, repair.  Hernia ,  19 , S344.  Bhardwaj, A., Kalhan, S., Bhatia, P., Khetan, M., John, S., Bindal, V., … Arora, P. (2015, April). Topic: Abdominal wall hernia — Spigelian hernia, anatomy, incidence, repair.  Hernia ,  19 , S344.  Campanella, A. M., Licheri, S., Barbarossa, M., Saba, A., Pinna, E., Reccia, I., . . . Pisanu, A. (2015, April). Topic: Abdominal wall hernia: Spigelian hernia, anatomy, incidence, repair [Abstract].  Hernia ,  19 (Suppl 1), S215.  Larson, D. W., &amp; Farley, D. R. (2002, September 4). Spigelian hernias: Repair and outcome for 81 patients [Abstract].  World Journal of Surgery ,  26 (10), 1277–1281.  Light, D., Chattopadhyay, D., &amp; Bawa, S. (2013, March). Radiological and clinical examination in the diagnosis of Spigelian hernias.  Annals of The Royal College of Surgeons of England ,  95 (2), 98–100.  Mittal, T., Kumar, V., Khullar, R., Sharma, A., Soni, V., Baijal, M, … Chowbey, P. K. (2008, October–December). Diagnosis and management of Spigelian hernia: A review of literature and our experience.  Journal of Minimal Access Surgery ,  4 (4), 95–98.  Moreno-Egea, A., Carrasco, L., Girela, E., Martín, J.-G, Aguayo, J. L., &amp; Canteras, M. (2002, November). Open vs laparoscopic repair of Spigelian hernia: A prospective randomized trial.  Archives of Surgery ,  137 (11), 1266–1268.  Ng, Z. Q., Low, W., Subramanian, P., &amp; Stein, J. (2017, March). Strangulated small bowel in a Spigelian hernia and a review of the literature.  Annals of Emergency Surgery ,  2 (2), 1011.  Parihar, D., Kadian, Y. S., Raikwar, P., &amp; Rattan, K. N. (2013, September–December). Congenital Spigelian hernia and cryptorchidism: Another case of new syndrome.  APSP Journal of Case Reports ,  4 (3), 41.  Spigelian hernia. (n.d.).  Xu, L., Dulku, G., &amp; Ho, R. (2017, November 9). A rare presentation of Spigelian hernia involving the appendix.  European Journal of Radiology Open ,  4 , 141–143.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What is a spigelian hernia?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320429.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2017, December 26). "What is a spigelian hernia?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  