 When that pain lasts for 3 months or longer and is not due to a specific cause, it is called  vulvodynia .  In this article, we look at a variety of causes of vulvar pain, as well as how these might be treated.  The vulva is the area comprising the external genitals in women. It contains several different structures, including:  Vulvar pain can occur in any of these structures.  Vulvar pain varies among women and can be described as:  The pain can occur in one spot, when it is known as localized, or throughout the entire vulva and is then known as generalized.  It can also be provoked, meaning it is caused by pressure or touch, or unprovoked, meaning it occurs on its own without touch. For some women, the pain comes and goes, but it can also be constant.  Vulvar pain can be triggered by:  Pain and discomfort that occurs when pressure is applied to the opening of the vagina is called vestibulodynia.  There are many different causes of vulvar pain. Some of the potential causes of pain in the vulva include:   Infections   Chronic yeast infections or bacterial infections can cause pain that ranges from mild discomfort and itching to severe burning or throbbing.  Viral and bacterial infections, such as  bacterial vaginosis  or the  herpes  simplex virus, can also cause vulvar pain or discomfort.   Trauma   The vulva contains very sensitive tissues and contains nerve endings. It is easy for those nerve endings to be damaged by childbirth, sexual activity, or by riding a bicycle or horse.   Chronic pain conditions    Research has found  that women who have vulvodynia are more likely to also have a chronic pain condition, such as  fibromyalgia , interstitial  cystitis , or  irritable bowel syndrome .   Allergies   Some women have allergies to soaps or feminine hygiene products that can cause pain, discomfort, and irritation in the genital area.  Most women with allergies also report having irritation or  inflammation .   Hormonal changes   Hormonal changes associated with  menopause  or the menstrual period can cause sensitive tissues to become swollen, inflamed, or dry and uncomfortable.   Cancer    Vulvar cancer  is the growth of abnormal cells in the tissues of the vulva. This type of  cancer  can cause itching, burning, inflammation, and pain.  Most cases of vulvar cancer also cause lumps, sores, or skin changes.  Treatment depends on the cause of the vulvar pain. This may mean medication to treat an infection, hormone replacement to manage hormonal changes, or surgery to repair an injury.  Also, a therapist or physical therapist can help to relieve tight muscles or address chronic pain or  anxiety .  Other treatments may include:  Several home strategies can be used to reduce pain or discomfort. These include:  Some women find it embarrassing to talk about vulvar pain or discomfort with their doctor.  It is important to remember that the doctor is a professional and trained to help with all medical issues. A woman may also request a female doctor if that makes her more comfortable.  Vulvar pain can cause uncomfortable quality of life issues and can signal that something is wrong. In most cases, vulvar pain can be treated, but it is important to diagnose the problem correctly.  A doctor will look for signs of a serious cause, such as infection or cancer, and can recommend treatments to help relieve pain or discomfort.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 About vulvodynia and vulvar vestibulitis. (n.d.).  About vulvodynia and vulvar vestibulitis. (n.d.).  Disorders of the vulva: Common causes of vulvar pain, burning, and itching. (2015, September).  Nyirjesy, P. (2001, February 15). Chronic vulvovaginal candidiasis.  American Family Physician ,  63 (4), 697–703.  Reed, B. D., Harlow, S. D., Sen, A., Edwards, R. M., Chen, D., &amp; Haefner, H. K. (2012, July). Relationship between vulvodynia and chronic comorbid pain conditions [Abstract].  Obstetrics and Gynecology ,  120 (1), 145–151.  Signs and symptoms of vulvar cancers and pre-cancers. (2016, February 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "What causes vulvar pain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320466.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2017, December 29). "What causes vulvar pain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  