 The spinal column of people with dextroscoliosis may appear to be curved in an S or C shape.  In this article, we look at how a person can relieve symptoms of dextroscoliosis with treatment and exercise.  Dextrosoliosis is a type of  scoliosis  — a term which refers to conditions involving an abnormal curvature of the spine.  Although abnormal curvatures can develop anywhere in a person's spinal column, dextroscoliosis tends to occur in the middle and upper portions of the spine (thoracic spine).  Scoliosis can be caused by neuromuscular conditions, connective tissue disorders, and genetic conditions. But, approximately 85 percent of scoliosis cases have no known cause (idiopathic).  Types of scoliosis include:  Scoliosis impacts an estimated 2 to 3 percent of people in the United States. Most people develop the condition between the age of 10 and 15.  One way to reduce pain and compensate for limited movement in the spine is to increase the mobility and strength of the hips.  Stretches and exercises that stretch the spine, expand the chest, and strengthen the muscles of the back also seem to improve scoliosis symptoms.  Popular exercises that may help reduce dextroscoliosis symptoms include:   Gluteal stretch:    Knee to chest stretch:    Thigh stretch:    Lunge stretch:    Shoulder stretch:    Overhead stretch and reach:    Lying butterfly stretch:    Yoga  is suitable for people with scoliosis. Several core yoga poses, including the Cat, the Tree, and the Mountain, may be particularly beneficial.  Some people with scoliosis experience reduced lung capacity. Practicing breathing exercises may help improve lung capacity and reduce related symptoms, such as weakness and  headache .  Learning auto-correction techniques, or tricks that help a person recognize and correct poor posture has also been shown to help reduce pain caused by scoliosis.  According to the National Scoliosis Foundation, there is limited research on the benefits of therapeutic and recreational exercise for people with scoliosis.  Although specific exercises have shown promise in reducing scoliosis symptoms, the best treatment plan for each case depends on the location and extent of the curvature.  The best way to treat dextroscoliosis depends on a person's age, symptoms, and the severity of their condition.  Around 600,000 people in the U.S. seek medical attention for scoliosis symptoms.  Of those who seek treatment, an estimated 30,000 children are fitted for a back brace to treat scoliosis, while some 38,000 undergo surgery.  Scoliosis is confirmed using X-rays. A positive diagnosis of mild scoliosis requires the angle of the spine curvature to be greater than 10 degrees.  Mild cases of dextroscoliosis usually only require medical monitoring. A doctor may examine the progression of the curve every 6 months to a year and ask about symptoms, such as pain or discomfort.  Curvatures with angles between 25 and 30 degrees are classified as moderate scoliosis and typically require some form of treatment.  For moderate cases of scoliosis, doctors may recommend taking X-ray images every 6 months or yearly. In adults with scoliosis, X-rays may only be necessary every 5 years, since they are no longer growing.  Curvatures over 35 degrees are considered severe and almost always require treatment. A doctor may recommend either a back brace or surgery.  For moderate to severe curves, a back brace can be made to fit an individual's spine.  A person will need to wear the scoliosis brace at all times, except when eating, sleeping, or exercising. Braces for scoliosis only work for children and adolescents, when the spine is still actively growing.  Surgery may be necessary if scoliosis is severe. Most scoliosis surgeries involve fusing spinal vertebrae or segments together to encourage the spine to straighten.  Surgeons may also place metal rods or straightening devices into the spine to help it stay straight during recovery.  Additional therapies that may be used to treat dextroscoliosis symptoms include:  Scoliosis can cause pain, discomfort, and reduced mobility. It can also lead to low moods and low self-esteem.  While scoliosis can cause  back pain , it may also be caused by another condition. In one study, 10 percent of people with scoliosis who complained of back pain had an underlying condition, such as spondylolisthesis, syringomyelia, tethered cord,  herniated disc , or a spinal  tumor .  Though most cases of scoliosis resolve before the curvature causes serious health complications, untreated or severe scoliosis can be disabling, even life-threatening.  Long-term monitoring of people with scoliosis may also pose health risks, primarily due to repeated radiation from diagnostic scans.  Complications associated with scoliosis include:  Dextroscoliosis can cause pain, discomfort, and reduced mobility. However, mild to moderate cases of scoliosis only require medical monitoring, and people may be able to reduce their symptoms by exercise or wearing a brace.  In cases involving young children, scoliosis symptoms often resolve on their own over time.  Severe cases of scoliosis that cause pain or discomfort may require surgery. Anyone who has scoliosis and feels pain should seek medical attention.    
 Complementary therapies. (2016, January).  Complementary therapies. (2016, January).  Exercise and adults with scoliosis. (2015, June 22).  Horne, J. P., Flannery, R., &amp; Usman, S. (2014, February 1). Adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: Diagnosis and management.  American Family Physician ,  89 (3), 193–198.  Information and support. (n.d.).  Scoliosis. (n.d.).  Scoliosis. Overview. (2017, February 3).  Scoliosis. (n.d.).  Types of scoliosis. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What is dextroscoliosis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320457.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, December 28). "What is dextroscoliosis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  