 Tight hip flexors can also lead to injuries. Fortunately, there are several stretches and exercises that relax and strengthen the hip flexors. With improved strength and flexibility, a person is less likely to experience pain or injury.  A person's hip flexors are the muscles that surround the ball and socket joints that connect the legs to the upper body.  These muscles are vital to the movement of the lower body.  The hip flexors, which consist of five distinct muscles, are often a neglected muscle group.  It is not uncommon for even exercise enthusiasts to leave out exercises that strengthen and stretch these muscles.  A person should keep the hip flexors well-stretched and strong to help avoid injury or prevent existing injuries getting worse.  Several stretches will help improve flexibility and make the hip flexors less prone to injury. Some exercises to stretch the hip flexors include the following:  The seated butterfly stretch stretches the hips, thighs, and lower back. It is easy to perform and is done from a seated position.  To perform this stretch:  Bridge is a popular pose in  yoga . It stretches many parts of the legs, hips, and back while lying down.  To perform this stretch:  Another popular stretch in yoga, Pigeon pose gives the hips a deep stretch. This pose is difficult to perform, so people should use caution when trying it for the first time.  To perform this stretch:  There are some good exercises that can be done at home or the gym.  These exercises strengthen the legs in general but target the muscles that make up the hip flexors.  To strengthen the hip flexor a person can try the following:  Mountain climbers are a type of move that a person does from a plank-like position. Mountain climbers mimic the motion of climbing up rocks, which is where the name comes from.  To perform mountain climbers:  Start off with 5 to 10 repetitions and build up to about 20 to 30 over time.  Lunges are an excellent exercise to strengthen the leg and hip muscles. People can perform lunges in a variety of ways, including forward, backward, and toward either side. The simplest is a forward lunge.  To perform a forward lunge:  To start, 5 to 10 repetitions may be all that a person can do. However, building up to 20 to 30 repetitions is a good number to aim for.  Straight leg raises are another exercise that can be done lying down and involves lifting one leg at a time. It is easy to perform but gives the lower body a good workout.  To perform the straight leg raise:  Repeat 8 to 10 times per leg.  Squats can work the muscles of the legs and engage the core at the same time. Squats have an added advantage of being very flexible, meaning a person can adjust the intensity to fit their changing fitness needs.  To perform a squat:  As strength grows, people can add can jumps or weights for an extra challenge.  Clamming is a popular exercise among dancers, who need to have strong hip muscles to help with rotation. Initially, people can do clamming without resistance.  To perform a clam, a person should:  People who have been doing this exercise for a while may use a therapy band for added resistance.  People who have access to a gym may be able to find machines geared towards strengthening the hip flexors. Often seated, these machines focus on squeezing the legs together or pushing them apart.  If focusing on the legs, a person should not skip these machines at the gym, as they can help to strengthen the hip flexors.  Tight hip flexors can cause some potential problems in different parts of the body. Tight hip flexors can do the following:  Taking care to stretch and strengthen the hip flexors can help a person avoid complications in the future.  It is essential that a person does not forget these muscle groups when working out. Neglecting the hip flexors can lead to additional problems and pains that may limit mobility and quality of life.  There are some simple exercises and stretches to try that can help a person maintain strong, healthy hips.    
 Hip rehabilitation exercises. (2012, October).  Hip rehabilitation exercises. (2012, October).  Physical therapy after hip arthroscopy. Therapy phases 1 and 2 [Fact sheet]. (2017, October 5).  Tyler, T. F., Fukunaga, T., &amp; Gellert, J. (2014, November). Rehabilitation of soft tissue injuries of the hip and pelvis.  International Journal of Sports Physical Therapy ,  9 (6), 785–797.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "How do you strengthen hip flexors?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320489.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, January 1). "How do you strengthen hip flexors?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  