 But more focused research indicates that high blood levels of  cholesterol  are less influenced by cholesterol-containing foods, such as eggs, than individual factors, such as ethnicity, gender, hormonal functioning, and overall  nutrition .  Like egg whites, egg yolks have a high protein content and contain many essential  vitamins , minerals, fats, and healthy  calories .  Eggs are a low-cost, nutrient-filled, easy to access and prepare food, making them an excellent dietary staple for many people worldwide. Eggs are also a very versatile food. And the consumption of eggs does not usually conflict with most religious or moral guidelines.  Eating egg whites and yolks together in a whole egg also contains the right balance of protein, fat, and calories that allows most people to feel fuller and more satisfied at meals.  A  2015 study  found that obese Mexican-American women who ate eggs regularly after pregnancy got higher overall scores on the Healthy Eating Index than those who did not, suggesting eggs might play a role in healthy eating patterns.  Possible further health benefits associated with egg yolks include:  More recently researchers have begun to explore the potential of various immune-stimulating compounds found in egg yolks called immunoglobulins.  A  2017 study  found that female mice that consumed the egg yolk nutrient anti-VacA IgY were less likely to get become infected by  Helicobacter pylori , a bacteria that commonly causes intestinal infection.  The amount of nutrition in each egg yolk depends on the size of the egg, how it was raised and processed, and what species it is. And the final dietary value of egg yolks varies greatly depending on how they are prepared. For example, cooking whole eggs in oil may double, even triple, the fat and cholesterol content of an egg dish.  According to the  United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) , a raw egg yolk from one standard, large (17 gram) egg in the United States has:  Egg yolks contain at least seven essential minerals, including:  Egg yolks are high in many vitamins, especially fat and water-soluble vitamins.  The table below outlines the vitamin content of one large (17 g) egg yolk.  Egg yolks are also high in many compounds, vitamins, and other nutrients known to have health benefits, including the prevention of several long-term and infectious diseases.  Per unit size, duck, quail, and free-range heritage hen eggs are considered to contain higher amounts of most of the important nutrients than conventional chicken eggs.  Egg yolks contain an average of  43 percent  of the total protein content of the egg.  And nearly all the water-soluble and fat-soluble vitamins and minerals in eggs are found in the yolk. Several studies have concluded that consuming whole eggs has far more significant benefits than eating egg whites alone.  For example,  a 2017 study  found that young men who ate whole eggs immediately after resistance exercises had higher rates of muscular metabolism than those who only consumed egg whites.  The fact that most of an egg's nutrition is found in its yolk should not be surprising. Biologically, egg yolks are designed to be the primary source of nutrients for a growing embryo.  The most common health concern associated with eggs is  food poisoning  from the bacteria  Salmonella . Poultry naturally carry  Salmonella  and can contaminate their eggs with the bacteria.  Salmonella infections can be very serious, especially for young children, people with immune conditions, and those over the age of 65. But following a few basic safety precautions when purchasing, storing, handling, and cooking eggs significantly reduces the risk of  Salmonella  poisoning.  Tips for safely dealing with eggs include:  In general, the link between egg yolks and chronic conditions, such as cardiovascular disease, high-cholesterol, high-blood pressure, and disorders that influence circulation, such as  diabetes , remains unclear.    
 Andersen, C. J. (2015, September). Bioactive egg components and inflammation.  Nutrients ,  7 (9), 7889–7913.  Andersen, C. J. (2015, September). Bioactive egg components and inflammation.  Nutrients ,  7 (9), 7889–7913.  Basic Report: 01125, Egg, yolk, raw, fresh. (2016, May).  Fernandez, M. L. (2016, December 2). Eggs and health special Issue.  Nutrients ,  8 (12), 784.  Guiden, K. (2016, January 20). Setting the egg-spectation.  Hong, K. S., Ki, M.-R., Ullah, H. M. A., Lee, E.-J., Kim, Y. D., Chung, M.-J., ... &amp; Jeong, K.-S. (2017, December 6). Preventive effect of anti-VacA egg yolk immunoglobulin (IgY) on  Helicobacter pylori -infected mice.  Vaccine ,  3 , 371–380.  Li, Y., Zhou, C., Zhou, X., &amp; Li, L. (2013, August). Egg consumption and risk of cardiovascular diseases and diabetes: a meta-analysis.  Atherosclerosis ,  229 (2), 524–530.  Miranda, J. M., Anton, X., Redondo-Valbuena, C., Roca-Saavedra, P., Rodriguez, J. A., Lamas, A., … Cepeda, A. (2015, January). Egg and egg-derived foods: Effects on human health and use as functional foods.  Nutrients ,  7 (1), 706–729.  Rouhani, M. H., Rashidi-Pourfard, N., Salehi-Abargouei, A., Karimi, M., &amp; Haghighatdoost, F. (2017, November 7). Effects of egg consumption on blood lipids: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials.  Journal of the American College of Nutrition , 1-12 .   Salmonella  in eggs. (2017, May 24).  The healthy way to eat eggs. (2015, September 3).  van Vliet, S., Shy, E. L., Sawan, S. A., Beals, J. W., West, D. W. D., Skinner, S. K., ... &amp; Burd, N. A. (2017, December). Consumption of whole eggs promotes greater stimulation of postexercise muscle protein synthesis than consumption of isonitrogenous amounts of egg whites in young men.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  106 (6), 1401–1412.  Vega-López, S., Pignotti, G. A. P., Todd, M., &amp; Keller, C. (2015, October 2). Egg intake and dietary quality among overweight and obese Mexican-American postpartum women.  Nutrients ,  7 (10), 8402–8412.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "All you need to know about egg yolk."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320445.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, December 27). "All you need to know about egg yolk."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  