 Having thrombosed  hemorrhoids  can be painful. They may make everyday activities uncomfortable, such as walking, sitting, or going to the toilet.  Thrombosed hemorrhoids can affect anyone and are not a sign of being unhealthy. This article explores the symptoms, causes, and outlook for this common condition.  A person's anal canal is lined with blood vessels. When these blood vessels become dilated or swollen, they can form a hemorrhoid.  Hemorrhoids can be on the inside of the anal passage or form on the outside of the anus. Hemorrhoids on the inside are called internal hemorrhoids, and those on the outside are called external hemorrhoids.  Thrombosed hemorrhoids occur when either an internal or external hemorrhoid fills with blood clots. The name comes from the word "thrombosis," which means clotting. Thrombosed hemorrhoids can become tender and painful.  The symptoms of thrombosed hemorrhoids include:  Thrombosed hemorrhoids can also become infected, which may lead to an abscess. An abscess can cause additional symptoms, including a  fever .  Hemorrhoids are not a symptom of an underlying health concern but may be related to a person's diet.  A person may develop hemorrhoids when more pressure is put on their anal passage. This may be caused by:  Not every person who has external hemorrhoids will develop blood clots, but some do. Scientists do not yet understand why blood clots form in some external hemorrhoids.  Certain things can increase the risk of getting hemorrhoids, including:  A thrombectomy is usually used to treat thrombosed hemorrhoids. This is a small procedure where surgeons make a cut in the hemorrhoid and drain the blood.  The doctor will give a person anesthesia before they carry out the procedure, so they will not feel any pain.  This procedure is most effective if carried out a few days after blood clots develop in the hemorrhoid. As this is not always possible, other treatments may be needed.  If a thrombectomy is not effective, surgery may be required. There is a variety of surgical options available. These include:  Some home treatments may reduce the pain and discomfort of hemorrhoids:  It is not always possible to prevent hemorrhoids, but the following tips can reduce the risk:  Thrombosed hemorrhoids can be itchy, painful, and uncomfortable if left untreated, but symptoms can often be relieved using home remedies.  Where this is not the case, there are some medical treatments available. Rarely, a person may require surgery with general anesthetic.  Treatments for hemorrhoids are usually effective. If a person experiences recurrent hemorrhoids, it is essential that they discuss this with their doctor.    
 Hemorrhoids and what to do about them. (2017, October 31).  Hemorrhoids and what to do about them. (2017, October 31).  Treatment of hemorrhoids. (2016, October).  Zuber, T. (2002, April 15). Hemorrhoidectomy for thrombosed external hemorrhoids.  American Family Physician ,  65 (8), 1629–1632.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Thrombosed hemorrhoids: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320407.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2017, December 24). "Thrombosed hemorrhoids: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  