 If other treatments are not successful or the condition is severe, surgery is usually successful in restoring full movement.  The recovery time for trigger finger surgery is quick, and the procedure has a high chance of success.  Trigger finger or stenosing tenosynovitis is when the finger gets stuck in a particular position at one or more of the joints.  Trigger finger can make it difficult to move or use the finger; it also causes pain and discomfort.  The condition can affect any finger or the thumb and can occur in one or more fingers. Trigger finger is sometimes called trigger digit, as it can affect the thumb as well as the fingers.  Tendons connect the bones to muscles, allowing them to move. The tendons are protected by a covering called a sheath. When the tendon sheath becomes inflamed, it can make movement difficult and sometimes result in trigger finger.  The symptoms of trigger finger are:  The condition can affect any digit but is most common in the fourth and fifth fingers of the hand and the thumb.  There are three types of surgery for trigger finger:  Open surgery has traditionally been preferred by medical professionals because it has a very low risk of complications.  There is a small chance that percutaneous release surgery may damage blood vessels or nerves close to the tendon sheath.  However, percutaneous release surgery does not leave a scar and is more cost-effective. A  small 2016 study  found that people had an equal level of long-term satisfaction with both open and percutaneous release surgery.  Surgery will take around 20 minutes, and a person should not have to stay in the hospital overnight. The person will remain awake during the procedure, but local anesthetic will ensure they do not feel any pain.  Surgery may initially cause some pain or soreness. Doctors may recommend over-the-counter painkillers for relief.  Immediately after surgery, a person should be able to move their finger or thumb. Be gentle with movements at first; full movement can be expected to return in 1 to 2 weeks.  People should keep a dressing on their finger for a few days following open surgery. After this, they must keep the wound clean, using mild soap and water.  If a person has stitches, a medical professional may need to remove them after 2 to 3 weeks. Dissolvable stitches will dissolve within 3 weeks.  A person should ask their doctor about when they can resume everyday activities, such as driving or using a computer. Recovery time may be longer for someone who has had trigger finger surgery on more than one finger or thumb.  Some people may need to do finger exercises or undertake hand therapy to return full movement to the affected digit.  If left untreated, trigger finger can become permanent. If the affected finger or thumb becomes stuck in one position, it can make day-to-day tasks more difficult.  However, trigger finger is curable without surgery in most cases. Non-surgical treatments include:  If these treatments do not work, surgery may be needed. Before deciding on surgery, a doctor will consider how much pain a person is in, how much it affects their day-to-day activities, and how long they have been experiencing the pain.  Around  20 to 50 percent  of people who have trigger finger might need surgery to correct the condition.  Trigger finger can affect children, but surgery is not usually the recommended treatment. Trigger finger in children can often be treated with stretching and splints.  All three types of trigger finger surgery are considered very safe and straightforward, so complications are unlikely.  There are some risks, and a doctor should explain these before surgery. These include:  Trigger finger can affect anyone, but the following groups have a higher risk of developing the condition:  Repetitive movements, such as gripping a steering wheel or playing guitar, may cause trigger finger. In most cases, however, the exact cause is unknown.  Trigger finger is linked to certain medical conditions. Rheumatoid arthritis causes swollen joints and joint tissue, and this  inflammation  can extend to the fingers and thumbs. If the tendons in the digits become inflamed, it may cause trigger finger.  People with diabetes also have a higher risk of developing trigger finger. The condition affects  10 to 20 percent  of those with diabetes, but only 2 to 3 percent of the general population. The link between diabetes and trigger finger is unclear.  Trigger finger surgery is usually effective, and the problem is unlikely to happen again after surgery.  Both the open and percutaneous release methods of surgery have a high success rate, and recovery is relatively quick.    
 Does diabetes cause trigger finger? (2013, February).  Does diabetes cause trigger finger? (2013, February).  Lin, C.-J., Huang, H.-K., Wang, S.-T., Huang, Y.-C., Liu, C.-L., &amp; Wang, J.-P. (2016, June). Open versus percutaneous release for trigger digits: Reversal between short-term and long-term outcomes.  Journal of the Chinese Medical Association ,  79 (6), 340–344.  Trigger finger. (2015, September 1).  Trigger finger. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "Trigger finger surgery: What to expect."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320488.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2017, December 31). "Trigger finger surgery: What to expect."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  