 The scan involves injecting a radioactive tracer into a person's vein. The tracer travels through the bloodstream into the body parts listed above. A special camera takes pictures to track the tracer's movement and transmit images onto a computer screen for observation and diagnosis.  This article discusses HIDA scanning and outlines what a person can expect before, during, and after the procedure.  A HIDA scan may be done to:  HIDA scans can help diagnose the following:  Doctors may use X-rays and  ultrasounds  in conjunction with HIDA scans to confirm a diagnosis.  After a person has fasted for 4 to 12 hours, they may be allowed clear fluids, but always check this with a doctor. Before undergoing the procedure, all individuals should tell their doctor about any medications and supplements they are taking.  For example, those who have had an X-ray using barium contrast material or who have taken a medication containing bismuth, such as Pepto-Bismol, in the days before the HIDA scan should let their doctor know. Both barium and bismuth can impact the outcome of the test.  Pregnant women will not usually be given a HIDA scan as there may be a potential risk to the fetus. Breast-feeding women will be advised to avoid feeding their infant for several days following the scan to ensure the radioactive tracer has left their system.  Upon arrival at the hospital or clinic, a person will be asked to remove any jewelry and metal accessories. They may also be required to change into a hospital gown.  During the procedure:  If anyone experiences discomfort at any stage of the procedure, it is essential to tell the medical staff. Deep breathing may help alleviate discomfort.  Some people may be given more medications before, or during, the scan. For example, if the doctor orders a HIDA scan with cholecystokinin (CCK), which is a hormone that causes the gallbladder to release bile, the person will be given the medication sincalide (injection) or Kinevac (orally). Some people may be given morphine to aid the tracer's movement into the gallbladder.  If the images from the scan are not clear, some people may need to undergo a second scan within 24 hours.  Following a HIDA scan, most people will be able to go about their day as normal.  A person should drink plenty of water to help speed up the radioactive tracer's movement out of the body through urination and bowel movements.  HIDA scan results can be classed as:  A doctor will use these results — plus the results of other tests, as well as a person's signs and symptoms — to help inform their diagnosis.  There are relatively few risks associated with a HIDA scan. Potential risks include:  HIDA scans vary in price. In some cases, insurance may cover the cost. Healthcare Bluebook quotes  $1,120  as the fair price for a HIDA scan.  A HIDA scan is a useful test to help diagnose conditions in the liver, gallbladder, bile ducts, and small intestine. It involves tracking a radioactive tracer's movement as it moves through the body's bile system.  There is little preparation necessary before undergoing a HIDA scan, although it is important that women who are breast-feeding or pregnant inform their doctor before the procedure begins. Side effects are rare, with the benefits of undergoing a HIDA scan usually outweighing the potential risks.    
 Andalkar, L., Trow, T. K., Motroni, B., &amp; Katz, D. S. (2004, May). Bronchobiliary fistula as a complication of liver metastases: Diagnosis by HIDA scan [Abstract].  Clinical Nuclear Medicine ,  29 (5), 289–291.  Andalkar, L., Trow, T. K., Motroni, B., &amp; Katz, D. S. (2004, May). Bronchobiliary fistula as a complication of liver metastases: Diagnosis by HIDA scan [Abstract].  Clinical Nuclear Medicine ,  29 (5), 289–291.  HIDA scan (hepatobiliary system imaging). (n.d.).  Pfau, P. R., Kochman, M. L., Lewis, J. D., Long, W. B., Lucey, M. R., Olthoff, K., ... Ginsberg, G. G. (2000, July). Endoscopic management of postoperative biliary complications in orthotopic liver transplantation [Abstract].  Gastrointestinal Endoscopy ,  52 (1), 55–63.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What you should know about the HIDA scan."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320496.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, January 3). "What you should know about the HIDA scan."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  