 While bradykinesia can be a symptom of many medical conditions, it is most often associated with  Parkinson's disease . This is one of the main symptoms that a doctor will use to diagnose the disease.  Bradykinesia can also be a side effect of medications or a symptom of other neurological issues. It is related to akinesia, which is when a person has difficulty performing voluntary movements.  In this article, we look at the symptoms, diagnosis, causes, and treatment for bradykinesia.  Bradykinesia is essentially slow or difficult body movement.  There are varying degrees of bradykinesia, and the condition can often mean that everyday movements, such as lifting arms or legs, take much longer.  Parkinson's disease is the main cause of bradykinesia. As Parkinson's progresses through its stages, a person's ability to move and respond quickly diminishes.  In addition to slow movements and reflexes, a person may experience:  People with Parkinson's may also notice an inability to speak clearly. As the disease progresses, speech becomes softer and much harder for others to understand.  There is a specific test used to diagnose bradykinesia. The test is called the bradykinesia akinesia incoordination test or B.R.A.I.N.  During the test, a person does a series of rapid taps on a keyboard with alternating fingers for one minute.  A doctor then scores the test to help determine the diagnosis. The test score is based on:  The B.R.A.I.N. test is considered a very reliable tool for doctors to use. The results are used to help determine if someone has bradykinesia and the stage of Parkinson's they have reached.  In many cases, it is possible to treat successfully some of the symptoms associated with bradykinesia.  A doctor may first recommend that a person tries lifestyle changes to help alleviate symptoms.  A person can usually see some positive results when making these basic changes. However, it is important for them to consult their doctor before making alterations to their daily routine.  Some changes to talk to a doctor about can include:  Many doctors also recommend medication in conjunction with lifestyle treatments. A doctor is likely to prescribe a medication that increases the body's dopamine level.  Dopamine can be found in:  The treatment process often involves a lot of trial and error. A doctor must often try several drugs before finding one that works for an individual.  To make it even more difficult, most of the drugs lose their effectiveness over time. This means that a doctor must frequently change drugs or the doses to help a person achieve their desired results.  There is also a surgical procedure available for some people. A doctor may recommend a person tries deep brain stimulation.  This procedure involves surgically implanting electrodes into the brain. These electrodes are used to send signals to the brain, which improve movement speed and timing. This surgery is usually performed on people who have not responded well to medication.  Aside from Parkinson's disease, some medications can cause bradykinesia.  Antipsychotics and other drugs used to treat neurological conditions are common medications that can cause a person to experience symptoms of bradykinesia.  Scientists are not sure why this happens, as not enough research is available to determine the underlying cause.  There is no cure for bradykinesia. There are scientists who are researching treatments and cures for Parkinson's and bradykinesia, and this gives hope that a cure will be discovered eventually.  Lifestyle changes, medications, and, in some cases, surgery are all effective methods to help treat symptoms of the disorder.  A doctor or physical therapist is an excellent resource to develop an at-home treatment plan to manage symptoms.  Crucially, a person should consult their doctor before making any changes to their treatment plan, even small ones.    
 Berardelli, A., Rothwell, J. C., Thompson, P. D., &amp; Hallett, M. (2001, November). Pathophysiology of bradykinesia in Parkinson's disease [Abstract].  Brain: A Journal of Neurology ,  124 (Pt. 11), 2131–2146.  Berardelli, A., Rothwell, J. C., Thompson, P. D., &amp; Hallett, M. (2001, November). Pathophysiology of bradykinesia in Parkinson's disease [Abstract].  Brain: A Journal of Neurology ,  124 (Pt. 11), 2131–2146.  Homann, C. N., Suppan, K., Wenzel, K., Giovannoni, G., Ivanic, G., Horner, S., … Hartung, H. P. (2000, July). The bradykinesia akinesia incoordination test (BRAIN TEST), an objective and user-friendly means to evaluate people with Parkinsonism [Abstract].  Movement Disorders ,  15 (4), 641–647.  Shiner, T., Seymour, B., Symmonds, M., Dayan, P., Bhatia, K. P., &amp; Dolan, R. J. (2012, October 15). The effect of motivation on movement: A study of bradykinesia in Parkinson's disease.  PLoS ONE ,  7 (10), e47138.  Vaillancourt, D. E., Prodoehl, J., Metman, L. V., Bakay, R. A., &amp; Corcos, D. M. (2004, March 1). Effects of deep brain stimulation and medication on bradykinesia and muscle activation in Parkinson's disease.  Brain: A Journal of Neurology ,  127 (3), 491–504.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What you should know about bradykinesia."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320487.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, January 1). "What you should know about bradykinesia."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  