 Researchers are not sure why they develop, but hiatal  hernias  are very common, estimated to impact up to  60 percent  of people by the age of 60.  The primary symptom of a hiatal hernia is indigestion; certain foods and lifestyle habits can increase a person's chances of experiencing uncomfortable symptoms.  Unless a person has an unusually severe and problematic hiatal hernia, the best way for them to reduce or prevent symptoms is to make dietary and lifestyle adjustments.  Non- or low-acidic foods will reduce the likelihood and severity of hiatal hernia symptoms. The best food choices for people with hiatal hernias are non-acidic, minimally processed, and contain dietary fiber.  There are some exceptions for those who have food intolerances. Elimination diets may be helpful for optimal improvement in symptoms.  Safe foods to eat may include:  Fermented or cultured foods that are rich in probiotics (acid-neutralizing stomach bacteria) may also help reduce hiatal hernia symptoms.  Popular fermented foods include:  It is important to note that consuming processed sugar alongside probiotics may be counterproductive. Sugar supports the growth of stomach microbes that destroy and consume probiotics.  This means that probiotic ice creams, juices, yogurts, sweetened protein powders, and gummies are typically not a good source of probiotics.  Avoiding certain foods might help reduce and prevent symptoms of  indigestion , including  heartburn , bloating, gas, and regurgitation.  It is best for people with a hiatal hernia to stay away from foods that are acidic, rich, oily, or contain preservatives.  Foods to avoid may include:  Aside from diet, a person could try making some lifestyle adjustments to help manage their hiatal hernia symptoms.  Lifestyle tips for treating hiatal hernia symptoms include:  Drinking a small amount of diluted apple cider vinegar at the beginning of meals may also help reduce symptoms.  Managing  stress  and practicing stress-reducing strategies, such as walking, being in nature, mindfulness, meditation, or  yoga , may help a person feel better.  A person can also take over-the-counter antacids, though long-term use does carry risks.  Indigestion is the primary and often the only symptom of a hiatal hernia. Most of the more serious health complications associated with the condition occur because of untreated chronic indigestion.  These complications include esophageal scarring and internal bleeding.  Diet plays a significant role in the development, severity, and length of hiatal hernia symptoms. But aside from causing  inflammation  and irritation, researchers are not sure how and why certain foods cause a hiatal hernia to develop.  Most of the studies exploring the connection between diet and indigestion have focused on gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ), a condition that may lead to a hiatal hernia.  A person should seek medical attention for indigestion that lasts longer than 3 consecutive days.  A doctor should also assess heartburn, abdominal pain, bloating, gas or regurgitation that does not improve with the use of antacids, dietary changes, and lifestyle adjustments.  Hiatal hernias can cause serious health risks, including esophageal damage and associated internal bleeding, though this is rare.  A doctor can prescribe medications designed to treat indigestion that can reduce discomfort and improve the overall quality of life for people with hiatal hernias. However, making lifestyle and diet changes is often the best first step as there is unlikely to be any side effects.  Sometimes, if a hiatal hernia causes particularly bothersome symptoms, surgery may be necessary.    
 Ebrahimi-Mameghani, M., Sabour, S., Khoshbaten, M., Arefhosseini, S. R., &amp; Saghafi-Asl, M. (2017, June 14). Total diet, individual meals, and their association with gastroesophageal reflux disease.  Health Promotion Perspectives ,  7 (3), 155–162.  Ebrahimi-Mameghani, M., Sabour, S., Khoshbaten, M., Arefhosseini, S. R., &amp; Saghafi-Asl, M. (2017, June 14). Total diet, individual meals, and their association with gastroesophageal reflux disease.  Health Promotion Perspectives ,  7 (3), 155–162.  Eslami, O., Shahraki, M., Bahari, A., &amp; Shahraki, T. (2017, November 28). Dietary habits and obesity indices in patients with gastro-esophageal reflux disease: A comparative cross-sectional study.  BMC Gastroenterology ,  17 , 132.  Hiatus hernia. (2015, March 12).  Hyun, J. J., &amp; Bak, Y.-T. (2011, September). Clinical significance of hiatal hernia.  Gut and Liver ,  5 (3), 267–227.  Jackson, F. (n.d.). Very common, yet high predisposition.  Jarosz, M., &amp; Taraszewska, A. (2014, October 19). Risk factors for gastroesophageal reflux disease: The role of diet.  Przegla̜d Gastroenterologiczny ,  9 (5), 297–301.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Foods to eat and avoid for a hiatal hernia."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320468.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2017, December 30). "Foods to eat and avoid for a hiatal hernia."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  