 In this article, we look at the causes and symptoms of slipping rib syndrome, as well as when to see a doctor.  Slipping rib syndrome occurs when the ligaments holding the ribs in place move, cause the ribs to shift or "slip."  Slipping rib syndrome is more likely to occur in women than men. Playing contact sports is also a risk factor.  It usually affects the eighth, ninth, or tenth ribs, as these lower ribs are not connected to the mid-chest bone.  Instead, they are connected to each other by fibrous tissue or ligaments, which allows for greater movement and flexibility of the lower chest region. If these ligaments are injured or weakened, the damage can cause the ribs to slip.  When slipping rib syndrome occurs, the movement can irritate the nerves and put a strain on specific muscles in the affected area. The result is  inflammation  and pain.  The most common symptoms of slipping rib syndrome are:  A person will also usually experience pain when undertaking particular activities that involve movement of the rib cage. Examples include bending and lifting, breathing deeply or coughing, stretching, going up stairs, getting up from a seated position, and rolling over in bed.  In most instances, a rib only slips on one side, though it is possible for slipping rib syndrome to occur on both sides of the ribcage at the same time.  There are many possible reasons why slipping rib syndrome might occur, but sometimes there is no precise cause. In most cases, slipping rib syndrome occurs due to other problems in the chest, such as a weakness in chest muscles or ligaments.  Weakness in the chest muscles or ligaments is often due to hypermobility of the eighth, ninth, and tenth ribs. Hypermobility means they are more likely to move. These ribs are also more susceptible to trauma and injury.  Other causes of slipping rib syndrome are:  Many of the symptoms of slipping rib syndrome are similar to those of other conditions, therefore a doctor may do several tests to rule these out.  A doctor will ask about a person's symptoms and medical history, including how long the symptoms have been happening and if anything makes them worse.  A doctor may perform a test called the hooking maneuver to help diagnose slipping rib syndrome.  The test involves the doctor hooking their fingers under the person's rib margins and moving them upward and back. If this causes discomfort, the doctor may be able to diagnose slipping rib syndrome without any further tests.  Other possible conditions with similar symptoms include:  Treatment will depend on the severity of someone's pain and discomfort. If these are mild to moderate, the following treatment methods may be suggested:  Using over-the-counter pain medications is not seen as a long-term treatment and may cause side effects, including gastritis.  Medical treatments for slipping rib syndrome include:  Alternative natural treatments are also thought to provide some relief to people with slipping rib syndrome. These include:  A person should consult a doctor before starting these exercises to ensure they are done correctly, and they will not make the symptoms worse.  In some cases, slipping rib syndrome requires surgery. This intervention is usually recommended for people with severe and continuous pain if other options have not helped.  The surgical procedure is known as costal cartilage excision.  It is essential to seek immediate medical attention if a person experiences intense chest pain or difficulty breathing. These could be signs of a serious or life-threatening medical emergency, such as a  heart attack .  If pain is ongoing, causing discomfort, and affecting daily activities, a person should visit their doctor, as soon as possible. As the symptoms of slipping rib syndrome are similar to other, more severe conditions, it is vital to get a proper diagnosis and start treatment quickly.    
 Acute cholecystitis. (2016, August 4).  Acute cholecystitis. (2016, August 4).  Costochondritis. (2016, May 16).  Fu, R., Iqbal, C. W., Jaroszewski, D. E., &amp; St. Peter, S. D. (2012, October). Costal cartilage excision for the treatment of pediatric slipping rib syndrome.  Journal of Pediatric Surgery ,  47 (10), 1825–1827.  González, T. N., Ayuso, G. L, Hernández, M. S., Molina, C. A. Y., Pisón, C. J., &amp; Martínez, B. M. A. (2015, May–August). Slipping rib syndrome. An aggressive but effective treatment [Abstract].  Anales del Sistema Sanitario de Navarra ,  38 (2), 329–332. Gould, J. L., Rentea, R. M., Poola, A. S., Aguayo, P., &amp; St Peter, S. D. (2016, December). The effectiveness of costal cartilage excision in children for slipping rib syndrome.  Journal of Pediatric Surgery ,  51 (12), 2030–2032.  Robb, L. G., Robb, M. P., &amp; Robb, P. M. (2014, October 28). The slipping rib syndrome: An overlooked cause of abdominal pain.  Turcios, N. L. (2017, March). Slipping rib syndrome: An elusive diagnosis [Abstract].  Paediatric Respiratory Reviews ,  22 , 44–46.  Udermann, B. E., Cavanaugh, D. G., Gibson, M. H., Doberstein, S. T., Mayer, J. M., &amp; Murray, S. R. (2005, April–June). Slipping rib syndrome in a collegiate swimmer: A case report.  Journal of Athletic Training ,  40 (2), 120–122.  van Delft, E. A. K., van Pul, K. M., &amp; Bloemers, F. W. (2016, April 8). The slipping rib syndrome: A case report.  International Journal of Surgery Case Reports ,  23 , 23–24.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What is slipping rib syndrome?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Dec. 2017. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320417.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2017, December 24). "What is slipping rib syndrome?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  