 The pancreas is an organ that sits behind the stomach and secretes chemicals, called enzymes, which aid digestion. These digestive juices drain into the intestine through a tubular structure of ducts.  In normal circumstances, a person's digestive juices would drain to the small intestine through the ventral duct and via the major papilla. In pancreas divisum, however, they drain via the dorsal duct and the narrower minor papilla  Pancreas divisum is a widespread disorder, affecting  5 to 10 percent  of the general population. The vast majority of people with the condition experience no symptoms, and most cases of pancreas divisum are only discovered after death, at autopsy.  It does not usually require treatment.  If a person is in pain or experiencing frequent bouts of  pancreatitis , doctors may suggest increasing the size of the opening to the minor papilla, which is the opening to the main pancreatic duct.  Doctors can achieve this in the following ways:  The  National Pancreas Foundation  has published the following lifestyle advice for people with pancreatic diseases:  If someone experiences a flare-up of symptoms, they should limit their food intake. Speak to a doctor about the best way to do this.  Symptoms might include:  Very few people with the condition will develop any symptoms.  Pancreas divisum is usually diagnosed using magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (magnetic MRCP) or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).  These methods scan the inside of the body, and doctors will look for the presence of two separate rather than one fused pancreatic duct.  MRCP uses a powerful magnetic field and radio waves to produce detailed images of the pancreas and pancreatic ducts. It is non-invasive and does not require X-rays.  A person undergoing this test will likely be given a contrast material, which will be administered intravenously, through a drip. The person will then be asked to lie very still in the  MRI  machine while it scans the pancreas. The entire examination can take 10 to 45 minutes.  An ERCP is a camera and X-ray examination, during which a flexible tube with a tiny camera on the end is passed through the mouth into the stomach and the top of the small intestine.  Before taking X-rays of your pancreatic system, the doctor will inject a special dye that shows up on X-rays. The procedure usually takes 15 to 90 minutes.  Pancreas divisum can lead to recurrent or  acute pancreatitis , which is painful and can lead to  malnutrition .  It occurs when the narrow pancreatic duct becomes blocked as the digestive juices find it difficult to drain into the small intestine. This causes swelling and damage to the tissue.  It usually begins with gradual or sudden pain in the top of the belly, sometimes extending to the back, which may get worse after eating.  The pain tends to be severe and constant and can last for several days without treatment. Medical attention is needed in most cases.  Other symptoms include:  Acute pancreatitis is treated with fluids, nutritional support and pain control. Doctors will also attempt to identify and deal with the underlying cause, which could be pancreas divisum.  Pancreas divisum is an abnormality that occurs in the womb, and as such cannot be prevented. However, the overwhelming majority of people with pancreas divisum do not experience any symptoms, and the condition will have no impact on their life.  For those who are impacted by pancreas divisum, it is essential to speak to a doctor about the available treatment and management options.    
 Having an ERCP. (2016, December).  Having an ERCP. (2016, December).  Ignacio, Jr, R. C., Prescher, L. (2016, November). Pancreas divisum.  Nutrition advice and recipes. (n.d.).  Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography. (2017, January 23).  Pancreatic divisum. (n.d.).  Pancreas divisum. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "Pancreas divisum: How to treat and manage it."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320515.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, January 4). "Pancreas divisum: How to treat and manage it."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  