  Knee replacement surgery , also known as knee arthroplasty, is one of the most common types of elective surgery. It is estimated that by 2030 as many as  3.48 million  knee replacements will take place in the United States.  Knee replacement surgery may be necessary if a person has ongoing severe knee pain or swelling that affects their ability to carry out daily activities.  Most people are free from pain and regain their mobility after surgery. However, some people who have knee replacement surgery may develop an infection.  This article explores the signs, causes, risk factors, and treatments for a knee replacement infection. It also considers how to prevent knee replacement infections from happening.  A knee replacement infection may develop in the wound after surgery. It may also occur around the artificial implant that is used to replace the knee joint. Harmful bacteria entering the wound usually cause the infection.  A knee replacement infection can occur any time after surgery. For example:  According to the  American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons , only one in every 100 people who have a hip or knee replacement will develop an infection.  The following are normal after knee replacement surgery:  These post-surgery symptoms do not indicate an infection and should not be a cause for concern. These symptoms should get better over time.  If post-surgery symptoms get worse rather than better over time, this may be a sign of infection.  A person who experiences one or more of the following symptoms may have a knee replacement infection:  After knee replacement surgery, bacteria might enter a person's body through the wound where the surgical incision was made. If bacteria reach a person's new artificial knee joint, they may multiply and cause an infection.  Some bacteria are harmless, such as those that occur naturally in the stomach, while others may harm a person and cause an infection. A person's immune system usually kills any harmful bacteria that get into the bloodstream.  When a person has a knee replacement, their knee joint is replaced with an artificial joint made of metal and plastic. Because these materials are not organic, it is harder for the body to kill bacteria on them.  Anyone who has a knee replacement can develop an infection after surgery, but some groups are at a greater risk of infection. These include people who:  A doctor may be able to diagnose a knee replacement infection with a visual examination.  Sometimes, the doctor may need to investigate the type of bacteria that is causing infection using one or several of the following tests:  There is a range of treatments for a knee replacement infection, including both nonsurgical and surgical procedures.  Some knee replacement infections are superficial, which means that the infection has reached the skin and tissue around the joint but does not affect the artificial joint itself.  A superficial knee replacement infection may be treated with oral or intravenous (IV)  antibiotics .  If a knee replacement infection goes deeper than the skin and tissue around a joint, it may need to be treated surgically. Surgical treatment options include:  The different stages of staged surgery typically include:  Before and during knee replacement surgery, the following steps may help reduce the risk of infection:  After a person has had knee replacement surgery, the following measures may help reduce the risk of infection:  Although they may require surgery, knee replacement infections are treatable. Once a person has received proper treatment, the pain and swelling around the joint should improve, and they will regain movement.  Following pre- and post-surgery preventative measures will reduce the risk of further infection.    
 Chun, K. C., Kim, K. M., &amp; Chun, C. H. (2013, September). Infection following total knee arthroplasty.  Knee Surgery &amp; Related Research ,  25 (3), 93–99.  Chun, K. C., Kim, K. M., &amp; Chun, C. H. (2013, September). Infection following total knee arthroplasty.  Knee Surgery &amp; Related Research ,  25 (3), 93–99.  Joint replacement infection. (2012, October).  Kurtz, S., Ong, K., Lau, E., Mowat, F., &amp; Halpern, M. (2007, April). Projections of primary and revision hip and knee arthroplasty in the United States from 2005 to 2030.  Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery American Volume ,  89 (4), 780–785.  Malinzak, R. A., Ritter, M. A., Berend, M. E., Meding, J. B., Olberding, E. M., &amp; Davis, K. E. (2009, September). Morbidly obese, diabetic, younger, and unilateral joint arthroplasty patients have elevated total joint arthroplasty infection rates [Abstract].  The Journal of Arthroplasty ,  24 (6), 84–88.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Knee replacement infection: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320519.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, January 5). "Knee replacement infection: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  