 People with atypical Parkinsonism do not tend to respond to traditional  Parkinson's disease  treatments.  In this article, learn about the symptoms and types of atypical Parkinsonism and the treatments available.  Some people who have Parkinson's disease experience symptoms that are typical of the disease as well as other symptoms that are not typical of the disease. When this occurs, doctors call the condition atypical Parkinsonism or Parkinsonism plus syndrome.  Parkinson's disease is a progressive disorder that affects the brain, chiefly causing changes in movement.  Some of the most common symptoms include tremors, muscle stiffness, and changes in a person's gait when walking.  Atypical Parkinsonism has several known syndromes that affect a person's overall health. Examples include Lewy body  dementia , a type of early-onset dementia.  Atypical Parkinsonism may not respond to traditional Parkinson's disease treatments, so getting a correct diagnosis is important to ensure a person receives the treatments most likely to be effective.  People with atypical Parkinsonism experience symptoms in addition to those typical of Parkinson's disease. The symptoms of Parkinson's disease include:  People with atypical Parkinsonism do not tend to have a tremor at rest. They may also develop symptoms of late-stage Parkinson's at a faster rate. These symptoms include:  A doctor will consider these and other symptoms when making a diagnosis.  Atypical Parkinsonism has several forms or types that are known to co-occur with Parkinson's disease symptoms. These include:  While doctors do not know the exact cause of Parkinson's disease, they do know the disease destroys cells in an area of the brain called the substantia nigra.  This area is responsible for making a neurotransmitter called dopamine, which is associated with movement.  People with atypical Parkinson's have damage in the substantia nigra as well as to the cells outside this area of the brain that usually receive dopamine transmissions.  As a result, individuals may experience additional symptoms not associated with Parkinson's disease.  Currently, doctors do not consider atypical Parkinsonism to be hereditary, which means it does not appear to be passed down from parents to children.  Doctors do not have a definitive test to diagnose Parkinson's disease or atypical Parkinsonism. Instead, they must consider a person's overall symptoms and rule out other diseases.  A doctor will start by taking a person's medical history and asking about any symptoms they have observed. Diagnostic testing may include:  However, a person with atypical Parkinsonism may not improve with this medication because medicines designed for Parkinson's disease do not always have any effect on atypical Parkinsonism.  Sometimes making a definitive diagnosis of atypical Parkinson's can take time because symptoms do not fit into the most commonplace categories associated with the disease.  No cure exists for atypical Parkinsonism, but some medications can help reduce the severity of the symptoms. A doctor will also take into account the type of atypical Parkinsonism when prescribing treatments.  For example, doctors may treat dementia with Lewy bodies with levodopa, a Parkinson's medication. They may also prescribe medicines for dementia and  psychosis , such as donepezil and quetiapine (Seroquel).  A doctor may also treat PSP with levodopa as well as medicines to promote sleep, such as zolpidem (Ambien). Sometimes, doctors will use Botulinum toxin ( BOTOX ) injections to reduce eye muscle twitching.  In addition to medications, a person can also benefit from physical and occupational therapy to enhance balance, improve strength, and encourage independence.  Parkinson's disease and atypical Parkinsonism cannot always be prevented, but there are certain risk factors a person can try to avoid.  Factors that influence the development of atypical Parkinsonism include:  A person can take protective steps to avoid some of these risks by limiting chemical exposures and wearing a helmet when riding a bicycle or motorcycle.  Atypical Parkinson's represents a variety of conditions and symptoms in addition to typical Parkinson's symptoms.  A person should speak to their doctor as soon as possible if they are experiencing Parkinson's symptoms, as an early diagnosis may identify atypical Parkinsonism and associated conditions.    
 Atypical Parkinsonian disorders. (n.d.).  Atypical Parkinsonian disorders. (n.d.).  Atypical Parkinsonism. (n.d.).  Atypical Parkinson's disease. (n.d.).  Levin, J., Kurz, A., Arzberger, T., Giese, &amp; A., Höglinger, G. U. (2016, February). The differential diagnosis and treatment of atypical Parkinsonism.  Deutsches Arzteblatt International ,  113 (5), 61–69.  Parkinsonism syndromes, including atypical Parkinsonism. (n.d.).  What is atypical Parkinsonism and how does it differ from PD? (2013, June 24).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What is atypical Parkinsonism?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 8 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320551.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, January 8). "What is atypical Parkinsonism?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  