 Apple cider vinegar is one of the more common types of vinegar produced worldwide. It is touted as a natural health cure, with a number of suggested health benefits. Some of these health claims have potential, with small studies to back them up. Others, however, have little to no evidence of their validity.  In this article, we investigate the claim that consuming apple cider vinegar can help with weight loss.  Can drinking apple cider vinegar help someone lose weight? The answer might be yes, but it is not proven.  The weight loss claims surrounding apple cider vinegar may stem from several small studies, mostly on animals. Nonetheless, these studies do show some possible benefits of apple cider vinegar and could open the door to further research.  Acetic acid, a compound found in apple cider vinegar, has been cited in some studies as the active ingredient that helps with weight loss.   A study  in  Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry  found that mice who were given acetic acid were less likely to gain body fat.  The mice that were given the acetic acid had higher energy expenditure, oxygen intake, and burned more fat for energy than those given just water. The authors state that this suggests acetic acid could help suppress body fat buildup.  A similar article in the same journal found that consuming vinegar did  help reduce body fat , though the reduction was small. This study used 155 people who were considered obese with a body mass index ( BMI ) of 25–30.  Over 12 weeks, three groups were given either 15 milliliters (ml) of vinegar, 30 ml of vinegar, or a  placebo . Overall, those who consumed 15 or 30 ml of vinegar had a lower  body weight , smaller waist, and less abdominal fat than those who did not have the vinegar.   A study  in the  European Journal of Clinical Nutrition  looked at how glucose,  insulin , and feelings of fullness were different in those who consumed acetic acid versus those who did not.  Twelve people were given three different levels of vinegar with acetic acid after eating a portion of white bread. Another group was given bread with no vinegar.  The authors found that the people who received the highest dose of acetic acid had lower blood sugar and insulin after eating the bread than the other groups. They also found that the higher the dose of acetic acid, the fuller the participants felt.  The authors suggest that fermented and pickled products that contain vinegar with acetic acid may help people feel fuller and lower blood sugar responses after a meal.   A study  in the  Annals of Cardiology and Angiology  found that apple cider vinegar showed "anti-obesity" effects in rats.  Two groups of rats were fed a high-fat diet, but one group was given apple cider vinegar daily while the other received no vinegar.  Those that were given a daily dose of apple cider vinegar ate less overall and weighed less than those who were not given the apple cider vinegar. The mice fed the apple cider vinegar also showed lower blood sugar and  cholesterol .  There is at least one study that has questioned whether apple cider vinegar is a good way to help people eat less.   A study  in the  International Journal of Obesity  found that vinegar did suppress appetite in the sample of people studied. But the authors state this appetite-suppressing effect was largely because people felt nauseous after consuming the vinegar.  As such, the authors of this study do not feel that vinegar is an appropriate way to help control appetite.  Apple cider vinegar may have other health benefits beyond weight loss. However, the studies to date on its health effects have been small and limited.  Some possible benefits of apple cider vinegar include:  Apple cider vinegar works well as a flavoring for food, and a preservative for canned items, such as pickles. Vinegar also works well with meat marinades.  It has a strong, sour flavor that works well when balanced with other ingredients.  A tablespoon of vinegar can add the right hint of tang to a pork and bean dish or a pulled pork roast, for example. But, its tartness is best paired with plain apple cider or a sweet barbecue sauce.  One of the easiest and healthiest ways to consume apple cider vinegar is to add it to a healthy oil, such as olive oil, and use it as a salad dressing. Most of the studies found that just 1 to 2 tablespoons of apple cider vinegar are enough to reap its health benefits.  Apple cider vinegar is not for everyone, however. People who have stomach ulcers or  acid reflux  may find that apple cider vinegar makes their conditions worse.  On the other hand, for some people with  heartburn , resulting from reduced stomach acid, apple cider vinegar may improve heartburn or acid reflux symptoms. These people should discuss using apple cider vinegar with a doctor before trying it.  It should be remembered that the acidity of apple cider vinegar means that it could damage tooth enamel if used too frequently.  Some small studies show encouraging results for apple cider vinegar's weight loss benefits. However, it cannot take the place of proven weight loss methods.  Evidence-based weight loss plans encourage people to:  Though it may help with some weight loss and health conditions, apple cider vinegar should not be used in place of medical treatment.  There are various brands available to  purchase online . Before using apple cider vinegar, people should discuss its potential benefits and risks with their doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bouderbala, H., Kaddouri, H., Kheroua, O., &amp; Saidi, D. (2016, June). Anti-obesogenic effect of apple cider vinegar in rats subjected to a high fat diet [Abstract].  Annales de Cardiologie et d'Angéiologie ,  65 (3), 208–213.  Bouderbala, H., Kaddouri, H., Kheroua, O., &amp; Saidi, D. (2016, June). Anti-obesogenic effect of apple cider vinegar in rats subjected to a high fat diet [Abstract].  Annales de Cardiologie et d'Angéiologie ,  65 (3), 208–213.  Budak, N. H., Aykin, E., Seydim, A. C., Greene, A. K., &amp; Guzel-Seydim, Z. B. (2014, May 8). Functional properties of vinegar.  Journal of Food Science ,  79 (5), R757–R764.  Darzi, J., Frost, G. S., Montaser, R., Yap, J., &amp; Robertson, M. D. (2014, May). Influence of the tolerability of vinegar as an oral source of short-chain fatty acids on appetite control and food intake.  International Journal of Obesity ,  38 , 675–681.  Eshghizadeh, M., Moghaddam, M. B., Najafi, S., Rezvani, Z., Atarodi, M., &amp; Baghban, M. (2015). The effect of apple cider vinegar on striae gravidarum in women aged 20–35 years residing in Gonabad [Abstract].  Avicenna Journal of Phytomedicine ,  5 , 110–111.  Hattori, M., Kondo, T., Kishi, M., &amp; Yamagami, K. (2010, October 7). A single oral administration of acetic acid increased energy expenditure in C57BL/6J mice.  Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry ,  74 (10), 2158–2159.  Johnston, C. S., &amp; Buller, A. J. (2005, December). Vinegar and peanut products as complementary foods to reduce postprandial glycemia [Abstract].  Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,  105 (12), 1939–1942.  Johnston, C. S., &amp; Gaas, C. A. (2006, May 30). Vinegar: Medicinal uses and antiglycemic effect.  Medscape General Medicine ,  8 (2), 61.  Johnston, C. S., Kim, C. M., &amp; Buller, A. J. (2004, January). Vinegar improves insulin sensitivity to a high-carbohydrate meal in subjects with insulin resistance or type 2 diabetes [Abstract].  Diabetes Care ,  27 (1), 281–282.  Kondo, T., Kishi, M., Fushimi, T., Ugajin, S., &amp; Kaga, T. (2009, August 7). Vinegar intake reduces body weight, body fat mass, and serum triglyceride levels in obese Japanese subjects.  Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry ,  73 (8), 1837–1843.  Mohanty, S., Ramesh, S., &amp; Muralidharan, N. P. (2017, April–June). Antimicrobial efficacy of apple cider vinegar against  Enterococcus faecalis  and  Candida albicans : An  in vitro  study.  Journal of Advanced Pharmacy Education &amp; Research ,  7 (2), 137–141.  Naziroğlu, M., Güler, M., Özgül, C., Saydam, G., Küçükayaz, M., &amp; Sözbir, E. (2014, August). Apple cider vinegar modulates serum lipid profile, erythrocyte, kidney, and liver membrane oxidative stress in ovariectomized mice fed high cholesterol [Abstract].  The Journal of Membrane Biology ,  247 (8), 667–673.  Östman, E., Granfeldt, Y., Persson, L., &amp; Björck, I. (2005, June 29). Vinegar supplementation lowers glucose and insulin responses and increases satiety after a bread meal in healthy subjects.  European Journal of Clinical Nutrition , 59, 983–988.  Sakakibara, S., Yamauchi, T., Oshima, Y., Tsukamoto, Y., &amp; Kadowaki, T. (2006, June 2). Acetic acid activates hepatic AMPK and reduces hyperglycemia in diabetic KK-A(y) mice [Abstract].  Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications ,  344 (2), 597–604.  White, A. M., &amp; Johnston, C. S. (2007, November). Vinegar ingestion at bedtime moderates waking glucose concentrations in adults with well-controlled type 2 diabetes.  Diabetes Care ,  30 (11), 2814–2815.  Wu, D., Kimura, F., Takashima, A., Shimizu, Y., Takebayashi, A., Kita, N., ... Murakami, T. (2013). Intake of vinegar beverage is associated with restoration of ovulatory function in women with polycystic ovary syndrome [Abstract].  The Tohoku Journal of Experimental Medicine ,  230 (1), 17–23.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "Is apple cider vinegar good for losing weight?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320530.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, January 7). "Is apple cider vinegar good for losing weight?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  