 Many people take medication, such as  antidepressants , to treat their  depression , but there are a variety of natural methods available that work and reduce the risk of future episodes.  Depression is the  most common  type of mental illness. The  American Psychiatric Association  estimate that depression affects around 1 in 15 adults every year and that 1 in 6 people will experience depression at some point during their life.  While depression can affect anyone, it usually occurs for the first time when a person is in their teens or early 20s. Women are more likely than men to have depression.  There is considered to be a relationship between  stress  in a person's life and depression or  anxiety .  A  2012 study  conducted with veterinary students found stress had a negative impact on mental health, life satisfaction, and general health.  A variety of factors, including work, education, family life, or relationships, can cause stress. It is important to try managing and addressing these stressful situations when they arise.  Exercise offers a range of health benefits including  helping prevent depression . Both high-intensity and low-intensity exercise is beneficial in this respect.  High-intensity exercise releases the feel-good chemicals, known as endorphins, into the body.  Low-intensity exercise sustained over an extended period helps release proteins called neurotrophic factors, which improve brain function and make a person who is exercising feel better.  Many people who are depressed have low motivation for exercise, so it is a good idea to start with 5 minutes of walking or doing an enjoyable activity and gradually increase the length of time over the coming days, weeks, and months.  The brain needs the right mix of nutrients to function properly.  The  British Dietetic Association  (BDA) outlines some dietary changes people with depression can make that may help prevent relapses:  Not getting enough sleep has a significant impact on people psychologically and physically, and  insomnia is associated with depression .  Depression can also cause  insomnia , but there are techniques people can try in order to get more sleep naturally. These include:  There is a close link between depression, as well as anxiety disorders, and alcohol or other substance-use disorders.  The  Anxiety and Depression Association of America  estimates that around 20 percent of people who have depression also have an alcohol or drug disorder.  For most people, moderate alcohol consumption is not a problem, but for people with depression, alcohol or drug use can make their symptoms worse.  It can be a vicious cycle, but while many people take medication, there are natural techniques available that can help deal with both disorders at the same time.  For example,  cognitive behavioral therapy  (CBT), which looks at ways to change thinking patterns, is often useful. Many people see benefits after 12 to 16 weeks of therapy.  CBT is one effective way in which talking is used to help people with depression and, in  many cases , it has been found to be more effective than medication.  However, CBT is not the only type of talking therapy. A doctor or psychiatrist can help identify what kind of therapy may be most beneficial to an individual diagnosed with depression.  Often people find it easier talking to a trained stranger, such as a counselor or therapist, than they do talking to family and friends.  It can help the person talk about their symptoms differently and identify ways to deal with them.  Talking therapy is often in a one-on-one situation, but there are also support groups that other people find effective.  As much as possible, a person should avoid triggers associated with the onset of their depression symptoms.  This, of course, is not always simple, and in some cases, it can be impossible. For example, if a particular person or group of people are a trigger, the individual will have to weigh the advantages and disadvantages of avoiding them.  A job could be a trigger, but leaving a job is not always possible. Any life-changing decisions, such as these, need to be thoroughly thought out.  However, the most important thing is that the individual identifies what triggers their depression and works toward a way of managing and avoiding them as much as possible.    
 Benefits of talking therapy. (2016, January 3).  Benefits of talking therapy. (2016, January 3).  Corcoran, J. (2009).  The depression solutions workbook: A strengths and skills-based approach . Available from  https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=edVMWNVp9iYC&amp;pg=PA158&amp;lpg=PA158&amp;dq=avoiding+depression+triggers&amp;source=bl&amp;ots=Rj1r7BkxIg&amp;sig=qiABw5SKnJ9MZqXn1z1QbBRCxGY&amp;hl=en&amp;sa=X&amp;redir_esc=y#v=onepage&amp;q=avoiding%20depression%20triggers&amp;f=false   Effland, L. S. (n.d.). Depression and sleep problems: How to improve without medication.  Exercise is an all-natural treatment to fight depression. (2013, August).  Harbottle, L. (2016, April). Depression and diet [Fact sheet].  Mental health basics. (2013, October 4).  Reisbig, A. M., Danielson, J. A., Wu, T. F., Hafen Jr, M., Krienert, A., Girard, D., … Garlock, J. (2012). A study of depression and anxiety, general health, and academic performance in three cohorts of veterinary medical students across the first three semesters of veterinary school.  Journal of Veterinary Medical Education   39 (4), 348–358.  Substance use disorders. (n.d.).  What is depression? (2017, January).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "What to know about avoiding depression."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320502.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2018, January 4). "What to know about avoiding depression."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  