 Muscles stiffness can also be accompanied by pain, cramping, and discomfort.  It is usually not a cause for concern and can be treated with home remedies and stretching.  In this article, we look at some causes of muscle stiffness, as well as home remedies and when to see a doctor.  There are a variety of things that can cause muscle stiffness, including:  A common cause of muscle stiffness is exercise or hard physical labor of some kind.  Often, stiffness can occur when someone starts a new exercise routine or program or has increased the intensity and duration of their routine.  When this happens, the muscles are required to work harder, and this causes microscopic damage to the muscle fibers, resulting in stiffness or soreness. This type of injury is sometimes referred to as delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS).  Any movement can cause DOMS, but it is commonly caused by:  The  most common  cause of muscle stiffness is a sprain or strain, which can affect both the muscles and ligaments.  A strain is when the muscle fibers are stretched or torn. Strains are particularly common in the legs and lower back.  A sprain is when the ligaments have been stretched, twisted, or torn. The ligaments are the bands of tissue around the joints that connect the bones together.  Common areas prone to sprains include:  Other symptoms associated with sprains and strains include:  Polymyalgia rheumatica causes muscle pain and stiffness. It usually affects the upper body, including the shoulders, neck, and arms. It also commonly affects the hips.   The average age  of a person with polymyalgia rheumatica is 70, and some people do not develop it until they reach their 80s. What causes the condition is unknown.  Additional symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica include:  Insect bites and stings can sometimes cause muscle stiffness. Bites or stings may also cause a red, swollen lump on the skin, which can be itchy and painful.  Bugs that commonly bite or sting and may cause muscle stiffness include:  Symptoms of a bite or sting will usually improve within a few days, but some people have allergic reactions that may require medical attention.  Stiffness after an insect bite can also be associated with more serious conditions, such as  Lyme disease ,  malaria , or Rocky Mountain spotted  fever . These conditions will also cause other symptoms, such as fever and malaise.  Some infections cause muscle stiffness in addition to other symptoms. These infections include:  Some medications can cause muscle stiffness. Muscle stiffness is a common side effect of statins, or drugs prescribed to lower  cholesterol .  Anesthetics used before surgery can also cause a person to experience muscle stiffness during the hours and days that follow.  Other things that may lead to occasional muscle stiffness include:  Most cases of muscle stiffness will go away on their own or with the aid of home remedies, but prolonged or frequent stiffness can sometimes be a sign of an underlying condition.  If someone is experiencing muscle stiffness along with additional symptoms, such as fever, pain, dark urine, or swelling, they should speak to a doctor.  If a person is experiencing stiffness after an insect bite or sting, they should speak to a medical professional, especially if they have allergy symptoms.  People should always speak to a doctor about any bothersome side effects of medications they are taking, including muscle stiffness.  It is important for a person to tell the doctor about all the symptoms they have, not just muscle stiffness, in order to get an accurate diagnosis.  If muscle stiffness is a symptom of an underlying condition, a person will work with their doctor to make a treatment plan. A doctor may also prescribe anti-inflammatory medication to reduce pain and discomfort.  Over-the-counter painkillers usually work for pain relief, although stronger medications may be prescribed if necessary.  If a medication is causing stiffness, a doctor may be able to adjust the dose or prescribe an alternative.  For most cases of muscle stiffness, there are some simple home remedies for relief. These include:  There are also some simple changes people can make to their lifestyle to prevent getting muscle stiffness. These include:  Staying hydrated and eating a varied, nutritious diet is an important part of a healthy lifestyle and can also help reduce the chance of muscle stiffness.  To stay hydrated, a person should drink plain water every day, try herbal teas, or add fruit slices to sparkling water.   Research has shown  a link between muscle stiffness and  dehydration , so a person should take breaks and stay hydrated while exercising.  Muscle stiffness will usually go away on its own in a few days. In chronic or recurrent cases, making simple lifestyle changes may help treat and prevent muscle stiffness.  If muscle stiffness is a symptom of a more serious underlying condition, the outlook will vary depending on the cause. A person should speak to their doctor if they are concerned about unexplainable or long-term muscle stiffness.    
 Baoge, L., Van Den Steen, E., Rimbaut, S., Philips, N., Witvrouw, E., Almqvist, K. F., …Vanden Bossche, L. C. (2012, February 23). Treatment of skeletal muscle injury: A review.  ISRN Orthopedics ,  2012 .  Baoge, L., Van Den Steen, E., Rimbaut, S., Philips, N., Witvrouw, E., Almqvist, K. F., …Vanden Bossche, L. C. (2012, February 23). Treatment of skeletal muscle injury: A review.  ISRN Orthopedics ,  2012 .  Chu, R. (n.d.). 10 tips to overcome morning stiffness.  Cleary, M. A., Sweeney, L. A., Kendrick, Z. V., &amp; Sitler, M. R. (2005, October–December). Dehydration and symptoms of delayed-onset muscle soreness in hyperthermic males.  Journal of Athletic Training ,  40 (4), 288–297.  Connolly, D. A., Sayers, S. P., McHugh, M. P. (2003, February). Treatment and prevention of delayed onset muscle soreness.  Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research ,  17 (1), 197–208.  Effects of anesthesia. (n.d.).  Get the facts: Drinking water and intake. (2016, August 9).  https://www.cdc.gov/nutrition/data-statistics/plain-water-the-healthier-choice.html   Insect bites and stings. (2016, July 1).  Jorge, R. R. (2016, February). Emerging infectious diseases.  Polymyalgia rheumatica. (2017, March).  Sprains and strains. (2016, March 6).  Why do I feel pain after exercise? (2017, November 30).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "What causes muscle soreness and stiffness?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 8 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320545.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2018, January 8). "What causes muscle soreness and stiffness?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  