 Rest and ice often help people who have mild cases of iliopsoas  bursitis . People who are experiencing more severe symptoms may require  physical therapy  or other treatments.  Iliopsoas bursitis is an inflammatory response in the bursa located under the iliopsoas muscle.  The iliopsoas muscle is a group of two muscles located toward the front of the inner hip.  A bursa is a liquid filled sack that sits between muscles, ligaments, and joints.  When functioning normally, a bursa provides cushioning and reduces irritation from rubbing and friction.  A damaged bursa causes inflammation that may reduce a person's range of motion, making it difficult for them to move.  Athletes and people who exercise regularly tend to develop this condition. It can also develop in people with chronic conditions, such as  arthritis , or in people with tight hips.  Depending on the severity of the swelling, the pain may start in the front of the hip and radiate down the leg. The pain may also radiate towards the buttocks.  In addition, people with iliopsoas bursitis are likely to experience stiffness in the morning. Often, the stiffness will subside throughout the day. However, a person might also experience pain when:  It is not uncommon for the pain and discomfort to get more severe over time.  Several potential causes can lead to iliopsoas bursitis. One of the most likely causes is from repetitive use. Athletes and physically active people are more at risk than people who are sedentary. Runners, skiers, and swimmers are all at risk of developing the condition.  Also, a person who has tight hips may develop iliopsoas bursitis. Tight hips put additional pressure on the ligaments, joints, and muscles. The pressure causes friction, which can lead to the condition.  Some chronic conditions can also cause iliopsoas bursitis. In particular, people with arthritis, both rheumatoid and osteoarthritis, are at an increased risk. Both of these conditions can cause excess friction in the hips that then leads to iliopsoas bursitis.  Treatment for iliopsoas bursitis depends on the cause and the severity of the condition. When diagnosed early, at-home remedies are often enough. In more severe cases, a person may need to seek medical advice to treat the pain.  Mild cases often require little more than rest and icing to the stop the inflammation. Some people might also benefit from over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medications. People experiencing mild episodes of iliopsoas bursitis should consider stopping or reducing the activity that causes the bursitis.  In more severe cases, a person may seek additional therapies. Some therapies include:  If a person has arthritis, the doctor will treat the underlying condition. Medications designed to target the arthritis symptoms will likely help relieve the bursitis. A person should talk to his or her doctor if experiencing hip pain associated with arthritis.  Stretching and exercise can be used to help prevent iliopsoas bursitis. One of the primary causes is friction and rubbing that can occur when the hips are too tight. Stretching can help alleviate the tightness.  There are  many stretches  that focus on the hips including the following:  Lay on the floor with feet flat and knees bent. Lay one ankle across the other knee. Rotate the hip in and out.  Sit on the floor and put soles of the feet together. Gently push the knees toward the floor.  Sit with one knee bent in front of the body at a 90-degree angle, with the heel toward the opposite hip.  Extend the other leg behind the body as far as possible. Gently move the back hip forward and backward. Repeat with the other side.  When stretching for the first time, go very slowly and gently. Try to hold each stretch for 10-30 seconds and repeat several times on either side. Do these stretches as often as possible.  In addition to stretching, a person may wish to strengthen their hips. Stronger hips can help prevent overuse injuries caused by inadequate support. Some exercises that will help strengthen the hips are listed below.  Standing up, raise one leg out to the side. Do this on both sides and repeat between 10 to 15 times per side. As strength increases, try adding light weights to the ankles. Hold onto a wall for balance, if required.  Lie on the ground with both feet planted on the floor near the buttocks. Raise one leg straight up, keeping the thighs parallel. Raise the hips off the ground. Repeat about 10 to 15 times.  Place both hands and knees on the floor. Raise one foot back towards the sky and return to all-fours. Repeat on each side between 10 to 15 times.  Iliopsoas bursitis will get worse over time if left untreated. What started as mild discomfort will grow into a pain that may radiate through parts of the leg and hips.  Rarely, a person may develop an infection. An infection can occur if the iliopsoas bursa ruptures. Some symptoms of infection include:  Psoas syndrome is an injury to the psoas muscle. The psoas muscle is one of a group of muscles that join up to form the iliopsoas muscle. It is essential for the movement of the back, pelvis, legs, and hips. Psoas syndrome is an uncommon condition that can be mistaken for iliopsoas bursitis because it causes similar symptoms.  An injury to the psoas muscle can take several weeks to heal. Typical recovery times range between 6 to 8 weeks. Often, people will have physical therapy, take medications, and ice the injury. Doctors recommend limited activity during the recovery period.  Iliopsoas bursitis is easy to treat in most cases. It usually requires rest and some minimal care to improve symptoms and heal the damage. Stretches and exercises that target the hips are helpful in preventing iliopsoas bursitis.    
 Johnston, C. A. M, Preston Wiley, J., Lindsay, D. M., &amp; Wiseman, D. A. (2012, September 23). Iliopsoas bursitis and tendinitis.  Sports Medicine ,  25 (4), 271–283.  Johnston, C. A. M, Preston Wiley, J., Lindsay, D. M., &amp; Wiseman, D. A. (2012, September 23). Iliopsoas bursitis and tendinitis.  Sports Medicine ,  25 (4), 271–283.  Toohey, A. K., LaSalle, T. L., Martinez, S., &amp; Polisson, R. P. (1990, August). Iliopsoas bursitis: clinical features, radiographic findings, and disease associations {Abstract].  Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism ,  20 (1), 41–47.  Tufo, A., Desai, G. J., &amp; Cox, W. J. (2012). Psoas syndrome: a frequently missed diagnosis.  The Journal of the American Osteopathic Association ,  112 (8), 522–528.  Use these 8 hip stretches to relieve aches and pains and loosen tight hips. (2017, January 10).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What to know about iliopsoas bursitis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320589.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, January 11). "What to know about iliopsoas bursitis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  