 A  personality disorder  is a  mental health  condition that affects the way a person thinks, behaves, and relates to other people. There are many types of personality disorders. To help with diagnosis, doctors organize them into different groups called clusters.  This article explores the different types of cluster B personality disorders, their symptoms, and how they may be treated. It also considers some coping mechanisms that may help those with the condition and their loved ones.  Cluster B personality disorders are a group of mental health conditions that affect a person's emotions and interpersonal relations.  Doctors use a diagnostic manual called  The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition , or ( DSM-5 ), to help diagnose mental health conditions.   DSM-5  defines three main clusters of personality disorders:  Within each cluster, there is a range of related personality disorders. This article looks at cluster B personality disorders.  There are four types of cluster B personality disorders:  Experiencing the symptoms of a personality disorder may cause a person to behave in ways that are distressing for them and others.  Understanding the symptoms of cluster B personality disorders may help a person seek treatment. Increased awareness of symptoms may also help friends and relatives support those experiencing a cluster B personality disorder.  The symptoms of each of the cluster B personality disorders are considered below.  A person diagnosed with an antisocial personality disorder may behave in ways that suggest they do not care about other people's needs.  A person diagnosed with the condition may:  It may seem that they are behaving in this way for their own benefit. A person with this condition may develop behavioral patterns that are:  A person who has an antisocial personality disorder does not usually show remorse or feel sorry for the way they are acting. If they do not get treatment, their behavior may cause problems with law enforcement.  A person with borderline personality disorder may have low self-esteem and a fragile sense of self. The way they feel about themselves may affect the way they relate to others.  They may feel:  Feeling this way may lead to unhealthy thought patterns and extreme reactions to interpersonal  stress .  They may react with intense anger or sadness to minor things other people say or do that would not be considered distressing to most people.  These exaggerated reactions can cause difficulty in relationships. People who spend time with a person with borderline personality disorder may consider their behavior manipulative.  Interpersonal stress may cause unstable patterns in mood, with high and low periods.  Sometimes a person with borderline personality disorder may talk about — or carry out — self-harming behavior. They may experience  suicidal thoughts  and are at risk of acting on these feelings.  If a person is feeling suicidal — or knows someone who is — they should speak to a doctor immediately. It is best to call 911 or the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 800-273-8255.  A person diagnosed with histrionic personality disorder may behave in an attention-seeking manner that is not always appropriate.  The following traits may be noticeable in a person with this condition:  Like borderline personality disorder, this condition is also linked to suicidal behavior. If a person with histrionic personality disorder experiences suicidal thoughts, they should call a suicide prevention line or emergency medical services immediately.  A person diagnosed with narcissistic personality disorder may act in a way that suggests they believe they are superior to others. They may:  Others may feel that a person with narcissistic personality disorder is using or manipulating them to improve their own situation.  The exact cause of personality disorders is not understood. However, researchers believe they are likely influenced by both environmental and genetic factors.  Some studies have shed light on some potential causal factors:  More research is needed to understand the causes of personality disorders fully.  Recognizing some of the symptoms listed above does not mean a person has a cluster B personality disorder. Most people show some of these behaviors at certain times in their lives.  A person should not attempt to diagnose themselves or others. If a person thinks they or someone they know may have a cluster B personality disorder, they should speak to a doctor.  A doctor can refer a person to a mental health professional who can help diagnose the condition. The mental health professional will use  DSM-5  as a reference for diagnosis.  To determine if a person meets the criteria for a condition, they will ask a person questions about their:  They may want to talk to a person's family or partner to get a more rounded picture of their behavior. This will remain confidential.  According to  DSM-5 , to be diagnosed with a cluster B personality disorder, symptoms must:  There is a range of treatments available for cluster B personality disorders. What works for one person may not work for someone else, so a doctor will help individuals find the best treatment.  Available treatments include:  Speaking to a doctor and accessing treatment is the first step toward coping with a personality disorder.  Sometimes, a person may feel that a loved one who is experiencing a personality disorder has overstepped a personal boundary. If this is the case, they should be honest about it and discuss the situation with the person affected without passing judgment.  If anyone believes a person with a personality disorder is at risk of harming themselves or others they should call emergency services immediately.  As with any mental health condition, mindfulness, meditation, and exercise may also help improve a person's overall well-being.  If left untreated, cluster B personality disorders may make it hard for a person to maintain positive relationships.  With treatment, however, many people with cluster B personality disorders can manage their condition well.  A person with a cluster B personality disorder may sustain healthy, happy, relationships with the right support, treatment, and understanding.    
 Johnson, J. G., Cohen, P., Smailes, E. M., Skodol, A. E., Brown, J., &amp; Oldham, J. M. (2001, January). Childhood verbal abuse and risk for personality disorders during adolescence and early adulthood [Abstract].  Comprehensive Psychiatry ,  42 (1), 16–23.  Johnson, J. G., Cohen, P., Smailes, E. M., Skodol, A. E., Brown, J., &amp; Oldham, J. M. (2001, January). Childhood verbal abuse and risk for personality disorders during adolescence and early adulthood [Abstract].  Comprehensive Psychiatry ,  42 (1), 16–23.  Pergugula, M. L., Narang, P. D., &amp; Lippmann, S. B. (2017, April 13). The biological basis to personality disorders [Abstract].  The Primary Care Companion for CNS Disorders ,  19 (2).  South, S. C., &amp; Reicheborn-Kjennerud, T. (2017, March 6). Genetics of personality disorders [Abstract].  Wiley Online Library .  Yen, S., Shea, M. T., Battle, C. L., Johnson, D. M., Zlotnick, C., Dolan-Sewell, R., … McGlashan, T. H. (2002, August). Traumatic exposure and posttraumatic stress disorder in borderline, schizotypal, avoidant, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders: Findings from the collaborative longitudinal personality disorders study [Abstract].  The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease ,  190 (8), 510–518.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What are cluster B personality disorders?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320508.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, January 4). "What are cluster B personality disorders?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  