 In this article, learn about the symptoms, causes, and treatments for tendinosis, as well as what makes it different from  tendinitis .  Tendons are the tough, fibrous cords that attach muscles to bones. Healthy tendons are made of straight, parallel fibers of  collagen .  Tendinosis occurs when tendons degenerate, meaning that they begin to break down. Tendons may have small tears or disorganized collagen fibers instead of straight collagen fibers.  This condition is most common in the elbow, shoulder, knee, hip, and Achilles heel tendons.  Tendinosis may be linked to other underlying conditions, such as  tennis elbow  and swimmer's shoulder.  Tendinosis refers to hardening, thickening, and scarring of the tendons. This causes pain and a loss of flexibility in the joint.  Common symptoms of tendinosis are:  Tendinosis is usually caused by an overuse of the tendon. It can also be caused by physical trauma, such as a fall or sports injury.  Hobbies or professions that require putting repeated  stress  on the tendons can cause tendinosis. Athletes and manual laborers, for example, are more prone to this disorder.  Tendon problems are  more common in older adults  because the joints become less flexible as a person ages. People with joint conditions such as  arthritis  may also be more prone to tendinosis.  Tendons usually take a long time to heal, so the treatments for tendinosis aim to speed up the body's natural healing processes.  Doctors often recommend the following at-home treatments:   Initial research  has also suggested that  vitamin  C and curcumin supplements may help to promote collagen production and speed up healing.  A doctor may also recommend the following treatments:  Tendinosis and tendinitis both refer to problems with the tendons. They are often confused with one another, and the  medical community  is still working on defining these terms.  Tendinosis is a degeneration of tendon tissue, but may also involve some  inflammation . Tendinosis is a chronic and long-term condition.  Tendinitis is tendon pain caused by inflammation. Symptoms can be relieved through anti-inflammatories and ice.  A doctor can often distinguish between tendinosis (degenerated tendons) and tendonitis (inflamed tendons) by scanning the affected area using an  ultrasound  or magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) scan.  Tendons take a long time to heal because the blood supply to tendons is typically low. Tendinosis may take  3 to 6 months  to heal, but  physical therapy  and other treatments may improve the outlook.  A person who has tendinitis can expect a faster recovery time of up to  6 weeks .  Although treatment can be difficult, the long-term outlook for tendinosis is good.  Around 80 percent  of people with tendinosis make a full recovery in 3 to 6 months, depending on whether their condition is chronic or not.  Tendinosis that is left untreated can lead to ruptured tendons so early treatment is crucial.  People can sometimes prevent tendinosis by ensuring they warm up thoroughly before exercise or beginning an activity involving repetitive joint movements. Wearing supportive shoes can protect tendons in the lower limbs.  Rest and physical therapy can speed up the recovery process and improve the long-term outlook for this condition.    
 Abate, M., Salini, V., Schiavone, C., &amp; Andia, I. (2016, December 22). Clinical benefits and drawbacks of local corticosteroids injections in tendinopathies [Abstract].  Expert Opinion on Drug Safety ,  16 (3), 341–349.  Abate, M., Salini, V., Schiavone, C., &amp; Andia, I. (2016, December 22). Clinical benefits and drawbacks of local corticosteroids injections in tendinopathies [Abstract].  Expert Opinion on Drug Safety ,  16 (3), 341–349.  Bass, E. (2012, March 31). Tendinopathy: Why the difference between tendinitis and tendinosis matters.  International Journal of Therapeutic Massage &amp; Bodywork ,  5 (1), 14–17.  Fusini, F., Bisicchia, S., Bottegoni, C., Gigante, A., Zanchini, F., &amp; Busilacchi, A. (2016, May 19). Nutraceutical supplement in the management of tendinopathies: A systematic review.  Muscles, Ligaments and Tendons Journal ,  6 (1), 48.  Korakakis, V., Whiteley, R., Tzavara, A., &amp; Malliaropoulos, N. (2017, September 27). The effectiveness of extracorporeal shockwave therapy in common lower limb conditions: A systematic review including quantification of patient-rated pain reduction [Abstract].  British Journal of Sports Medicine .  Miller, L. E., Parrish, W. R., Roides, B., &amp; Bhattacharyya, S. (2017, November 6). Efficacy of platelet-rich plasma injections for symptomatic tendinopathy: Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised injection-controlled trials.  BMJ Open Sport &amp; Exercise Medicine ,  3 (1), e000237.  Murrell, G. A. (2007). Using nitric oxide to treat tendinopathy.  British Journal of Sports Medicine ,  41 (4), 227–231.  Rees, J. D., Stride, M., &amp; Scott, A. (2014, November 1). Tendons — time to revisit inflammation.  British Journal of Sports Medicine ,  48 (21), 1521.  Tendons. (n.d.).  Wilson, J. J., &amp; Best, T. M. (2005, September 1). Common overuse tendon problems: A review and recommendations for treatment.  American Family Physician ,  72 (5), 811–818.  Zhou, B., Zhou, Y., &amp; Tang, K. (2014, April). An overview of structure, mechanical properties, and treatment for age-related tendinopathy [Abstract].  The Journal of Nutrition, Health &amp; Aging ,  18 (4), 441–448.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Smith, Amy. "What is tendinosis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320558.php&gt;    APA  Smith, A. (2018, January 9). "What is tendinosis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  