  Research increasingly points  to the value of  ginger  as a natural  diarrhea  remedy. Herbal practitioners have long used ginger to prevent muscle spasms. This property of ginger can reduce the frequency of urges to have a bowel movement, and can ease the pain of diarrhea.  Western medical practitioners are now interested in the role ginger can play in preventing gastrointestinal problems, including  morning sickness , diarrhea, bloating, gas, and nausea.  The anti-diarrhea benefits of ginger likely come from phytochemicals.  Researchers, holistic practitioners, and various doctors have suggested some ways ginger might help with diarrhea. Those include:  A  2017 study  attempted to assess at what dosage ginger becomes toxic to rabbits and rats. The highest dose the animals received was 5,000 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) of  body weight , but none of the animals died or experienced serious side effects.  While research on animals is not always applicable to humans, this study offers preliminary evidence that ginger may be safe.  The best way to take in ginger is in its natural form. Taking processed ginger supplements may pose a danger as some supplements may be contaminated, inconsistent, or of poor quality.  The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not approve ginger supplements, and there is no widely accepted daily recommended intake.  However, most sources recommend people consume no more than 4 grams (g) of ginger per day. Pregnant or breast-feeding women should consult a doctor before supplementing their diets with ginger.  Try starting with 1 g or less per day, then gradually raising the dose. Carefully monitor symptoms and check for side effects. As with any supplement, the safest option is to use the lowest effective dose.  So if diarrhea disappears with 0.5 g of ginger, there is no need to increase the dose.  Sudden, severe diarrhea  may be due to bacteria  called  Escherichia coli  ( E. coli ). Other infections, such as  listeria , may also cause diarrhea. A limited body of research suggests that ginger might be a natural remedy for these infections.   A 2015 study  assessed the ability of ginger and garlic to fight listeria and  E. coli  in a petri dish. Both spices slowed the growth of these bacterial infections.  A  2007 study  on mice found that ginger reduced the severity of diarrhea caused by  E. coli .  A  2011 study  of guinea pigs suggests that ginger may change the behavior of neurotransmitters and other chemicals linked to gastrointestinal distress, including nausea and vomiting.   Research published in 2012  found that ginger could prevent or reduce diarrhea in pigs.  Ginger may do more than just relieve diarrhea.  Studies have found  that ginger can address gastrointestinal problems including:  Ginger is safe and well tolerated, which means there are few risks associated with using it for stomach pain or diarrhea. Even studies that do not support the use of ginger to treat stomach pain find few or no adverse effects.  Research does not support the use of ginger to treat IBS. However,  a 2014 study  of ginger for IBS noted more negative side effects with a  placebo  than with ginger.  As with all natural remedies, ginger is not a cure-all for gastrointestinal problems and is not a substitute for medical treatment. Severe diarrhea can cause  dehydration . Severe diarrhea may signal an untreated medical condition and can be fatal in children.  People who experience severe diarrhea that lasts longer than a few days should seek medical care.  Ginger can be prepared in a variety of ways, including being powdered and juiced. It is possible that the results of some of the studies differed because the researchers used different preparations of ginger. For example, one research group used ginger blended with other substances, such as honey.  Because researchers have not carried out studies in which they all use the same ginger preparations, there is no evidence supporting one type of ginger over another.  Anybody considering ginger as a treatment for diarrhea should try different preparations to find one that works.  A popular and healthful way to consume ginger is through drinking ginger tea. Ginger tea can be easily prepared at home by steeping 1 or 2 tablespoons of grated, chopped, or powered ginger in boiling water.  Let this brew for several minutes or longer, and strain if necessary. Lemon or honey can be added according to taste. Ginger teabags are also widely available.  Ginger can also be ground up in a smoothie, used sparingly as a seasoning, or even consumed alone. It has a strong taste, which some people may find overpowering, so it may be more palatable when mixed with something else.  The sugar and other ingredients in ginger snaps may irritate the stomach and elevate blood sugar. So avoid using ginger snaps as a source of ginger.  Some people report a burning sensation in the mouth or nose. Ginger can irritate the mucous membranes, so wash hands after preparing ginger and before touching the face.  People with a history of  food allergies , pregnant and breast-feeding women and those with compromised immune systems should consult a doctor before trying ginger or ginger supplements.  Ginger is a safe home remedy that is unlikely to cause serious side effects. It has been used in traditional medicine for thousands of years, often in conjunction with other things, such as honey or garlic.  A doctor skilled in herbal medicine may be helpful in determining the right dose of ginger. A physician can also help with understanding the cause of diarrhea, and decide whether it needs medical treatment.  If ginger makes symptoms worse or diarrhea lasts more than a few days, seek medical care.    
 Chen, J.-C., Huang, L-J., Wu, S.-L., Kuo, S.-C, Ho, T.-Y, &amp; Hsiang, C.-Y. (2007, September 20). Ginger and its bioactive component inhibit enterotoxigenic  Escherichia coli  heat-labile enterotoxin-induced diarrhea in mice [Abstract].  Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry ,  55 (21), 8390–8397.  Chen, J.-C., Huang, L-J., Wu, S.-L., Kuo, S.-C, Ho, T.-Y, &amp; Hsiang, C.-Y. (2007, September 20). Ginger and its bioactive component inhibit enterotoxigenic  Escherichia coli  heat-labile enterotoxin-induced diarrhea in mice [Abstract].  Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry ,  55 (21), 8390–8397.  Cho, J. H., Zhang, S., &amp; Kim, I. H. (2012). Effects of anti-diarrhoeal herbs on growth performance, nutrient digestibility, and meat quality in pigs.  Asian-Australasian Journal of Animal Sciences ,  25 (11), 1595–1604.  Deepa, J., &amp; Vrinda, M. K. (2015). Antibacterial effect of garlic and ginger extracts on  Escherichia coli  and  Listeria monocytogenes .  International Journal of Applied And Pure Science and Agriculture .   E.coli  (Escherichia coli). (2015, November 6).  Ghayur, M. N., &amp; Gilani, A. H. (2005, October). Pharmacological basis for the medicinal use of ginger in gastrointestinal disorders [Abstract].  Digestive Diseases and Sciences ,  50 (10), 1889–1897.  Huang, Q., Matsuda, H., Sakai, K., Yamahara, J., &amp; Tamai, Y. (1990, December). The effect of ginger on serotonin induced hypothermia and diarrhea [Abstract].  Yakugaku Zasshi ,  110 (12), 936–942.  Kaur, K., Saxena, A., Haniadka, R., Saldanha, E., D'Silva, P., Ponemone, V., . . . Baliga, M. S. (2015). Medicinal benefits of ginger in various gastrointestinal ailments [Abstract]. Foods and Dietary Supplements in the Prevention and Treatment of Disease in Older Adults , 51–61.  Khodaie, L., &amp; Sadeghpoor, O. (2015, February). Ginger from ancient times to the new outlook.  Jundishapur Journal of Natural Pharmaceutical Products ,  10 (1), e18402.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4377061/   Kim, J. Y., &amp; Choi, J. S. (2017, December). Single-dose oral toxicity and acute dermal irritation of steamed and dried ginger extract in rat and white rabbit [Abstract].  Journal of Animal and Plant Sciences ,  27 (6), 1822–1828.  Pertz, H. H., Lehmann, J., Roth-Ehrang, R., &amp; Elz, S. (2011, July). Effects of ginger constituents in the gastrointestinal tract: Role of cholinergic M3 and serotonergic 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 receptors [Abstract].  Planta Medica ,  77 (10), 973–978.  Solan, M. (2009, July 30). Healing foods: Ginger.  van Tilburg, M. A. L., Palsson, O. S., Ringel, Y., &amp; Whitehead, W. E. (2014, February). Is ginger effective for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome? A double blind randomized controlled pilot trial.  Complementary Therapies in Medicine ,  22 (1), 17–20.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What to know about ginger for diarrhea."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 8 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320546.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, January 8). "What to know about ginger for diarrhea."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  