 In this article, we list meal plans for people with  hypoglycemia , as well as other tips for managing the condition.  People with persistent low blood sugar may have hypoglycemia. Having low blood sugar is often associated with  diabetes , but it is possible to experience hypoglycemia without having diabetes.  Other common causes include hormonal deficiencies, critical illnesses, and excessive alcohol consumption.  When blood sugar drops within 4 hours of eating a meal, a person may be experiencing reactive hypoglycemia. This condition is caused by excessive  insulin  production after eating.  Hypoglycemia symptoms including:  A person should always try to eat breakfast as soon as possible after waking up, as blood sugar levels may have dropped during the night.  It is advisable to limit intake of fruit juices in the morning and stick to juices that do not have added sugar, as these may cause blood sugar levels to become unstable.  Some ideal breakfast choices include:  Cinnamon is thought to help  reduce blood sugar levels  and can be sprinkled on many breakfast foods.  Some of these products are available to purchase online, including  sunflower seeds ,  agave syrup , and  oatmeal .  Lunch should be a small meal but packed with protein, healthful fats, and complex  carbohydrates  that will continue to release energy slowly.  Some good lunch ideas for hypoglycemia are:  It is necessary for a person with hypoglycemia to be aware of the glycemic index or GI of the foods they eat. Some foods that appear to be healthful may have a high GI. Fortunately, there is often an alternative that has a lower GI.  For example, sweet potatoes have a relatively low GI and are full of  antioxidants , making them a better choice than other types of potato, such as white russet potatoes, which have a high GI.  While it may be tempting to eat more in the evenings, a person with hypoglycemia should keep their evening meals small. A good dinner choice will include protein and complex carbohydrates.  Dinner ideas include:  People with hypoglycemia should try to include small, nutritious snacks in between meals to keep blood sugar levels constant and ensure they are having enough  vitamins , minerals, healthy fats, proteins, and fibrous carbohydrates in their diet.  Eating one snack mid-morning, another mid-afternoon, and something small close to bedtime can help keep blood sugar levels stable throughout both the day and night.  Some healthy snack options are:  It is important to remember that people who exercise regularly may need to eat more frequently, as strenuous or sustained physical activity can cause blood sugar levels to drop.  A person should eat a small snack that includes carbs and protein before a workout. Good choices include:  Exercising on a full stomach is not advisable, so keeping pre-exercise snacks small and remembering to stay hydrated by drinking lots of water are important.  A person experiencing a minor case of low blood sugar can consume 15–20 grams (g) of fast-acting carbohydrates, such as a small glass of fruit juice or a few crackers.  If a person is still experiencing symptoms of low blood sugar after 15 minutes, they can eat another 15–20 g portion of carbohydrates.  Following a hypoglycemia diet will help to manage symptoms and prevent blood sugar from dropping.  Reducing simple sugars and increasing complex carbohydrates can help control blood sugar levels throughout the day and prevent any sudden spikes or dips.  A person with hypoglycemia can try the following lifestyle considerations:  Eating or drinking a small amount of fast-acting carbohydrates, such as a piece of fruit or fruit juice, can treat minor cases of hypoglycemia.  However, anyone experiencing more severe or regular symptoms should see their doctor, as soon as possible. Hypoglycemia is a manageable condition, and getting an early diagnosis means the symptoms can be controlled.  Left untreated, the symptoms of hypoglycemia can become more frequent and dangerous. The symptoms also mimic other conditions, so it is important for a doctor to diagnose the condition and rule out other possible causes.  Severe symptoms of hypoglycemia, including loss of consciousness, require immediate medical attention.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Davis, P. A., &amp; Yokoyama, W. (2011, September). Cinnamon intake lowers fasting blood glucose: Meta-analysis.  Journal of Medicinal Food ,  14 (9), 884–889.  Davis, P. A., &amp; Yokoyama, W. (2011, September). Cinnamon intake lowers fasting blood glucose: Meta-analysis.  Journal of Medicinal Food ,  14 (9), 884–889.  Glycemic index and glycemic load for 100+ foods. (2015, August 27).  Healthy eating guidelines for people with reactive hypoglycemia. (2015, June).  Low blood glucose (hypoglycemia). (2016, August).  Hypoglycemia and diet. (n.d.).  Mohr, C. R. (2017, February 13). Timing your pre- and post-workout nutrition.  Oatmeal With Blueberries, Sunflower Seeds, and Agave. (2013, April).  Ruggiero, R. (n.d.). The importance of individualizing your hypoglycemia diet.  Sweet potatoes. (n.d.).  What is a hypo? (n.d.).  Wilcox, G. (2005, May). Insulin and insulin resistance.  Clinical Biochemist Reviews ,  26 (2), 19–39.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What to eat for hypoglycemia."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320518.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, January 6). "What to eat for hypoglycemia."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  