 As mild cardiomegaly does not always cause symptoms, many people with a slightly enlarged heart are unaware of the problem. For some people, cardiomegaly is just temporary and will resolve on its own.  However, other people may have permanent cardiomegaly. It is vital that this symptom and the underlying cause of it are treated to prevent more serious damage to the heart. Treatments include medication, surgery, and lifestyle changes.  Cardiomegaly can be caused by many conditions, including  hypertension ,  coronary artery disease , infections, inherited disorders, and cardiomyopathies.  Cardiomyopathy is a disease of the myocardium or heart muscle that causes cardiomegaly. There are  2 types  of cardiomyopathy  In most cases, symptoms typically appear when the cardiomegaly becomes moderate or severe.  Symptoms, when noticeable, include:  Mild cardiomegaly can result from conditions that overwork or damage the heart, such as:  Often, however, the cause of mild cardiomegaly is unknown.  Medical treatment may be necessary in some cases, and the causes of temporary cardiomegaly can include:  Some people are more at risk than others of developing mild cardiomegaly. Factors that can increase risk include:  Possible complications include:  Complications of cardiomegaly depend on the reason for it and the level of the enlargement.  Diagnostic tests may include one or more of the following:  Mild cardiomegaly is typically diagnosed through both a physical examination and additional tests.  Though mild cardiomegaly will often resolve itself, treatment options include:  Recommended medications depend on the condition that is causing the enlarged heart. Medication may be prescribed to treat abnormal heart rhythms and high blood pressure. Diuretics may be prescribed to lower pressure in the arteries, while anticoagulants can reduce the risk of blood clots.  Other underlying conditions, such as anemia or thyroid disorders, can also be treated with medication.  If medications do not effectively treat mild cardiomegaly, or if symptoms become moderate or severe, it may be necessary for someone to be fitted with a medical device.  A pacemaker may be fitted to regulate heartbeat in those with dilative cardiomyopathy. People with severe arrhythmias may require an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) to deliver shocks to control the heart rhythm.  Surgery is usually reserved for more severe cases of cardiomegaly, or for those that do not respond to other treatments. Depending on several factors, the following surgeries may be recommended for people with cardiomegaly:  People with cardiomegaly may be able to alleviate their symptoms with the following lifestyle and dietary changes:  It is possible to reduce the risk of experiencing an enlarged heart by:  It is not always possible to prevent cardiomegaly, for example, in the case of inherited heart diseases.  Many forms of cardiomegaly are permanent and will require ongoing care to prevent their progression. Other, temporary forms can be resolved by eliminating the cause, such as by addressing stress or seeking treatment for drug or alcohol abuse.  Therefore, it is important to see a doctor if any of the signs or symptoms of cardiomegaly are noticed. Seek emergency medical treatment if any of the symptoms of a heart attack are experienced, such as:  The outlook for people with mild cardiomegaly depends on the underlying cause. Even though mild cardiomegaly is not as serious as moderate or severe cardiomegaly and does not always cause symptoms, it is still important to attend to the underlying condition.    
 Enlarged heart (cardiomegaly). (n.d.).  Enlarged heart (cardiomegaly). (n.d.).  Shaking the salt habit to lower high blood pressure. (2017, November 13).  Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to know about cardiomegaly."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320591.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, January 12). "What to know about cardiomegaly."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  