 Whether apple cider vinegar is effective for treating  headaches  is not yet scientifically proven, but it is still praised by many as a natural treatment that can do little harm. In this article, we look at the evidence.  Raw, unfiltered apple cider vinegar can contain iron,  potassium , and  calcium . Both the minerals and the acidity in apple cider vinegar could indirectly help headaches.  Apple cider vinegar may also aid digestion, which can help prevent headaches caused by digestive issues.   One study  found that apple cider vinegar reduces blood sugar levels in subjects with  diabetes . This benefit could help regulate blood sugar spikes, which sometimes cause headaches.  However, people with diabetes should speak to a doctor before using apple cider vinegar for their symptoms.  It is also thought that inhaling vaporized apple cider vinegar can help clean out the sinuses and relieve a sinus headache.  Apple cider vinegar does not directly affect a headache in the way that an over-the-counter painkiller does.  Headaches can have different causes, ranging from allergies and digestive issues to  stress  and  high blood pressure . Apple cider is thought to work on the underlying cause of a headache.   Dehydration  is another common cause of headaches. Even though many people drink plenty of liquids throughout the day, not all liquids act the same way in the body.  Highly-caffeinated liquids or sweetened drinks may make the body thirstier. Adding apple cider vinegar to a tall glass of water may increase the number of minerals in the water, helping someone stay hydrated and potentially lessening headache pain.  Apple cider vinegar has a strong flavor, especially for those who are not used to it. The most basic apple cider vinegar recipe is:  A person can drink this mixture, as needed, for headache relief.  There are a variety of tastier ways to incorporate apple cider vinegar into a home remedy, including:  Replacing half the water in the basic recipe with apple juice can lessen the drink's strong acidic flavor. Some people may choose to sweeten it with honey.  A person should add the ingredients to a large glass and stir if necessary then drink, as needed, for symptoms.  The cayenne pepper in this drink gives it a spicy kick, while it is sweetened with the honey.  The ingredients should be mixed in a heat resistant mug and drunk, as needed.  This recipe should not be drunk but used as a steam bath to help clear the sinuses.  Add the apple cider vinegar to the boiled water and then remove it from the heat source. Placing a towel over the head and pot, inhale the steam for 5 minutes at a time, as needed.  Apple cider vinegar should always be diluted. Although it may contain less acid that white vinegar, it is still very acidic.  This acid may damage the throat or break down the enamel of the teeth over time. It may also burn the skin after extended periods of contact.  People with diabetes may want to avoid apple cider vinegar except when they and their doctor are directly monitoring the effects it has on their blood sugar.  Apple cider vinegar is also believed to slow digestion. This may cause issues for people who already have a slow digestive time. Anyone in doubt should talk to a doctor about possible interactions or complications apple cider vinegar may have.  There are many different treatments for headaches that are readily available for use at home. These include:  There is little scientific evidence directly supporting the claim that apple cider vinegar can treat headaches. Many people do find relief from drinking diluted apple cider vinegar regularly, which may be due to its additional health benefits.  Anyone experiencing regular headaches should see a doctor for a proper diagnosis and treatment tips. A doctor may recommend stress reduction, alternative therapies, or prescription medications.  Apple cider vinegar is available to purchase in many health food stores, and  online .  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Beheshti, Z., Chan, Y. H., Nia, H. S., Hajihosseini, F., Nazari, R., Shaabani, M., … Omran, M. T. S. (2012). Influence of apple cider vinegar on blood lipids.  Life Science Journal ,  9 (4), 2431–2440.  Beheshti, Z., Chan, Y. H., Nia, H. S., Hajihosseini, F., Nazari, R., Shaabani, M., … Omran, M. T. S. (2012). Influence of apple cider vinegar on blood lipids.  Life Science Journal ,  9 (4), 2431–2440.  Bunick, C. G., Lott, J. P., Warren, C. B., Galan, A., Bolognia, J., &amp; King, B. A. (2012, October). Chemical burn from topical apple cider vinegar [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  67 (4), e143–e144.  Chowdhury, D. (2012, August). Tension type headache.  Annals of Indian Academy of Neurology ,  15 (Suppl 1), S83–S88.  Iman, M., Moallem, S. A., &amp; Barahoyee, A. (2015, March). Effect of apple cider vinegar on blood glucose level in diabetic mice.  Pharmaceutical Sciences ,  20 , 163–168.  Štornik, A., Skok, B., &amp; Trček, J. (2016, March). Comparison of cultivable acetic acid bacterial microbiota in organic and conventional apple cider vinegar.  Food Technology and Biotechnology ,  54 (1), 113–119.  Wells, R. E., Burch, R., Paulsen, R. H., Wayne, P. M., Houle, T. T., &amp; Loder, E. (2014, May 22). Meditation for migraines: A pilot randomized controlled trial.  Headache ,  54 (9), 1484–1495.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Can apple cider vinegar cure a headache?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320522.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, January 6). "Can apple cider vinegar cure a headache?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  