 The condition is thought to be triggered when a person sees a pattern of small clustered holes, bringing about symptoms, such as fear, disgust, and  anxiety .  Although trypophobia is not currently recognized by the American Psychiatric Association's  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) , the term trypophobia has been in use since 2009.  People who experience symptoms of trypophobia are often triggered by specific images of clusters of small, irregular holes, such as:  People with trypophobia may experience symptoms, such as:  A 2013  study  examined images that induce trypophobia and found that when people who do not have the condition see a picture of a honeycomb, for example, they may think of honey or bees.  However, the study theorized that people with trypophobia develop symptoms because they subconsciously associate the honeycomb with a dangerous animal — in this case, a rattlesnake — whose pattern is similar.  A study completed in  2017  concluded that of the 95 subjects surveyed, the symptoms of trypophobia were long-term and persistent. Their research also showed that many of those surveyed had  depression  and generalized anxiety.  The study also showed that when people with trypophobia encountered clusters of holes, they experienced feelings of disgust and not fear.  Another  2017 study  suggests that trypophobia is an evolutionary response to alert a person to the presence of parasites or other infectious diseases.  The researchers explain that based on their findings, those affected by trypophobia may have the perception that these cluster images are cues of ectoparasites (parasites, such as fleas, that live outside of the host) and skin-transmitted pathogens (droplets spread by coughs or sneezes).  A  Chinese study  evaluated whether symptoms of trypophobia in preschool children and their discomfort was based on the features of the visual stimuli specifically, or as a subconscious fear of venomous animals.  While researchers note that children did experience discomfort when presented with some trypophobic stimuli, they theorize that their discomfort was not related to subconscious association with venomous animals but was, in fact, due to the characteristics of the cluster pattern itself.  While there is no treatment specific to trypophobia, there are some treatments available for phobias in general with varied success rates. Treatments may consist of self-help treatments, therapy, and medications.  People can undertake self-help treatments by themselves or with the help of a therapist or counselor.  These strategies may or may not be effective in treating individual phobias and have varied rates of success. Some self-help strategies include the following:  At times, doctors will prescribe certain medications to treat phobias or the side effects of phobias, such as anxiety. Medications include:  A person with trypophobia experiences symptoms, such as fear, disgust, anxiety, goosebumps, and panic, on seeing clusters of small holes.  Trypophobia is not currently recognized by the American Psychiatric Association's  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM–5) , and there is conflicting research as to whether the condition is, in fact, a genuine phobia.  More research is needed in this area to validate the condition.    
 Can, W., Zhuoran, Z., &amp; Zheng, J. (2017, April 1). Is trypophobia a phobia? [Abstract].  Psychological Reports ,  120 (2), 206–218.  Can, W., Zhuoran, Z., &amp; Zheng, J. (2017, April 1). Is trypophobia a phobia? [Abstract].  Psychological Reports ,  120 (2), 206–218.  Cole, G. G., &amp; Wilkins, A. J. (2013, August 27). Fear of holes.  Psychological Science ,  24 (10), 1980-1985.  Kupfer, T. R., &amp; Le, An. T. D. (2017, July 6). Disgusting clusters: Trypophobia as an overgeneralised disease avoidance response [Abstract].  Cognition and Emotion , 1–13.  Phobia's: Self-help. (2016, January 14)  Phobia's: Treatment (2016, January 14)  Trypophobia: Fear or disgust at the sight of clusters of holes. (n.d.).  Vlok-Barnard, M., &amp; Stein, D. J. (2017, October-December). Trypophobia: an investigation of clinical features.  Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria ,  39 (4).  What is cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)? (n.d.).  What is trypophobia? Is It real? (2017, October 9)  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Smith, Lori. "Is trypophobia real?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320512.php&gt;    APA  Smith, L. (2018, January 4). "Is trypophobia real?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  