 It is often caused by hypoventilation or disordered breathing where not enough oxygen enters the lungs and not enough carbon dioxide is emitted. There are other causes of hypercapnia, as well, including some lung diseases.  This article discusses the symptoms and causes of hypercapnia and outlines some of the treatment options available to help manage the condition.  In cases where symptoms are mild and develop slowly over time, people may not even realize they have hypercapnia. Therefore, it is important to be aware of both mild and severe symptoms.  The following are considered to be mild symptoms of hypercapnia:  These symptoms of hypercapnia may arise from shorter periods of shallow or slow breathing, such as during deep sleep.  They may not always be a cause for concern, as the body is often able to correct the symptoms and balance carbon dioxide levels in the bloodstream without intervention.  However, if the above symptoms persist for several days, it is advisable to see a doctor.  The symptoms of severe hypercapnia require immediate medical attention, as they can cause long-term complications. Some cases may be fatal.  Severe hypercapnia symptoms include:  There are many causes of hypercapnia including the following:  COPD is an umbrella term for several conditions that affect the breathing. Common forms of COPD include chronic  bronchitis  and  emphysema .  Chronic bronchitis leads to  inflammation  and mucus in the airways, while emphysema involves damage to the air sacs or alveoli in the lungs.  Both conditions can cause increased levels of carbon dioxide in the bloodstream.  The main cause of COPD is long-term exposure to lung irritants. According to the  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute , cigarette smoke is the most common lung irritant that causes COPD in the United States. Air pollution and exposure to chemicals or dust may also cause COPD.  Although not everyone with COPD will develop hypercapnia, a person's risk increases as their COPD progresses.  The  National Sleep Foundation  report that between 5 and 20 percent of adults have sleep apnea.  This common condition is characterized by shallow breathing, or pauses in breathing, during sleep. It can interfere with the level of oxygen in the bloodstream and throw off the body's balance of carbon dioxide and oxygen.  Sleep apnea symptoms include daytime sleepiness, headaches upon waking, and difficulty concentrating.  Rarely, a genetic condition where the liver fails to produce enough alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT) can cause hypercapnia. Alpha-1-antitrypsin is a protein that is necessary for lung health, so AAT deficiency is a risk factor for COPD development.  In some people, the nerves and muscles necessary for proper lung function may not work correctly. For example,  muscular dystrophy  can cause the muscles to weaken, eventually leading to breathing problems.  Other disorders of the nervous or muscular systems that can contribute to hypercapnia include:  Other causes of high blood levels of carbon dioxide include:  Some people are more at risk than others for the development of hypercapnia, especially if they:  Some tests used to diagnose hypercapnia include:  The treatment for hypercapnia will depend on the severity of the condition and the underlying cause.  Options include:  There are two types of ventilation used for hypercapnia:  People with severe hypercapnia symptoms may be put on a ventilation device to assist with breathing.  Certain medications can assist breathing, such as:  People who undergo oxygen therapy regularly use a device to deliver oxygen to the lungs. This can help balance out the levels of carbon dioxide in their blood.  To reduce symptoms and avoid complications, a doctor may recommend changes to diet and physical activity. They will also encourage people with hypercapnia to avoid lung irritants by  quitting smoking  and limiting their exposure to chemicals, dust, and fumes.  If the lungs or airways are damaged, then surgery may be required. Options include lung volume reduction surgery to remove damaged tissue or a lung transplant where a damaged lung is replaced by a healthy lung from a donor.  Hypercapnia can be prevented by:  Hypercapnia is caused by too much carbon dioxide in the blood. There are several reasons why this might happen, and addressing these is key to managing symptoms and improving a person's quality of life.  As symptoms can be mild and progress slowly over time, it is important to be aware of the symptoms of hypercapnia and to consult a doctor if breathing difficulties or other symptoms are noticed.  Those who require long-term treatment or surgery for their hypercapnia should follow their treatment regimen carefully to reduce the risk of complications.    
 Chapter 3: Sleep-related breathing disorders: Prevalence. (n.d.).  Chapter 3: Sleep-related breathing disorders: Prevalence. (n.d.).  Chowdhuri, S., &amp; Badr, M. S (2017, April). Control of ventilation in health and disease.  CHEST ,  151 (4), 917–929.  COPD: Causes. (n.d.).  Michaelidis, B., Ouzounis, C., Paleras, A., &amp; Pörtner, H. O. (2005, June 2). Effects of long-term moderate hypercapnia on acid–base balance and growth rate in marine mussels  Mytilus galloprovincialis  [Abstract].  Marine Ecology Progress Series ,  293 , 109–118.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to know about hypercapnia."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320501.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, January 5). "What to know about hypercapnia."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  