 Phosphate is a chemical found in the body. It contains a mineral called phosphorus that occurs naturally in many foods. Phosphorus supports bones and teeth to develop and helps turn food into energy for the body to use.  The kidneys naturally control levels of phosphates. However, if the kidneys are not working efficiently, they may not be able to remove enough phosphate, leading to high levels in the body.  Treatment for hyperphosphatemia will depend on the underlying condition. For people with kidney disease, a combination of diet and medication are used to keep phosphate levels under control.  Hyperphosphatemia does not usually have apparent symptoms. It is more likely that the symptoms of an underlying disease that can cause high phosphate levels, such as uncontrolled  diabetes , are spotted first.  If levels of phosphate in the blood become too high, it may cause mineral and bone disorders and calcification.  Bones need minerals and hormones to rebuild, grow, and stay strong. The kidneys balance the amount of phosphorus and  calcium  in the blood. If these are out of balance, it can draw calcium out of the bones and weaken them.  Because kidneys control the balance of minerals and other chemicals,  chronic kidney disease  can cause mineral and bone disorders. Those who have had kidney failure and are having dialysis are most at risk.  This deterioration can take place over many years, often without symptoms. But, as bones begin to get weaker, a person may start to feel pain in their bones or joints.  If this happens in children who have kidney disease, it can be more serious as their bones are still developing. Children who have mineral and bone disorder may not grow to full height. The bones in their legs may bend inward or outward, which is sometimes known as renal  rickets .  Calcification happens when calcium is deposited in organs or tissues in the body. The condition can affect the veins and arteries and is known as vascular calcification. It is a particularly serious condition as the heart will need to work harder to pump blood around the body. Calcification can make dialysis more difficult.  High levels of phosphorus and calcium in the blood can also cause itchy skin and red eyes.  Kidney disease is the most common cause of hyperphosphatemia. Healthy kidneys adjust the levels of minerals in the blood, but kidneys that are not working properly are not always able to do this.  There are other conditions linked with high levels of phosphate in the blood, however, including the following:  Taking a phosphate supplement can also lead to hyperphosphatemia. Most people will get more than enough phosphorus from their diet, and the body is usually good at regulating levels. Nobody should take more than  250 milligrams  (mg) of phosphorus supplements per day.  Processed foods often have phosphorus added to preserve them, and a high-protein diet may also contain more phosphorus than someone needs.  If someone has symptoms of hyperphosphatemia or a disease linked to the condition, they should see a doctor. The doctor will ask about their medical history, discuss any symptoms, do a physical examination, and sometimes recommend a phosphate test.  Tests include:  Typically, people with kidney failure have their phosphate levels regularly monitored, which means that hyperphosphatemia will usually be found during routine checks.  Treatment for hyperphosphatemia will depend on the underlying cause:  The main way to prevent hyperphosphatemia is to control the levels of phosphate and calcium in the body. This is usually done by eating certain foods and avoiding others.  Processed foods often contain phosphorus as a preservative, shown by ingredients that have the letters PHOS together. A person with an underlying condition linked to hyperphosphatemia may wish to avoid these foods.  Certain natural foods, such as peas, milk, and peanut butter, also contain high levels of phosphorus.  For people with kidney disease, eating a diet with the right amount of minerals is an essential part of managing the condition. This can be complicated, and a nutritionist can help to explain which foods to eat or avoid.  If kidneys are working normally and are producing the correct levels of hormones, the body will naturally balance levels of phosphate in the blood. If this is not happening, levels need to be regulated artificially using diet and medication.  Hyperphosphatemia can weaken bones and cause damage to veins, tissues, and organs in the body. It is crucial that people with kidney disease seek advice on diet to keep phosphate at a safe level, which can help to manage the condition.    
 Calcification. (n.d.).  Calcification. (n.d.).  Diabetic ketoacidosis. (2017, April 24).  Dialysis. (2015, July 7).  Hypoparathyroidism and hyperparathyroidism. (2015, January 19).  Mineral &amp; bone disorder in chronic kidney disease. (2015, November).  Phosphate. (2016, January 15).  Vitamins and minerals. (2017, March 3).  Wilkens, K. (n.d.). How to be a phosphorous detective.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "What is hyperphosphatemia?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320521.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2018, January 6). "What is hyperphosphatemia?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  