 Unlike acute  sinusitis , which is often due to a sinus infection, chronic sinusitis is not usually caused by bacteria and does not always get better with standard treatment,  such as antibiotics .  Chronic sinusitis is sometimes called chronic  rhinosinusitis .  The sinuses are moist, hollow spaces behind the  bones of the face . They usually drain through the nose.  When the sinuses are unable to drain, due to issues such as an infection that blocks the nose, swelling, irritation, or an allergic reaction, then mucus and other fluid, including  pus , stays trapped in the sinuses.  This can cause the sinuses to swell and become irritated or infected. This  inflammation  is called sinusitis.   Acute sinusitis  is usually due to the common cold or a mild infection and usually goes away within 10 days. Some people with acute sinusitis develop an infection that requires  antibiotics .  Chronic sinusitis usually persists longer than 10 days, but the symptoms are the same. Those include:   Doctors now believe  that chronic sinusitis may be an inflammatory disorder similar to asthma and allergies. Some treatment options include:  The most common causes of chronic sinusitis include:  Home remedies include:  The following strategies can help with the pain of sinusitis and may reduce the length of the infection:  Sinusitis, even in its chronic form, is not typically dangerous. In some cases, however, it may indicate a serious underlying condition. A doctor can help identify the cause, so see a doctor if sinus pain or pressure lasts longer than a week or two.  The most common complication of sinusitis is an infection, either in the sinuses or surrounding structures. An infection that is left untreated can spread and cause serious illness.  Rarely, chronic sinusitis can cause  other complications . Those include:  Chronic sinusitis can be difficult to treat. Many doctors now treat it as a chronic condition that comes and goes.  Identifying and treating the underlying cause of sinusitis can reduce the length of the inflammation and prevent it from coming back. People with chronic sinusitis may need treatment from an allergist or an ear, nose, and throat specialist.  Good self-care, including treatment for allergies and asthma and avoiding allergens, may reduce the likelihood of another bout of sinusitis. People who have previously experienced chronic sinusitis should know they are at risk of developing it again, however.  Chronic sinusitis can be intensely painful. People with this condition may feel sick for weeks, and struggle to participate in everyday life.  Prompt medical care from a specialist can help, so see a doctor for signs of sinusitis. Diagnostic tests that help a doctor see the sinuses can determine the underlying cause, and help with prescribing the right treatment.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Chen, I. (2011, May 12). When sinus problems won't go away.  Chen, I. (2011, May 12). When sinus problems won't go away.  Chronic sinusitis (in adults). (2013, December).  Chronic sinusitis. (n.d.).  Holliman, K. (2011, January 1). Miserable symptoms mark chronic sinusitis.  Litvack, J. (2015, January 20). Complications of sinusitis.  Rudmik, L., &amp; Soler, Z. M. (2015, September 1). Adult chronic sinusitis.  JAMA ,  314 (9), 964.  Sinusitis. (n.d.).  Sinus surgery. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What to know about chronic sinusitis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320569.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, January 10). "What to know about chronic sinusitis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  