 If wisdom teeth only partially erupt, gum flaps may develop. These flaps are areas where food can become trapped, and bacteria can build up, causing infection.  The symptoms can vary between individuals depending on the severity of the infection.  Chronic symptoms  include :  Chronic symptoms often only last for  1 to 2 days  but keep recurring over a period of months.  Acute symptoms usually last 3 to 4 days and  can include :  Pericoronitis commonly occurs in people in their 20s, with around  81 percent  of those affected being aged between 20 and 29 years old.  Men and women develop pericoronitis in equal numbers.  There are also some common causes and conditions associated with pericoronitis:  Dentists often diagnose pericoronitis during a clinical evaluation. The dentist will diagnose the condition by examining the wisdom teeth and checking for signs and the appearance of pericoronitis.  The dentist will look to see if the gums are inflamed, red, swollen, or draining pus. They will also look to see if there is a gum flap in the affected area.  The dentist might also take an X-ray to look at the alignment of the wisdom teeth and to rule out other possible causes for the pain, such as dental decay.  If a doctor diagnoses pericoronitis, they will refer the individual to a dentist for further treatment.  Once the dentist has diagnosed pericoronitis, they will design a treatment plan according to the specific needs of the individual.  The condition  can be difficult to treat  because if there is a gum flap, then the problem will not go away completely until the tooth fully erupts, or the tooth or tissue is removed.  If the person has symptoms that are localized to the area around the tooth then the dentist may try the following  treatment options :  If there is an infection, then the dentist will prescribe  antibiotics , and an individual can take other medication to manage the pain and reduce swelling. A person should consult their dentist before using any over-the-counter medications or mouth rinses.  In many cases, the dentist may recommend removing the tooth, especially if it is a recurring problem.  It is vitally important that symptoms of pericoronitis are treated swiftly to keep the infection from spreading and to lessen the risks of complications.  Anyone experiencing symptoms of pericoronitis should contact their dentist as soon as possible. Those who realize their wisdom teeth are coming through but have no symptoms of pericoronitis should still tell their dentist so that they can monitor the progress.  For minor cases of pericoronitis, some home remedies can help alleviate and treat symptoms.  A warm saltwater rinse can help, as can cleaning the affected area carefully with a toothbrush to remove plaque and food debris.  However, if a person sees no improvement after 5 days, then they should consult a dentist.  It is not recommended to use home remedies if a person is experiencing severe symptoms.  Complications associated with pericoronitis can occur. Problems are more likely to happen if the symptoms are not treated promptly.  Sometimes, the infection can spread from the affected area, which can lead to swelling and pain in other parts of the head and neck.  Trismus, where a person finds it difficult to open their mouth or bite down, can also be a complication.  In rare cases, complications of pericoronitis can even be life-threatening. Untreated pericoronitis can lead to  Ludwig's angina , which is an infection that spreads under the jaw and tongue. This condition can also cause other deep infections within the head, neck, or throat.  There is  also the possibility  that the infection can spread into the bloodstream, in a condition known as  sepsis , which can also be life-threatening.  Steps that people can take to try and reduce the chance of pericoronitis developing include:  Typically, pericoronitis causes no long-term effects. If the wisdom tooth fully erupts or is removed then pericoronitis will not reoccur in that area.  If a tooth is removed, then a person can usually expect to make a full recovery after about  2 weeks . During recovery, a person can expect to experience:  Following all aftercare instructions is essential. A person should contact their dentist or oral surgeon if they experience intense or throbbing pain, fever, or bleeding.  The most important thing about treating pericoronitis is ensuring that individuals receive the right treatment so that this painful condition can be corrected as soon as possible.    
 Moloney, J., &amp; Stassen, L. F. A. (2009). Pericoronitis: Treatment and a clinical dilemma.   Journal of the Irish Dental Association ,  55  (4),190–192.  Moloney, J., &amp; Stassen, L. F. A. (2009). Pericoronitis: Treatment and a clinical dilemma.   Journal of the Irish Dental Association ,  55  (4),190–192.  Kavarodi, A. M. (2011, July). Necrotizing fasciitis in association with Ludwig's angina — A case report.  The Saudi Dental Journal ,  23  (3), 157–160.  Pericoronitis (infection near wisdom tooth). (n.d.).  Renton, T., &amp; Wilson, N. H. F. (2016). Problems with erupting wisdom teeth: Signs, symptoms, and management.  The British Journal of General Practice ,  66 (649), e606–e608.  Respiratory tract infections. (2015, April 14).  Sepsis and dental health. (2017, December 13).  Wisdom tooth removal. Recovery. (2015, April 20).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "What causes pericoronitis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320552.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2018, January 9). "What causes pericoronitis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  