 This article will review the evidence behind the claims that turmeric can help symptoms of  irritable bowel syndrome  or IBS, discuss how it may be used, and if there are any risks.  Turmeric has been used to treat conditions, including colds, digestive problems, and infections. Its potential healing properties come from curcumin, which is an anti-inflammatory compound it contains.  Turmeric has recently attracted attention for its potential to reduce IBS symptoms. IBS is a common disorder of the digestive system that causes symptoms, such as stomach cramps,  diarrhea , and  constipation .  The cause of IBS is unknown, and there are currently no available cures. Symptoms of IBS are typically managed using medicine and lifestyle changes that tend to involve changes in diet.  Including turmeric as part of a healthful diet-based approach to managing IBS symptoms is an easy step to take.   One study  found that curcumin had a positive impact on gastrointestinal functioning in rats. The authors of the study suggested that their findings could have implications for the use curcumin in treating IBS symptoms. However, more studies are needed in humans to establish this conclusively.  A  pilot study conducted in 2004  found that human participants with IBS who took 2 tablets of turmeric every day for 8 weeks reported reductions in abdominal discomfort and improved bowel movement patterns.  However, this study lacked a control group, and the authors concluded that more research was needed to rule out the  placebo  effect and other variables.  Turmeric has been associated with benefits for other disorders of the digestive system, including ulcerative colitis, a chronic condition that causes diarrhea and abdominal pain.   One study in 2015  found that adding curcumin to the regular treatment routine had a positive impact on the symptoms of ulcerative colitis.  There are some positive findings relating to the use of turmeric in reducing IBS symptoms, and these effects may also extend to other digestive disorders. However, more research is required to determine whether turmeric can have any real benefits for the treatment of IBS.  Curcumin is considered safe to consume for most people for short-term use only.  High doses may cause  increased gastrointestinal symptoms . It is best to take the supplements as recommended by the manufacturer and choose the lowest dose. More studies are needed to determine toxicity associated with long-term use.  Adding turmeric to your diet may also help to reduce IBS symptoms although some side effects can occur with regular turmeric use, including:  It is currently unclear whether curcumin supplements are safe for pregnant women, so it is important for these women to speak to a doctor before trying any supplements.  People with  diabetes  should also avoid consuming turmeric, as it can lower blood glucose levels. It may also interact with some medications, such as blood thinners or diabetes drugs, so people should be sure to talk to their doctor before taking curcumin supplements.  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not regulate supplements, so the safety and contents of turmeric products cannot be guaranteed.  Turmeric is commonly used to flavor foods from savory curries and soups to sweet cakes and smoothies. It can be purchased as a powder or in its root form. It is also possible to take curcumin supplements, which are normally available in health food stores.  Unlike turmeric in other forms, the supplements are highly concentrated doses of curcumin, so people should be sure to read the instructions on how much is safe to consume.  Turmeric has shown promise in initial studies for its positive effect on some IBS symptoms. In most cases, including turmeric or curcumin supplements, as a part of a healthful diet, will not pose any health risk for people with IBS.  Whether turmeric has any real benefits for IBS symptoms remains unclear, and further research in this area is required.  A range of turmeric products are available to  purchase online .  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.   Article last updated by Phil Riches on Wed  5 December 2018.  Visit our  Irritable Bowel Syndrome  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Irritable Bowel Syndrome.   
 Bundy, R., Walker, A. F., Middleton, R. W., &amp; Booth, J. (2004). Turmeric extract may improve irritable bowel syndrome symptomology in otherwise healthy adults: A pilot study.  Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine ,  10 (6), 1015–1018.  Bundy, R., Walker, A. F., Middleton, R. W., &amp; Booth, J. (2004). Turmeric extract may improve irritable bowel syndrome symptomology in otherwise healthy adults: A pilot study.  Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine ,  10 (6), 1015–1018.  Gupta, S. C., Patchva, S., &amp; Aggarwal, B. B. (2013, January). Therapeutic roles of curcumin: Lessons learned from clinical trials.  The AAPS Journal ,  15 (1), 195–218.  Hewlings, S. J., &amp; Kalman, D. S. (2017, October 22). Curcumin: A Review of Its’ Effects on Human Health.  Foods, 6 (10), 92.  Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). (2017, October 9).  Kumar, A., Purwar, B., Shrivastava, A., &amp; Pandey, S. (2010). Effects of curcumin on the intestinal motility of albino rats.  Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology ,  54 (3), 284–288.  Lang, A., Salomon, N., Wu, J. C. Y., Kopylov, U., Lahat, A., Har-Noy, O., … Ben-Horin, S. (2015, August). Curcumin in combination with mesalamine induces remission in patients with mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis in a randomized controlled trial.  Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology ,  13 (8), 1444–1449.e1.  Ulcerative colitis. (2016, March 17).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "Turmeric for IBS: Does it work?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Dec. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320643.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, December 5). "Turmeric for IBS: Does it work?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  