 This article outlines simple, healthy lifestyle tips for tackling water weight.  There are a variety of ways a person can lose water weight quickly and naturally. We look at the most effective techniques:  An easy first step for beating water weight is to replace sodium-rich foods with low-sodium equivalents.  Too much sodium, or salt, can cause immediate water retention. This is because the body needs to keep its sodium-to-water ratio balanced to function properly, so will hold on to water if too much salt is consumed.  The latest  Dietary Guidelines for Americans  recommend no more than 2,300 milligrams (mg) of sodium per day. An average American will eat over  3,400 mg  every day.  Table salt is very high in sodium, but  75 percent  of the sodium people consume is hidden in processed foods. These include cheese, cold meats, bread, frozen meals, soup mixes, and savory snacks.  Natural foods, such as vegetables, nuts, and seeds, are very low in sodium. Some foods can even reduce sodium levels, including  bananas , avocados, and leafy vegetables.  While counterintuitive, drinking water can actually reduce water weight.  Dehydration  can make the body hold on to extra water to make up for lack of incoming water.  Water also improves kidney function, allowing excess water and sodium to be flushed out of the system.  Adults should drink around  2 liters  of water a day. Replacing sugary drinks with pure water is a great way to keep up with the body's daily water needs.   Carbohydrates , or carbs, also cause the body to store extra water. When we eat carbs, the energy that we do not use right away is stored as glycogen molecules. Each gram (g) of glycogen comes with  3 g of water  attached.  Cutting down on carbs is a quick way to use up the glycogen stores, which means that the water weight will also be reduced.  According to the Institute of Medicine's Food and Nutrition Board, adults need at least  130 g  of carbohydrates to function each day, but the average American diet includes much more than this.  Common carbs include bread, rice, and pasta. Replacing some daily sources of carbs with high-protein foods, such as lean meats, eggs, and soy products, can reduce the buildup of water weight.   Vitamin  B-6 and  magnesium  oxide can be effective natural remedies for fluid retention.  These supplements work with the kidneys to help the body flush extra water and sodium from the system.   Studies show  that these two supplements are very effective at relieving the symptoms of premenstrual syndrome or PMS, including water retention. They can also reduce abdominal bloating, swelling in the legs, and breast tenderness.  It is best for someone to talk to a doctor before taking new supplements, as they can have side effects or interactions with other medications.  Exercise lets the body sweat out extra water. This causes water weight to  drop immediately after exercise .  A workout also stimulates blood flow and improves circulation, which can reduce fluid buildup throughout the body, especially in the legs and feet.  Exercise reduces water weight even more by burning through glycogen energy stores. However, replacing lost fluids is vital after any physical activity to avoid dehydration.  Water pills can treat mild fluid retention, as prescribed by a doctor. These pills work as diuretics, meaning they make a person urinate more often. Urination lets the body get rid of excess water and sodium.  Water pills are not recommended for long-term use. They should always be used as instructed by a doctor to avoid dehydration or mineral deficits.  Anyone can experience fluid retention, but some  risk factors  increase the chances of it occurring. These include:  Key causes of water weight include:  Maintaining a healthful, low-sodium, and low-carb diet can keep water weight at bay.  The American Heart Association recommend doing  2.5 hours  of exercise per week. Keeping the body active can prevent fluids from building up and reduce water weight. People should be sure to stay hydrated during exercise.  Women can plan for menstruation-related fluid retention by introducing exercise and vitamin supplements into their monthly routine.  Water weight is rarely a cause for medical concern, although, in some cases, it can be a symptom of a more serious underlying condition.  Severe or serious water retention may include a tight appearance of the skin and skin that keeps a dimple when it is pressed. This is called pitted  edema .  Fluid retention that occurs alongside coughing and shortness of breath, especially while lying down, may be a sign of fluid in the lungs or  heart failure . This requires urgent medical attention.  Even if the water retention is not severe, it is always best to consult a doctor if a person is worried about their symptoms.  Water weight is not usually a cause for concern, but it can be uncomfortable and recurring.  Reducing salt and carbohydrate intake, keeping hydrated, and frequently exercising are all good ways to lose water weight and prevent it from returning.    
 American College of Sports Medicine, Sawka, M. N., Burke, L. M., Eichner, E. R., Maughan, R. J., Montain, S. J., &amp; Stachenfeld, N. S. (2007, February). American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and fluid replacement [Abstract].  Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise ,  39 (2), 377–390.  American College of Sports Medicine, Sawka, M. N., Burke, L. M., Eichner, E. R., Maughan, R. J., Montain, S. J., &amp; Stachenfeld, N. S. (2007, February). American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and fluid replacement [Abstract].  Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise ,  39 (2), 377–390.  American Heart Association recommendations for physical activity in adults. (2017, December 14).  Causes and signs of edema. (2016, December 30).  Denning, D. W., Dunnigan, M. G., Tillman, J., Davis, J. A., &amp; Forrest, C. A. (1990, May 1). The relationship between 'normal' fluid retention in women and idiopathic oedema.  Postgraduate Medical Journal ,  66 (775), 363–366.  Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2015-2020. Eighth edition. (2015, December).  Ebrahimi, E., Motlagh, S. K., Nemati, S., &amp; Tavakoli, Z. (2012, December). Effects of magnesium and vitamin B6 on the severity of premenstrual syndrome symptoms.  Journal of Caring Sciences ,  1 (4), 183–189.  Kreitzman, S. N., Coxon, A. Y., &amp; Szaz, K. F. (1992, July). Glycogen storage: Illusions of easy weight loss, excessive weight regain, and distortions in estimates of body composition [abstract].  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  56 (1 Suppl), 292S–293S.  Lewis, J. L. (n.d.). About body water.  Lowering salt in your diet. (2017, November 29).  Magnesium: Fact sheet for consumers. (2016, February 17).  Oedema. (2016, July 25).  Sodium fact sheet. (2016, February 29).  Torsemide (by mouth). (2017, December 1).  Vitamin B6: Fact sheet for consumers. (2016, February 17).  White, C. P., Hitchcock, C. L., Vigna, Y. M., &amp; Prior, J. C. (2011, May 31). Fluid retention over the menstrual cycle: 1-year data from the prospective ovulation cohort.  Obstetrics and Gynecology International ,  2011 , 1–7.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Smith, Amy. "How to lose water weight naturally."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320603.php&gt;    APA  Smith, A. (2018, January 12). "How to lose water weight naturally."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  