 Many people interact with animals during their daily lives, and  millions of households  in the United States have pets. Other people come into contact with animals through their work, such as farming, or in the wild.  In this article, we look at the common types of zoonotic diseases and how they can be prevented.  Zoonosis refers to diseases that can be passed from animals to humans. They are sometimes called zoonotic diseases.  Animals can carry harmful germs, such as bacteria, fungi, parasites, and viruses. These are then shared with humans and cause illness. Zoonotic diseases range from mild to severe, and some can even be fatal.  Zoonotic diseases are widespread both in the U.S. and worldwide. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that  61 percent  of all human diseases are zoonotic in origin, while  75 percent  of new diseases discovered in the last decade are zoonotic.  Before the introduction of new hygiene regulations around 100 years ago, zoonotic diseases such as bovine  tuberculosis , bubonic plague, and glanders caused  millions of deaths . They are still a major problem in developing countries.  Common zoonotic illnesses include:   Rabies    Rabies  is a disease that affects the nervous system of mammals. It is usually caused by a virus and is transmitted if an infected animal bites a person or other animal.  Rabies is almost always fatal once symptoms appear. However, rabies vaccines exist and are commonly available.   Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain spotted fever    Lyme disease  is transmitted through tick bites. Symptoms can range from mild to severe, but it can be treated using  antibiotics .   Dengue, malaria, and chikungunya   These are mosquito-borne diseases and are more common in certain areas, such as the Caribbean.  Symptoms include  fever , vomiting, and  headaches . It is vital to treat these conditions as soon as possible, as they can be fatal.   Salmonella infection   Salmonella is often caused by handling reptiles or amphibians that carry Salmonella, or by handling baby chicks or ducks.  The illness usually lasts for between  4 and 7 days , and symptoms include  diarrhea , fever, and abdominal cramps. People can usually recover without medical treatment, although conservative measures are recommended.    E. coli  infection   This infection is often caused by touching infected animals or handling contaminated food. Cows also have  E. coli  germs on their udders.  Often associated with  food poisoning , salmonella can cause vomiting, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea. It is essential that infected people rest and drink plenty of fluids.   Psittacosis   Also known as ornithosis or parrot fever, psittacosis is a bacterial disease that most often affects birds. Humans can get it from feathers, secretions, and droppings.  Symptoms include fever, headache, and dry cough. In serious cases, it may cause  pneumonia  and require a hospital visit.   Other types   There are hundreds of zoonotic diseases, but many are rare. Other well-known types include:  Zoonotic diseases can be transferred from animals to humans in several different ways, including:  Direct contact involves coming into contact with the bodily fluids of an infected animal, such as saliva, blood, urine, mucus, or feces.  This can happen because of merely touching or petting infected animals, or being bitten or scratched by one.  Water resources that are contaminated by manure can also contain a great variety of zoonotic bacteria and therefore  increase the risk  of that bacteria transferring to humans.  Indirect contact involves coming into contact with an area where infected animals live or roam, or by touching an object that has been contaminated by an infected animal.  Common areas where this occurs include:  Farmers, abattoir workers, zoo or pet shop workers, and veterinarians have an increased risk of being exposed to zoonotic diseases. They can also become carriers and pass those diseases on to other people.  A vector is a living organism that transfers an infection from an animal to a human, or another animal.  They are often arthropods. Common vectors include:  The vector will bite the infected animal and then bite a human, passing on the zoonotic disease.  Zoonosis can come from contaminated animal food products, improper food handling, or inadequate cooking.  Around  1 in 6 American people  will get sick at some point in their lives by eating or drinking contaminated food or drink.  Common causes of zoonosis through food-borne include:  Global climate change, the overuse of antimicrobials in medicine, and more intensified farm settings are also thought to  influence the increasing rate  of zoonotic diseases.  People with a weakened immune system are also at  greater risk . Common causes of immune-suppression include:  People come into contact with animals all the time, but there are several steps a person can take to help prevent infection. These include:    
 Cantas, L., Suer, K. (2014, October 14). Review: The important bacterial zoonoses in " One Health " concept.  Frontiers in Public Health ,  2 , 144.  Cantas, L., Suer, K. (2014, October 14). Review: The important bacterial zoonoses in " One Health " concept.  Frontiers in Public Health ,  2 , 144.  List of zoonotic diseases. (2013, March 21).  Neglected zoonotic diseases. (n.d.).  Salmonella. (2017, December 7).  What zoonotic diseases are dangerous. (2016, February 18).  Zoonotic diseases. (2017, July 14).  Zoonotic diseases: Disease transmitted from animals to humans. (2017, November 15).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "Types of zoonotic diseases."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320618.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2018, January 15). "Types of zoonotic diseases."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  