  Necrotizing fasciitis  is a serious condition that kills soft tissues, often quickly, including muscles, nerves, and blood vessels.  Fournier's  gangrene  is rare but is a medical emergency when it does occur.  Fournier's gangrene can occur when a person has a skin wound that allows bacteria, viruses, or fungi to get deeper into the body.  Examples of these skin injuries include anorectal abscesses, surgical incisions,  diverticulitis , rectal  cancer , or genital piercings.  In some individuals, the cause of Fournier's gangrene is unknown. However, doctors have identified some risk factors that may make a person more likely to have Fournier's gangrene.  These include:  According to an article in the journal   ISRN Surgery  , an estimated 20 to 70 percent of those with Fournier's gangrene have diabetes. An estimated 25 to 50 percent have an alcohol abuse disorder.  The symptoms of Fournier's gangrene often begin with a general feeling of being unwell. Symptoms can include:  These symptoms will continue to worsen. The pain associated with the condition becomes more severe. The tissues may also start to smell foul, which is the result of dying or rotting tissue.  Rubbing the affected areas of skin yields a distinct sound that is similar to a popping or crackling noise and is known as crepitus. This sound is due to the friction of gas and tissues moving against each other.  The presence of Fournier's gangrene can set off a cascade of symptoms that can ultimately be deadly. These include:  Seeking quick treatment can reduce the chances of symptoms becoming even more severe.  Treatments associated with Fournier's gangrene involve immediately starting a person on strong intravenous (IV)  antibiotics  in an attempt to kill off the infection.  Also, a doctor will perform a procedure known as surgical debridement. This involves cleaning the affected skin and removing areas of dead tissue.  Ideally, a doctor can remove enough tissue to keep the infection from spreading.  Sometimes, a person will have to go back to the operating room multiple times for surgical debridements.  According to an article in   Postgraduate Medical Journal  , a person with Fournier's gangrene typically requires 3.5 procedures in an attempt to reduce the disease's spread.  Sometimes a doctor will recommend hyperbaric oxygen therapy. This involves exposing the body to 100 percent oxygen, in comparison to normal air that has about 21 percent oxygen.  The extra oxygen helps to keep bacteria from growing, reduces blood vessel damage, and promotes wound healing.  However, hyperbaric therapy is a controversial treatment for the condition because there are not any clinical trials that support its use.  Surgery is sometimes the only other option. Ideally, a person will seek treatment fast enough to avoid having to remove an excess of skin and tissues.  Sometimes, skin grafting or other plastic surgery is needed to reconstruct and re-create damaged tissues.  Doctors will diagnose Fournier's gangrene by first asking a person about their symptoms. They will take a medical history and perform a physical examination.  Imaging studies may be ordered to rule out other potential causes. For example, a doctor may ask for an  ultrasound  to determine if the condition is the result of inflammation or Fournier's gangrene.  Other conditions that can initially appear similar to Fournier's gangrene include epididymitis and orchitis.  Ultrasound can help a doctor identify underlying gases or fluids in the body. Computer tomography (CT) and X-rays may also help a doctor recognise Fournier's gangrene.  Blood work to test for the possible presence of infection will be done, as well as to check for the blood's clotting abilities.  Hospital admissions for Fournier's gangrene are rare, representing less than 0.02 percent of all hospital admissions in the United States.  Nevertheless, an estimated 20 to 40 percent of people with Fournier's gangrene die due to complications, according to an article published in the journal   Urologia Internationalis  . Some studies report the mortality rates to be much higher.  As a general rule, the older a person is and the more complicating health conditions they have, the more likely they are to experience severe side effects from Fournier's gangrene.  Seeking help without hesitation, as early as possible, can help keep the infection from spreading.    
 Ekelius, L., Björkman, H., Kalin, M., &amp; Fohlman, J. (2009, July 8). Fournier's gangrene after genital piercing [Abstract].  Scandinavian Journal of Infectious Diseases ,  36 (8), 610–612.  Ekelius, L., Björkman, H., Kalin, M., &amp; Fohlman, J. (2009, July 8). Fournier's gangrene after genital piercing [Abstract].  Scandinavian Journal of Infectious Diseases ,  36 (8), 610–612.  Fournier gangrene. (2017).  Huang, C.-S. (2017, March 23). Fournier's gangrene.  The New England Journal of Medicine ,  376 , 1158.  Mallikarjuna, M. N., Vijayakumar, A., Patil, V. S., &amp; Shivswamy, B. S. (2012, December 3). Fournier's gangrene: Current practices.  ISRN Surgery ,  2012 , 942437.  Sorensen, M. D., &amp; Krieger, J. N. (2016). Fournier's gangrene: epidemiology and outcomes in the general U.S. population.  Urologia Internationalis ,  97 (3), 249–259.  Thwaini, A., Khan, A., Malik, A., Cherian, J., Barua, J., Shergill, I., … Mammen, K. (2006, August). Fournier's gangrene and its emergency management.  Postgraduate Medical Journal ,  82 (970), 516–519.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What causes Fournier's gangrene?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320692.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, January 22). "What causes Fournier's gangrene?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  