 This article provides the key information about causes, treatment, and prevention of traction alopecia.  Traction alopecia is  hair loss  caused by the hair being pulled in the same way for a long time.  Traction alopecia can happen to anyone who wears their hair pulled back tightly, whether in braids, dreadlocks, or a ponytail. It can also occur when tight headwear is used in the same way every day.  Repeated strain on the hair follicles can pull out strands of hair and even damage the follicles. This causes redness, itching, and even pus-producing ulcers or infections.  Signs of traction alopecia include:  Occasionally wearing tight hairstyles is not a problem, and some daily hair loss is normal. According to the  American Academy of Dermatology , humans lose between 50 and 100 hairs every day, which are usually replaced by new hair growth.  Traction alopecia is not a medical concern, but it can have adverse psychological effects.  This form of hair loss is different from others, such as  alopecia areata , alopecia universalis, and male or female pattern  baldness , which are caused by genetic or immune factors.  A related condition called central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia (CCCA) can also occur when hair loss starts on the crown and moves outwards. This type of alopecia is likely to cause scarring on the scalp.  Traction alopecia is made more likely by certain hairstyles and professions.  Here is a list of possible causes of traction alopecia:  A study in the   British Journal of Dermatology   found traction alopecia in 31.7 percent of African women with relaxed or permed hair.  Traction alopecia is common among ballet dancers and other sports professionals who wear tight buns or ponytails for long periods of time.  Children and adults are both affected, but it is more common in older people because hair follicles naturally weaken over time.  Traction alopecia can also occur in pets. Leaving hair clips in a dog's fur for too long or allowing the fur to form dreadlocks can strain the follicles to cause painful pulling and hair loss.  Treatment can be as simple as changing hairstyle techniques. Here are some steps to treat this condition:  If the hair still does not regrow after a few months, the hair follicles may be damaged. If there is substantial scarring, the hair may not be able to grow back.  Consult a doctor or dermatologist to find out the best course of treatment. In severe cases, hair transplants or camouflage techniques are an option.  These tips will help prevent traction alopecia:  It is vital to keep hair healthy by getting enough protein and iron, which are essential for hair growth.  Good sources of iron  include beans, nuts, brown rice, meat, and leafy vegetables, such as spinach.  Traction alopecia is fully reversible in the earlier stages. In most cases, recognizing the problem and avoiding tight hairstyles will result in a full restoration of the hair.  In the later stages, follicles may become damaged and the hair may not re-grow. In these cases, a person may wish to ask a healthcare professional about hair transplants.  When a person is concerned about hair loss, they should speak to a doctor or dermatologist. A professional can work out the cause of hair loss and suggest the best course of treatment.    
 Akingbola, C. O., &amp; Vyas, J. (2017, August 31). Traction alopecia: A neglected entity in 2017.  Indian Journal of Dermatology, Venereology, and Leprology ,  83 (6), 644–649.  Akingbola, C. O., &amp; Vyas, J. (2017, August 31). Traction alopecia: A neglected entity in 2017.  Indian Journal of Dermatology, Venereology, and Leprology ,  83 (6), 644–649.  Drugs@FDA: FDA approved drug products. (n.d.).  Goren, A., Shapiro, J., Roberts, J., McCoy, J., Desai, N., Zarrab, Z., ... Lotti, T. (2015, January–February). Clinical utility and validity of minoxidil response testing in androgenetic alopecia [Abstract].  Dermatologic Therapy ,  28 (1), 13–16.  Hair loss. (n.d.).  James, J., Saladi, R. N., &amp; Fox, J. L. (2007, September–October). Traction alopecia in Sikh male patients.  The Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine ,  20 (5), 497-498.  Khumalo, N. P., Jessop, S., Gumedze, F., &amp; Ehrlich, R. (2007, November). Hairdressing and the prevalence of scalp disease in African adults [Abstract].  British Journal of Dermatology ,  157 (5), 981–988.  Lawson, C. N., Hollinger, J., Sethi, S., Rodney, I., Sarkar, R., Dlova, N., … Callender, V. D. (2017, March). Updates in the understanding and treatments of skin &amp; hair disorders in women of color.  International Journal of Women's Dermatology ,  3 (1 Suppl), S21–S37.  Tanus, A., Oliveira, C. C. C., Villarreal, D. J. V., Sanchez, F. A. V., &amp; Dias, M. F. R. G. (2015, July–August). Black women's hair: The main scalp dermatoses and aesthetic practices in women of African ethnicity.  Anais Brasileiros de Dermatologia ,  90 (4), 450–465.  Vitamins and minerals. Iron. (2017, March 3).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Smith, Amy. "Traction alopecia: Symptoms and prevention."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320648.php&gt;    APA  Smith, A. (2018, January 18). "Traction alopecia: Symptoms and prevention."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  