 The taste buds typically regenerate themselves about every 1 to 2 weeks. However, there are times when they can become damaged, burned, or swollen.  There are many potential causes of damage to the taste buds, and these will determine the choice of treatment.  Inside the papillae are small, hair-like projections known as microvilli that have sensory cells. These cells transmit messages to the brain. Disruption to these can affect a person's ability to taste foods.  Several conditions can irritate the taste buds enough to result in swelling. These include:  Sometimes an inflamed taste bud can signal a more severe problem, such as tongue  cancer , which can cause inflammation that leads to tongue and taste bud swelling.  The papillae may appear white or bright red. Some may also have little fluid-filled blisters that are known as pustules on the tongue.  Normally, however, a person should not be able to see their taste buds with the naked eye.  Because the body grows new taste buds all the time, most people's swollen taste buds resolve quickly. Either someone will treat the underlying condition they have, or the damage to their taste buds heals with time.  However, there are an estimated 200,000 Americans who seek treatment each year for disorders related to their sense of taste, according to the  National Institutes of Health .  If a person notices chronically swollen taste buds or feels their sense of smell is affected, they will usually make an appointment to see an otolaryngologist, who is an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) specialist.  An ENT specialist will start by taking a health history, reviewing a person's medical conditions, and the medications they take. They will consider the symptoms and do a physical examination. The doctor can also conduct taste tests by applying specially-flavored substances to a person's tongue.  If a doctor suspects a person could have tongue cancer, they may take a biopsy or sample of tissue. A specialist known as a pathologist will then view the cells under a microscope to look for cancerous cells.  A person may be able to reduce their swollen taste buds by treating the underlying cause. This could include taking  antibiotics  for a bacterial infection or gum problem.  Sometimes a doctor may prescribe alternate medications to reduce the effects of tongue or taste bud swelling.   Quitting smoking  can also help a person who smokes and has problems with taste.  Other steps include:  A person can also talk to their doctor about individual treatments that may benefit them.  Damage taste buds might mean someone is unable to taste spoiled foods. A sense of taste that is compromised could also affect a person's appetite and enjoyment of their food.  These problems with food consumption can result in unwanted weight loss if not dealt with quickly. Ideally, a person can seek medical treatment to identify underlying causes of taste bud swelling, so their taste sensations return.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Physiology of taste. (n.d.).  Physiology of taste. (n.d.).  Smell &amp; taste. (2018).  Taste buds. (n.d.).  Taste buds. (n.d.).  Taste disorders. (2017, May 12).  What are taste buds? (2013, October).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What to know about swollen taste buds."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320684.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, January 22). "What to know about swollen taste buds."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  