 Aronia berries can be eaten fresh on their own or used as an ingredient in foods, such as pies, juices, and tea.  The berries are said to have many health benefits, including anti-cancer properties.  Many of the proposed health benefits of aronia are linked to its high content of nutrients called polyphenols.  A 2015 review  in  Food Technology &amp; Biotechnology  noted that previous research had found aronia to have the highest polyphenol content of 143 plants.  In this article, we look at some of the possible health benefits of aronia, along with the evidence for them. We also examine their nutritious content and how they can be included in a diet.   Anti-cancer effects   A  2004 study  looked at the effects of grape, aronia, and bilberry extracts in preventing the growth of  colon cancer .  The study found that while all the extracts inhibited the growth of the  cancer  cells, aronia had the strongest effect.  A  2009 study  found that an aronia extract helped to reduce cell damage in relation to  breast cancer .  The study's authors concluded that the aronia extract had been shown to have protective qualities in people experiencing breast cancer.   Anti-diabetic effects   Research seems to support the anti-diabetic effects of aronia. A  2015 study in rats  found that an aronia extract helped to boost the immune system and reduce  inflammation  related to  diabetes .  A  2012 study , looking at insulin-resistant rats, found that an aronia extract fought  insulin resistance  on several levels. This result potentially makes it an effective aid in preventing diabetes from developing.  A  2016 study  found that blood glucose levels and  obesity  were positively affected by aronia.   Organ health   A  2016 study  looked at the effects of aronia fruit juice in rats with liver damage. Researchers found that the juice reduced the severity and symptoms of the liver damage.  A similar  2017 study  also found aronia juice to have protective effects against liver damage in rats. The study's authors suggested the effect might be due to the  antioxidant  activity of the aronia.  Another  rodent study from 2017  found that aronia juice helped to reduce the severity of symptoms in rats with damaged stomach linings.  The study suggested that, in this case, the benefits of the aronia might be due to it boosting mucus production, as well as its ability to combat oxidative  stress .   Artery and blood vessel health   A  2015 study  found that aronia could protect against  coronary artery disease . Aronia was thought to protect against the plaque that develops inside the arteries.  Both the aronia and bilberry extracts helped to relax the tissue, which would allow for improved blood flow. This is important, as many cardiovascular diseases result in a hardening of the arteries and reduced ability for the blood vessels to relax. This can also mean that the  blood pressure  drops.  Out of the three extracts tested, aronia had the most powerful effects. The researchers concluded that the extracts could have significant benefits in treating vascular disease.  A  2013 study  supported these findings. Researchers found that aronia was effective at reducing blood pressure, and might help combat  high blood pressure  in the arteries.  The specific nutrient balance of aronia will vary depending on the way it has been grown and prepared, as noted by  a review . The review lists factors such as harvest date and where the berries were grown.  Like other berries, aronia is known to be rich in nutrients. Some of the nutritional details suggested by the review include the following:   Vitamins    Minerals   All weights are the weight of the berries when fresh.  People can eat aronia berries in many forms, including fresh and juiced.  They can also be used as an ingredient in baked goods and other recipes or taken in extract form via various dietary supplements.  Foods and drinks in which aronia can be used include:  Aronia  typically has  a sharp, mouth-drying quality. This may be unpleasant for some people but is unlikely to present any health risk.  There does not appear to be any well-documented evidence of specific risks or hazards related to consuming aronia, although some people might be allergic to aronia.  Aronia is a nutrient-dense foodstuff, containing a wide range of vitamins and minerals, including zinc,  magnesium , iron, and vitamins C, B, and K.  Specific nutrient values will vary depending on the way the aronia is grown and prepared, so each brand should be investigated individually.  Research suggests that aronia may have significant health benefits in terms of combating the growth of certain cancers and the associated damage to the body.  Aronia also appears to have significant positive effects in terms of  insulin  and improving immune function. These effects may be especially valuable to people with diabetes or prediabetes.  Researchers believe that aronia berries may have protective effects on the liver, as well as helping to reduce symptoms and damage associated with stomach disorders.  Finally, aronia seems to be effective in reducing blood pressure and aiding blood vessel relaxation. Some researchers suggest that it could be a useful tool in treating vascular diseases.  There does not appear to be any well-documented evidence of health risks associated with aronia, though  dry mouth  is a common side effect of consumption that some might find unpleasant.    
 Badescu, M., Badulescu, O., Badescu, L., &amp; Ciocoiu, M. (2015, April). Effects of sambucus nigra and aronia melanocarpa extracts on immune system disorders within diabetes mellitus.  Pharmaceutical Biology ,  53 (4), 533–539.  Badescu, M., Badulescu, O., Badescu, L., &amp; Ciocoiu, M. (2015, April). Effects of sambucus nigra and aronia melanocarpa extracts on immune system disorders within diabetes mellitus.  Pharmaceutical Biology ,  53 (4), 533–539.  Ciocoiu, M., Badescu, L., Miron, A., &amp; Badescu, M. (2013, February 27). The involvement of a polyphenol-rich extract of black chokeberry in oxidative stress on experimental arterial hypertension.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2013 , 912769.  Duffy, V. B., Rawal, S., Park, J., Brand, M. H., Sharafi, M., &amp; Bolling, B. W. (2017, August 30). Characterizing and improving the sensory and hedonic responses to polyphenol-rich aronia berry juice.  Appetite ,  107 , 116–125.  Everhart, E. (n.d.). Aronia – a new crop for Iowa.  Kedzierska, M., Olas, B., Wachowicz, B., Stochmal, A., Oleszek, W., Jeziorski, A., … Glowacki, R. (2009, October). An extract from berries of Aronia melanocarpa modulates the generation of superoxide anion radicals in blood platelets from breast cancer patients [Abstract].  Planta Medica ,  75 (13), 1405–1409.  Kulling, S. E., &amp; Rawel, H. M. (2008). Chokeberry ( Aronia melanocarpa ) – a review on the characteristic components and potential health effects.  Planta Medica ,  74 (3), 1625–1634.  Parzonko, A., Oświt, A., Bazylko, A., &amp; Naruszewicz, M. (2015, December 15). Anthocyans-rich  Aronia melanocarpa  extract possesses ability to protect endothelial progenitor cells against angiotensin II induced dysfunction [Abstract].  Phytomedicine ,  22 (14), 1238–1246.  Paulrayer, A., Adithan, A., Lee, J. H., Moon, K. H., Kim, D. G., Im, S. Y., … Kim, J.-H. (2017).  Aronia melanocarpa  (black chokeberry) reduces ethanol-induced gastric damage via regulation of HSP-70, NF-kB, and MCP-1 signaling.  International Journal of Molecular Sciences ,  18 (6), 1195.  Pawłowicz, P., Wilczyński, J., &amp; Stetkiewicz, T. (2001). Influence of natural anthocyanins derived from chokeberry ( Aronia melanocarpa ) extract on glycosylated hemglobin level in pregnant women with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.  Polish Journal of Gynaecological Investigations ,  3 (3), 123–125.  Qin, B., &amp; Anderson, R. A. (2012, August 28). An extract of chokeberry attenuates weight gain and modulates insulin, adipogenic and inflammatory signalling pathways in epididymal adipose tissue of rats fed a fructose-rich diet.  The British Journal of Nutrition ,  108 (4), 581–587.  Tolić, M. T., Jurčević, I. L., Krbavčić, I. P., Marković, K., &amp; Vahčić, N. (2015, June). Phenolic content, antioxidant capacity and quality of chokeberry ( Aronia melanocarpa ) products.  Food Technology &amp; Biotechnology ,  53 (2), 171–179.  Valcheva-Kuzmanova, S., Borisova, P., Galunska, B., Krasnaliev, I., &amp; Belcheva, A. (2004, December). Hepatoprotective effect of the natural fruit juice from Aronia melanocarpa on carbon tetrachloride-induced acute liver damage in rats [Abstract].  Experimental and Toxicologic Pathology ,  56 (3), 195–201.  Yamane, T., Kozuka, M., Konda, D., Nakano, Y., Nakagaki, T., Ohkubo, I., … Ariga, H. (2016, May). Improvement of blood glucose levels and obesity in mice given aronia juice by inhibition of dipeptidyl peptidase IV and alpha-glucosidase [Abstract].  The Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry ,  31 , 106–112.  Zec, M., Martačić, J. D., Ranković, S., Pokimica, B., Tomić, M., Ignjatović, D., … Popović, T. (2017, March 30). Effects of  Aronia melanocarpa  juice on plasma and liver phospholipid fatty acid composition in Wistar rats [Abstract].  Acta Veterinaria ,  67 (1).  Zhao, C., Giusti, M. M., Malik, M, Moyer, M. P., &amp; Magnuson, B. A. (2004, October 6). Effects of commercial anthocyanin-rich extracts on colonic cancer and nontumorigenic colonic cell growth [Abstract].  Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry ,  52 (20), 6122–6128.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Wessels, Dan. "What are the health benefits of aronia berries?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320610.php&gt;    APA  Wessels, D. (2018, January 13). "What are the health benefits of aronia berries?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  