 Simple partial seizures are a seizure type where one side of the brain is initially affected. Sometimes the seizure activity will remain on this side, while other times the seizure activity will spread and become partial complex or secondarily generalized in type.  Doctors may also call simple partial seizures "focal aware seizures" or "simple focal seizures."  If a person experiences repeated simple partial seizures, a doctor might diagnose them with  epilepsy , which is continued seizures. An estimated  2 to 12 percent  of all children with epilepsy experience simple partial seizures.  A seizure occurs when a person experiences a disturbance in their brain's normal activity. The brain communicates via electric "signals," so when these signals are disrupted, a person can have a seizure.  Simple partial seizures occur in people who have an electrical abnormality in a specific part of their brain and are prone to these disturbed signals.  Doctors do not know what causes many types of simple partial seizure disorders but think there may be genetic factors.  Causes of simple partial seizures include  traumatic brain injury , which can cause a scar on the brain that can disturb normal brain electrical signals and trigger seizures. Also, brain irritation from surgery,  stroke , or  tumor  can interfere with brain electrical activity and cause simple partial seizures.  People with  diabetes  may experience a type of continuous simple partial seizures called epilepsia partialis continua (EPC). Addressing and correcting very high sugar levels in the blood can help treat this rare condition. Any other structural abnormality of the brain can also cause EPC.  Other seizure types include complex partial seizures, which do result in a person losing consciousness. This is because the abnormal electrical activity involves both sides of the brain and regions that are important in awareness.  Another type is a generalized seizure, which occurs when a person's entire brain is affected. People experiencing a generalized seizure do lose consciousness. Symptoms include tonic-clonic (grand mal) convulsions where there is jerking of the arms and legs, or petit mal staring spells where the individual does not respond to directives by anyone around them.  Doctors often classify simple partial seizures into four types based on the area of the brain they affect. The location of the seizure usually determines the symptoms experienced as well.  Motor and sensory simple partial seizures may not change awareness or consciousness. However, some partial seizures can be simple or complex and be associated with autonomic or psychic problems.  Here are more details on these four simple partial seizure categories:  Some general symptoms of simple partial seizures that can occur alone or in combination in a given person with no loss of consciousness include:  In some people, a simple partial seizure is a warning seizure that can indicate another seizure is about to occur. They can be a warning of a generalized seizure, which affects the whole of the brain, and causes the person to lose consciousness.  Most seizures do not last longer than 1 to 2 minutes. However, a person may continue to feel confused or have difficulty thinking clearly after a seizure has occurred.  If a seizure lasts longer than 5 minutes, doctors consider it a medical emergency.  When a person has experienced multiple seizures, doctors usually prescribe anti-convulsants as the first line of treatment.  However, other treatment options include:  However, seizure medications or these other treatments may be ineffective in stopping seizures.  Other treatments include:  One option to treat some forms of simple partial seizures in children is a specialized diet known as a ketogenic diet. Many doctors  suggest the ketogenic diet  for children who have not responded to other seizure treatments. This diet is a highly restrictive high-fat, low-carb diet that can sometimes be difficult for children to follow. A ketogenic diet requires a dietitian's supervision.  Some people may require surgery to stop their seizures. Surgery involves removing an area of the brain that is causing a person to have seizures. These areas include scar tissue, a tumor, or other abnormalities. Surgery is usually considered a last resort. It might be carried out on people who have not responded to medications, and those where the cause of the seizures is easily accessible.  People who are not candidates for surgery but who are not responding well to their anti-seizure medications may benefit from a device called a  vagus nerve stimulator (VNS) .  A VNS is a small unit that is placed under the skin in the chest and attached to the vagus nerve in the neck. That vagus nerve runs up to the brain, and the electrical signals released from the VNS change the electrical activity in the brain that causes seizures.  There is a range of medications available that aim to reduce seizure frequency. Each of the drugs works differently, and sometimes a doctor will prescribe more than one anti-convulsant medication type.  Medication options include:  If a person takes anti-convulsant medications, they must not suddenly stop taking them.  To prevent a seizure, the body needs to contain a certain amount of anti-convulsant medications. Suddenly stopping taking the medication can quickly trigger a seizure.  If a person experiences any symptoms that may be a simple partial seizure, they should seek medical attention immediately.  Sometimes, the symptoms of a simple partial seizure may be misunderstood. For example, a teacher or other school official may mistake the symptoms of simple partial seizure in a child as laziness in class or not paying attention.  A doctor will often diagnose epilepsy by considering a person's symptoms. They will ask friends and family about the symptoms they have observed.  The doctor may order tests to rule out other causes. This could include blood testing, liver tests, or thyroid tests.  Sometimes, the doctor may order a test known as an electroencephalogram or EEG. This test measures brain waves and functioning. If a person has a seizure while being monitored by an EEG, the doctor will collect specific information about the seizure type.  Doctors may also order imaging scans such as a  CAT scan  or an  MRI  to identify areas that could be causing seizures.  It is important to note that all tests including the neurological examination performed by the doctor may be normal, yet the individual may still have a seizure disorder or epilepsy.  A critical first step in the diagnosis of a person believed to have had one or more simple partial seizures is to determine whether a person has a brain abnormality. This abnormality could be a problem in the structure of the brain, such as a tumor, or it could be that a specific region of the brain is electrically abnormal and causing the simple partial seizures.  Children who have simple partial seizures will sometimes "outgrow" seizures and will not experience them as adults.  Others may need to take anti-seizure medications all their lives.  Simple partial seizures can be treated in a range of ways, such as treating an underlying disease or prescribing a specific medication. Sometimes, simple partial seizures can signal the beginning of a more dangerous (generalized) seizure disorder.  Anybody experiencing any symptoms of a possible simple partial seizure should see their doctor for a definite diagnosis and treatment.    
 Donner, E. J. (2010, February 4). Simple partial seizures.  Donner, E. J. (2010, February 4). Simple partial seizures.  Goldenberg, M. M. (2010, July). Overview of drugs used for epilepsy and seizures.  Pharmacy and Therapeutics ,  35 (7), 392–415.  How is epilepsy treated? (n.d.).  Ketogenic Diet. (2017, October 25).  Kiriakopoulous, E., &amp; Shafer, P. O. (2017, March). Tonic-clonic seizures.  Partial seizures (focal seizures). (2014, September).  Seizure types. (2017, November).  Simple partial seizures. (n.d.).  Simple partial seizures. (n.d.).  Simple partial seizures. (n.d.).  Vagus nerve stimulation. (2016, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What are simple partial seizures?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320696.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, January 23). "What are simple partial seizures?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  