 Urination is a vital process and the result of the kidneys filtering and removing waste products, fluids, electrolytes, and other substances the body no longer wants or needs.  The substances that are waiting to be expelled back up in the body and are not removed if the kidneys cease working and urination stops. This blockage can cause other health problems and be life-threatening if not treated.  Anuria is diagnosed when the kidneys are producing less than 500 milliliters (mL) of urine each day. A usual daily urine output is between 1 to 2 liters for an adult.  Anuria is mostly caused by problems in the kidneys, but it can also result from problems in the heart.  Some of the causes of anuria include:  Anuria or not urinating is a symptom itself and not a medical condition. Sometimes, a person may also have signs of the condition that is causing the poor urine output.  The symptoms of kidney disease can include:  Symptoms of heart failure can include:  Symptoms of diabetic ketoacidosis include:  Anyone experiencing any of these signs or symptoms, or who has stopped urinating, should see their doctor immediately, or proceed to the nearest urgent care or emergency room.  Diagnosing anuria and its underlying cause starts with a thorough medical history and interview when a doctor will ask about the person's medical history and medication use.  The doctor will also ask about symptoms and changes in urination, including:  The doctor may suggest additional testing, such as blood testing for kidney function, urine testing for blood or sugar, a biopsy of the kidney or imaging tests, including X-rays,  CT scans  or  MRI  scans.  Hospitalization may be needed until a person's kidney function has been restored or the cause of the anuria is determined.  If urine output cannot be restored, it can be life-threatening. The condition causing the anuria can also be very dangerous.  The primary complication of anuria is kidney damage or failure. This can be permanent and can cause someone to need dialysis or a kidney transplant.  Anuria can be fatal if not treated, so prompt treatment is vital if someone suspects anuria.  If anuria is a sign of an underlying condition, treatment depends on what that underlying condition might be.  People with diabetes should be careful to control their blood sugar levels. It is important to monitor blood sugar as directed, follow the prescribed diet and exercise regimen, and to take all medication, as directed.  Regularly following up with the doctor can also help to identify quickly when changes need to be made, and it can minimize the risk of complications.  Making positive lifestyle changes is also very important for someone with high blood pressure. The doctor should recommend diet and exercise changes and may suggest medication to help keep  blood pressure  low.  Stress  relief and getting enough sleep are also necessary.  Someone with an obstruction in the kidneys, such as from a  kidney stone  or  tumor , will need to have it removed. This may mean surgery, medication  chemotherapy , or  radiation therapy  to shrink or remove the tumor or stone.  Kidney disease is treated with dialysis, which is a procedure that removes excess fluid, electrolytes, and waste products from the blood. Dialysis is performed in an outpatient clinic, or the hospital if needed, 3 to 4 times a week.  There are several ways to have dialysis. Normally, the blood is removed, passed through a special filter to take out the waste products, and then reinfused back into the body.  Someone with kidney damage and who is on dialysis may be a candidate for a kidney transplant. Not everyone is a candidate for this type of surgery because of the risks and long-term care necessary afterward.  The outlook for someone with anuria depends on several factors, including its underlying cause, how quickly it is diagnosed and treated, and the person's overall health and wellness.  Because of the potential severity of anuria and the conditions associated with it, it is best to see the doctor as quickly as possible if there are any changes in urine output.    
 Acute kidney injury (AKI)? (n.d.).  Acute kidney injury (AKI)? (n.d.).  Agrawal, M., &amp; Swartz, R. (2000, April 1). Acute renal failure.  American Family Physician ,  61 (7), 2077–2088.  Dirkes, S. M. (2015, July). Acute kidney injury: Causes, phases and early detection.  American Nurse Today ,  10 (7).  McMillan, J. (n.d.). Acute kidney injury.  Symptoms. (n.d.).  Warning signs of heart failure. (2018, January 11).  What is diabetic ketoacidosis (2017, June).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "What you should know about anuria."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320663.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, January 19). "What you should know about anuria."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  