 Hairy cell  leukemia  accounts for approximately  2 percent  of all leukemias, is  more common  in men than in women, and is also more frequent in older people. Around  1,000 new cases  are reported every year in the United States.  It is a rare form of leukemia, in which the  bone marrow  produces an excessive amount of a type of white blood cell called B cells. These abnormal B cells do not develop into healthy cells but instead become harmful cells known as leukemia cells.  Leukemia cells can build up in the blood or the bone marrow, taking up space from healthy cells. This may weaken the body's immune system and make it more prone to infections,  anemia , and bleeding.  The name "hairy" comes from the way the leukemia cells look under a microscope — they resemble hair.  Hairy cell leukemia progresses slowly, if at all. A person may have few or no symptoms in the early stages of the disease.  When symptoms appear, they may include one or several of the following:  The causes of hairy cell leukemia are not fully understood.  Doctors think that a mutation known as V600E in a specific gene is responsible for most cases of hairy cell leukemia. This gene is the BRAF gene.  Men and older people may have an increased risk of developing this disease.  A doctor may make a diagnosis of hairy cell leukemia based on physical exams, medical questions, and tests that look at the person's blood and bone marrow cells.   Physical exam   A general body examination to check the person's overall physical health for unusual signs or symptoms.  The exam may include searching for lumps or swelling that could be enlarged lymph nodes or signal an enlarged spleen or liver.   Medical history   Collecting information about the person's health habits, past illnesses, and treatments.   Complete blood count (CBC)   A sample of blood is collected and examined to measure a variety of things:   Blood chemistry tests   Analysis of a blood sample to measure the levels of certain substances that are released by organs and tissues into the bloodstream. An unusually high or low amount of these substances can be a sign of a disease.   Peripheral blood smear   Checking a person's blood sample under the microscope to look for changes in the shape of blood cells and the appearance of a "hairy" look. Doctors also check for the amount and type of white blood cells as well as the number of platelets.   Bone marrow aspiration or biopsy   Collection of a small sample of the person's bone marrow, blood, or bone by inserting a hollow needle into the bone in the hip or breast area. This sample is then examined under the microscope to look for "hairy" leukemia cells, and to track healthy blood cells.   Cytogenetic analysis   Analysis of tissue cells under the microscope to look for genetic abnormalities.   Immunophenotyping   Analysis of markers on the surface of blood or bone marrow cells. Doctors will compare these with healthy cells of the immune system to determine what type of cells they are.   Flow cytometry   Tests a blood sample to estimate the number of cells, and the percentage of living cells it contains. The sample can also reveal other characteristics of cells, including the size, shape, and presence of  tumor  markers on the cell surface.  For this test, cells are stained with a fluorescent dye and suspended in a liquid. By passing a light beam through the cells, a doctor can identify their characteristics by the way the cells scatter light.   Computed tomography (CT) scan   A test that consists of making several X-ray images, from different angles, of specific body areas. A dye may sometimes be swallowed or infused into the person's veins so that a doctor can see the organs and tissues more clearly.  A  CT scan  of the chest, abdomen, or pelvis may be performed to look for swollen lymph nodes or a swollen spleen.   Gene mutation test   A laboratory test that examines a blood or bone marrow sample to look for mutations in the BRAF gene. This gene is mutated in around  80–90 percent  of people with hairy cell leukemia.  Hairy cell leukemia progresses slowly, and so some people survive for many years without receiving treatment.  When treatment is necessary, treatment options can depend on several factors, such as:  Different types of treatment are available to people with hairy cell leukemia. These include standard treatments used in clinical practice and treatments that are studied in clinical trials.  Here are five different types of standard treatments currently being used:   1. Watchful waiting   Careful monitoring of the person's condition to watch for new signs or symptoms before deciding that it is necessary to start treatment.   2. Surgery   A surgical procedure, known as splenectomy, to remove the spleen.  With the emergence of new effective treatment options, this procedure is now rarely used. It may be used to treat pregnant women to delay the use of other treatments, such as  chemotherapy .   3. Chemotherapy   A type of therapy that stops the progression of  cancer  by killing cancer cells or stopping them from dividing.  Depending on the type and stage of the cancer, chemotherapy can be given orally or injected.  The chemotherapy drugs cladribine and pentostatin are the standard first-line treatments for hairy cell leukemia. Bendamustine is another chemotherapy drug that can be used in people who get worse after the initial treatment.   4. Biologic therapy   Also known as immunotherapy, biologic therapy is a type of treatment that uses the body's own immune system to fight cancer.  Alpha-interferon is one type of biologic agent used to treat hairy cell leukemia.   5. Targeted therapy   A form of treatment that recognizes and attacks cancer cells without harming healthy cells.  Targeted therapy includes the use of monoclonal antibodies, which are molecules made in the laboratory that identify and attach to substances on cancer cells or substances that help cancer cells grow. Doing so prevents cancer from growing or spreading.  In hairy cell leukemia, rituximab is a commonly used monoclonal antibody. Others, such as obinutuzumab and ofatumumab, are being studied.  Other targeted therapies that doctors use for people with mutations in the BRAF gene are ibrutinib and vemurafenib.  Natural treatment options cannot cure hairy cell leukemia. However, some may help people deal with their disease or with the side effects of treatment.  Natural treatments that may help include:  Treatment of hairy cell leukemia has a high rate of success, and most people have a  similar life expectancy  to healthy people of the same age. However, people below 40 years old may have a  lower life expectancy  compared with people of the same age.  Hairy cell leukemia is considered a chronic cancer, as it never completely goes away. However, most people with the disease usually experience an extended period with few or no symptoms after the initial treatment.  Once a person is in remission, they will still require follow-up visits with their doctor to monitor blood counts and their health condition. If a person gets worse or sees their disease come back, they can be retreated and enter another remission.  A person's chances of recovering from hairy cell leukemia depend on whether the disease responds to treatment, and on whether it does not progress or progresses so slowly that it does not require treatment.    
 Else, M., Dearden, C. e., Matutes, E., Garcia-Talavera, J., Rohatiner, A. Z., Johnson, S. A., … Catovsky, D. (2009, June). Long-term follow-up of 233 patients with hairy cell leukaemia, treated initially with pentostatin or cladribine, at a median of 16 years from diagnosis [Abstract].  British Journal of Haematology ,  145 (6), 733–740.  Else, M., Dearden, C. e., Matutes, E., Garcia-Talavera, J., Rohatiner, A. Z., Johnson, S. A., … Catovsky, D. (2009, June). Long-term follow-up of 233 patients with hairy cell leukaemia, treated initially with pentostatin or cladribine, at a median of 16 years from diagnosis [Abstract].  British Journal of Haematology ,  145 (6), 733–740.  Hairy cell leukaemia. (2016, December 5).  Levy, I., &amp; Tadmor, T. (2017). Time to cure hairy cell leukemia.  Turkish Journal of Hematology ,  34 , 289–90.  Quest, G. R. &amp; Johnston, J. B. (2015, December). Clinical features and diagnosis of hairy cell leukemia [Abstract].  Best Practice &amp; Research Clinical Haematology ,  28 (4), 180–92.  Rosenberg, J. D., Burian, C., Waalen, J. &amp; Saven, A. (2014, January). Clinical characteristics and long-term outcome of young hairy cell leukemia patients treated with cladribine: A single-institution series.  Blood ,  123 (2), 177–83.  Sarvaria, A., Topp, Z. &amp; Saven, A. (2016, January). Current therapy and new directions in the treatment of hairy cell leukemia: A review [Abstract].  JAMA Oncology ,  2 (1), 123–9.  Stone, E. J., &amp; Margolin, M. (2015, December). What your hairy cell leukemia patients want you to know [Abstract].  Best Practice &amp; Research Clinical Haematology ,  28 (4), 264–8.  Thompson, P. A., &amp; Ravandi, F. (2017, May). How I manage patients with hairy cell leukaemia [Abstract].  British Journal of Haematology ,  177 (4), 543–556.  Troussard, X., &amp; Cornet, E. (2017, December). Hairy cell leukemia 2018: Update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and treatment.  American Journal of Hematology ,  92 (12), 1382–1390.  Wierda, W. G., Byrd, J. C., Abramson, J. S., Bhat, S., Bociek, G., Brander, D., … Sundar, H. (2017, November). Hairy cell leukemia, version 2.2018, NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology [Abstract].  Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network ,  15 (11), 1414–1427.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "What is hairy cell leukemia and how is it treated?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320628.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, January 16). "What is hairy cell leukemia and how is it treated?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  