 In this article, learn about the causes and types of panniculitis, as well as how it is treated.  Panniculitis is a relatively uncommon skin disorder. It causes large bumps to appear under the skin, usually on the lower legs.  The bumps, also called nodules, are tender to touch and may look red or purple.  Nodules are caused by an  inflammation  in the layer of fat under the skin. This layer is called the panniculus adiposus and is used for keeping the body warm.  Many types of panniculitis exist, including those caused by infections, cold temperatures, and side effects of medication.  The most common type is erythema nodosum where nodules are found on the shins. This type is most often seen in  women and young adults .  The main symptoms of panniculitis include:  Different types of panniculitis can look similar but have key differences. The exact diagnosis depends on which part of the body is affected and the cause of panniculitis.  A biopsy may be performed during diagnosis, where a sample of a person's skin cells is sent to a lab for evaluation.  The most common causes of panniculitis are infections, but non-infectious diseases or injuries can also lead to this disorder.  Possible causes of panniculitis include:  If the cause is unknown, the condition will be referred to as idiopathic panniculitis.  Although there are many different types of panniculitis, the symptoms are similar in each.  All types are uncommon or rare.  Types of panniculitis include:  Medically speaking, the types of panniculitis can be divided into two large groups based on which type of tissue is affected. Inflammations in the fat lobules are called lobular and inflammations in the connective tissue around the fat are called septal.  Most types are both lobular and septal.  Panniculitis often resolves without treatment, but certain methods can speed up recovery. The best treatment is to tackle the underlying cause.  If there is no known cause, doctors may treat panniculitis by reducing the inflammation, and in some cases, surgically removing the bumps or affected areas of skin.  Usual treatments for panniculitis include:  The most common form of panniculitis, erythema nodosum, generally resolves without treatment within  2 to 6 weeks . The recovery time depends on the cause of the panniculitis.  Tackling the underlying causes of panniculitis is likely to resolve any related symptoms. After one occurrence, however, there is a chance that this condition can reoccur.  Panniculitis bumps often disappear without any permanent mark, but some types can leave a lasting dent or discoloration on the skin.  A person should talk to a doctor if the bumps do not go away after 6 weeks, if there are lots of bumps, or if symptoms are getting in the way of daily life.    
 Blake, T., Manahan, M., &amp; Rodins, K. (2014). Erythema nodosum — A review of an uncommon panniculitis.  Dermatology Online Journal ,  20 (4).  Blake, T., Manahan, M., &amp; Rodins, K. (2014). Erythema nodosum — A review of an uncommon panniculitis.  Dermatology Online Journal ,  20 (4).  Choonhakarn, C., Chaowattanapanit, S., &amp; Julanon, N. (2016, March). Lipodermatosclerosis: A clinicopathologic correlation [Abstract].  International Journal of Dermatology ,  55 (3), 303–308.  Dhaou, B. B., Asma, K., Aydi, Z., Rachdi, I., Hammami, H., Daoud, F., Brahim, E. B., ... Boussema, F. (2017, July). Lupus erythematosus panniculitis: A case report.  Journal of Dermatology &amp; Dermatologic Surgery ,  21 (2), 110–112.  Erythema nodosum. (2017, September 15).  Golisch, K. B., Gottesman, S. P., &amp; Segal, R. J. (2017, December). Compression stockings as an effective treatment for erythema nodosum: Case series.  International Journal of Women's Dermatology ,  3 (4), 231–233.  Gonzalez, M. E. (2017, May). Panniculitis.  Gupta, P., Saikia, U. N., Arora, S., De, D., &amp; Radotra, B. D. (2016). Panniculitis: A dermatopathologist's perspective and approach to diagnosis.  Indian Journal of Dermatopathology and Diagnostic Dermatology ,  3 (2), 29–41.  Lee, L. (2017, December). Panniculitis: Recognition and diagnosis.  Rehmus, W. E. (n.d.). Erythema nodosum.  Rehmus, W. E. (n.d). Panniculitis.  Rongioletti, F., &amp; Caputo, V. (2013, August). Pancreatic panniculitis [Abstract].  Giornale Italiano di Dermatologia e Venereologia ,  148 (4), 419–425.  Saenz, I. B., Meeker, J., Jalali, O., &amp; Lynch, M. C. (2017, September 27). Cold-induced dermatoses: Case report and review of literature [Abstract].  The American Journal of Dermatopathology .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Smith, Amy. "What is panniculitis? Causes and treatment."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320672.php&gt;    APA  Smith, A. (2018, January 19). "What is panniculitis? Causes and treatment."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  