 Keratin is a tough, fibrous protein found in fingernails, hair, and skin. The body may produce extra keratin as a result of  inflammation , as a protective response to pressure, or as a result of a genetic condition.  Most forms of hyperkeratosis are treatable with preventive measures and medication.  Pressure-related hyperkeratosis occurs as a result of excessive pressure, inflammation or irritation to the skin.  When this happens, the skin responds by producing extra layers of keratin to protect the damaged areas of skin.  Non-pressure related keratosis occurs on skin that has not been irritated. Experts think that this form of hyperkeratosis may be the result of genetics.  Forms of hyperkeratosis include:  If a person has a potential area of hyperkeratosis on their skin that they are uncertain of, they should see their doctor.  Hyperkeratosis can have a range of symptoms. However, all symptoms will involve an area of rough or patchy skin that feels different from the surrounding skin.  Some symptoms of the more common causes of hyperkeratosis include:  With the exceptions of corns and calluses, most forms of hyperkeratosis are not painful.  Treatments for hyperkeratosis depend upon what form a person has. Both at-home and medical treatments exist for hyperkeratosis.  Some of the ways to avoid hyperkeratosis lesions, such as corns or calluses include:  If a person has a condition that causes lesions that are removable, such as warts, they should see their doctor, nurse practitioner, or physician assistant who can "freeze" a wart or use a laser to vaporize it.  These healthcare professionals can also prescribe medication to treat areas of hyperkeratosis, such as corticosteroid creams for eczema or lichen planus.  A person should see a doctor when their hyperkeratosis causes pain or discomfort. If an area of the skin appears infected, such as reddened, swollen, or pus-filled, they should also seek medical attention.  Sometimes hyperkeratosis plaques can closely resemble cancerous lesions. For this reason, many people choose to have thickened areas of skin evaluated.  A doctor will take a medical history to determine if there is an underlying cause for the hyperkeratosis. For example, if a person has leukoplakia, a history of smoking or using chewing tobacco, then they may be at higher risk of developing hyperkeratosis.  A doctor may also order imaging tests to determine if there are underlying problems with a person's bone structure or the presence of tumors on or around the hyperkeratosis areas.  Another diagnostic tool is a biopsy, which involves taking a sample of skin and examining it under a microscope for the presence of cancerous cells or other cell abnormalities. In most instances, a doctor can diagnose the underlying cause via a physical examination.  There are many forms of hyperkeratosis, most of which are not painful. Some types of hyperkeratosis, such as warts and calluses are removable, while other forms can be treated or managed with a variety of medications.  Anyone who develops patches of thickened skin on their body should consult a doctor or dermatologist for a diagnosis.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis. (2018, January 16).  Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis. (2018, January 16).  Freeman, D. (2002). Corns and calluses resulting from mechanical hyperkeratosis.  American Family Physician ,  65 (11), 2277-2280.  Hyperkeratosis. (2012, December).  Leukoplakia and hyperkeratosis. (n.d.).  Ring, C. &amp; Schwartz, R. (2016, April 29). Hyperkeratosis of the nipple and areola.  Dermatological Cryosurgery and Cryotherapy , 403-406.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What you should know about hyperkeratosis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320667.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, January 20). "What you should know about hyperkeratosis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  