 The condition causes people to feel breathless, and it is often accompanied by a dry cough. Diagnosis can be challenging, and there is currently no cure for the disorder.  There are treatment options that can help with management of the symptoms, however. Treatment also includes lifestyle changes to slow progression, as much as possible.  There are many types of interstitial lung disease, all affecting the interstitium, which is the network of tissue running through both lungs.  The interstitium supports the alveoli or tiny air sacs in the lungs. Blood vessels flow through the interstitium, allowing the blood to receive oxygen and get rid of excess carbon dioxide.  Disorders that affect the interstitium thicken its tissues by scarring,  inflammation  and  fluid retention . This thickening makes it difficult for the blood to absorb oxygen, which can lead to the symptoms of interstitial lung disease, such as breathlessness.  According to the  American Thoracic Society , there are more than 200 different lung disorders that affect the interstitium. Some of these disorders include:  Symptoms of interstitial lung disease vary and depend on the underlying cause. However, some symptoms are usually common to all the different forms of the disease. The most common symptom is a feeling of shortness of breath or not being able to catch the breath.  Most people with interstitial lung disease experience this symptom, and it may get worse with time. Eventually, a person with interstitial lung disease may feel out of breath even at rest.  This characteristic breathlessness is often accompanied by a dry, unproductive cough. Some people may also experience unexplained weight loss.  Anyone who is having trouble breathing should see their doctor for a diagnosis.  Anyone can develop interstitial lung disease, though it may be more common in people with certain medical conditions, specific drug use, or environmental hazards. These risk factors may include:  Some autoimmune disorders cause the body to attack and damage the lungs and other organs.  Autoimmune diseases that may affect the lungs include:  Some lines of work may also put a person at risk for interstitial damage. Exposure to different toxins or pollutants can damage the lungs over time. These substances can include:  Some medications and drugs may also damage the lungs, including:  Complications may include:  Respiratory failure occurs in late-stage interstitial lung disease when extremely low blood oxygen levels can contribute to other organ failures.  Scar tissue, inflammation or low oxygen levels that restrict the flow of blood are causes of  high blood pressure  in the arteries of the lungs.  Interstitial lung disease may lead to  cor pulmonale  when the right ventricle has to pump harder to move blood through the lungs. This extra work can cause the heart to fail due to the strain.  If doctors think a person has interstitial lung disease, a simple imaging test, such as an X-ray or  CT scan  can help them assess the extent of the damage. They may also ask for other tests to help confirm their diagnosis.  A  stress  test can help doctors determine if a person's breathing symptoms are due to problems with the heart or with the lungs.  Stress tests increase the work of the heart by making a person exercise on a treadmill or take medications that cause the heart to beat faster.  Pulmonary function tests check for decreased lung capacity by having someone blow into a machine called a spirometer. The tests help determine what type of lung problem they may be experiencing. They also give information about how the lungs move air in and out and how well they use oxygen.  A bronchoscopy is another test to help doctors check the lung tissue itself. The doctor will lightly sedate the individual and put a tube down their throat and into the lungs. They will then remove a small bit of lung tissue for testing.  A bronchoalveolar lavage test can give additional information by the use of a saline rinse to collect cells for testing.  In some cases, however, a surgical biopsy may be necessary.  There are currently no treatments that can completely reverse lung damage. But some treatments that are currently available may slow the progression of scarring and allow a person to breathe more freely.  Doctors may prescribe a few different treatments to manage someone's symptoms.  Many doctors recommend going through pulmonary rehabilitation, as this may help strengthen the lungs. Pulmonary rehabilitation uses various exercises to encourage a person to stretch their lung capacity and breather better.  A recent  small study  looked at the usefulness of pulmonary rehabilitation in people with interstitial lung disease due to different causes. The research concluded that pulmonary rehabilitation was beneficial for exercise tolerance, symptoms of interstitial lung disease and quality of life.  Oxygen therapy may be prescribed to help reduce how breathless a person feels and to improve their ability to be active. However,  a recent review  of the research questions the usefulness of oxygen therapy long-term in those with interstitial lung disease.  While some anti-inflammatory drugs can damage the lungs, others may help relieve symptoms. An example is the corticosteroid prednisone.   Corticosteroid treatment  can be useful for a variety of interstitial lung disease, but it is not without side effects.  If an autoimmune disorder is causing symptoms, doctors may recommend immune-suppressing drugs to reduce the damage occurring in the lungs.  A newer class of medications known as antifibrosis, or anti-scarring medications, seem to work by blocking the pathways in the body that are necessary for scar tissue formation.  These drugs have been approved for the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, a type of interstitial lung disease without a known cause.  Examples of these medications include Ofev (nintedanib) and Esbriet (pirfenidone), which are currently being  studied  for their effectiveness in other types of interstitial lung disease.  Conditions that are severe or progressing rapidly may require a lung transplant. Doctors will want to be sure that a person is in good enough health and free from other health issues before recommending a lung transplant.  The outlook for interstitial lung disease is different for everyone. It is a progressive disease, and there is currently no cure for damage caused by scarring and inflammation. Symptoms may progress unpredictably and make someone's life difficult.  People with interstitial lung disease may respond well to lifestyle changes, such as oxygen therapy, pulmonary rehabilitation, and eating a healthful and varied diet. Medical treatments may help slow lung damage and help someone breathe, and in some cases, a lung transplant will be a necessity.  Visiting a doctor to diagnose interstitial lung disease and to discuss the ideal treatment option is the best course of action for anyone who suspects they may be experiencing interstitial lung disease.    
 Bell, E. C., Cox, N. S., Goh, N., Glaspole, I., Westall, G. P., Watson, A., … Holland, A. E. (2017). Oxygen therapy for interstitial lung disease: A systematic review.  European Respiratory Review ,  26 (143), 160080.  Bell, E. C., Cox, N. S., Goh, N., Glaspole, I., Westall, G. P., Watson, A., … Holland, A. E. (2017). Oxygen therapy for interstitial lung disease: A systematic review.  European Respiratory Review ,  26 (143), 160080.  Cottin, V. (2013). Interstitial lung disease.  European Respiratory Review ,  22 (127), 26–32.  Dhooria, S., Agarwal, R., &amp; Gupta, D. (2015, January 2). Is pirfenidone ready for use in non-idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis interstitial lung diseases?  Lung India ,  32 (1), 4–5.  Frequently asked questions about interstitial lung disease (n.d.).  Huppmann, P., Sczepanski, B., Boensch, M., Winterkamp, S., Schönheit-Kenn, U., Neurohr, C., ... Kenn, K. (2013). Effects of inpatient pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with interstitial lung disease.  European Respiratory Journal ,  42 (2), 444–453.  Interstitial lung disease. (n.d.).  Kim, S., Oh, I.-J., Park, S.-Y., Song, J.-H., Seon, H.-J., Kim, Y.-H., … Kim, Y.-C. (2014, September). Corticosteroid therapy against treatment-related pulmonary toxicities in patients with lung cancer.  Journal of Thoracic Disease ,  6 (9).  Meyer, K. C., &amp; Decker, C. A. (2017, April 3). Role of pirfenidone in the management of pulmonary fibrosis.  Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management ,  13 , 427–437.  Schwaiblmair, M., Behr, W., Haeckel, T., Märkl, B., Foerg, W., &amp; Berghaus, T. (2012, July 27). Drug induced interstitial lung disease.  The Open Respiratory Medicine Journal ,  6 , 63–74.  Tonelli, R., Cocconcelli, E., Lanini, B., Romagnoli, I., Florini, F., Castaniere, I., … Clini, E. M. (2017, October 10). Effectiveness of pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with interstitial lung disease of different etiology: A multicenter prospective study.  BMC Pulmonary Medicine ,  17 , 130.  Vij, R., &amp; Strek, M. E. (2013, March). Diagnosis and treatment of connective tissue disease-associated interstitial lung disease.  Chest ,  143 (3), 814–824.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "What to know about interstitial lung disease."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320650.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, January 18). "What to know about interstitial lung disease."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  