 Many things, including  chemotherapy  and radiation, fungal, bacterial or viral infections,  cancer , stomach  acid reflux , and other conditions that cause  inflammation  and irritation can cause these ulcers.  Ulcers may develop in the throat, esophagus, and the voice box as a result of many conditions and causes.  Ulcers found in the throat may be related to or caused by:  Ulcers found in the esophagus may be related to or caused by conditions such as:  Ulcers or granulomas found on the voice box may be related to or caused by conditions such as:  Symptoms associated with throat ulcers may depend on the underlying cause and include:  In the first instance, doctors will do a physical exam and evaluate a person's symptoms. They may then need to take throat cultures, using mouth swabs. Sometimes blood tests and urine tests may be required.  However, diagnosis of throat ulcers will depend on the suspected cause of the condition and may include:  In some cases, simple lifestyle modifications may be all that is necessary, and these will be discussed in the section below.  However, some types of throat or esophageal ulcers require more extensive medical attention and people should discuss treatment options with their doctor.  Treatment of throat ulcers may include:  Treatment of esophageal ulcers may include:  Treatment of vocal cord granulomas may include:  Lifestyle changes and modifications that can be made to treat and manage the symptoms of throat ulcers may include:  There are measures that people can take to prevent throat ulcers in some cases and may include:  Each situation is unique. Individuals should discuss the prognosis with their doctor.  Anyone experiencing new or unusual symptoms should contact a doctor as soon as possible, as medical attention may be required.  People experiencing any of the following should contact a doctor:  Anyone experiencing the following symptoms should seek immediate medical attention:  Throat ulcers can be caused by a variety of conditions and medical treatments. They can cause pain, which, at times, can be severe and debilitating. Though painful, treatment and prognosis are typically good, but this depends on the condition that is being treated.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Butendieck, R. R. (2015). Behçet's Syndrome.  Butendieck, R. R. (2015). Behçet's Syndrome.  Chiejina, M., &amp; Hrishikesh, S. (2017, November 22). Ulcer, esophageal.  Cho, C.-K., Kim, J.-J., Sung, T.-Y., Jung, S.-M., &amp; Kang, P.-S. (2013, December 26). Endotracheal intubation-related vocal cord ulcer following general anesthesia.  Korean Journal of Anesthesiology ,  65 (6 Suppl), S147–S148.  Higuchi, D., Sugawa, C., Shah, S. H., Tokioka, S., &amp; Lucas, C. E. (2003, November). Etiology, treatment, and outcome of esophageal ulcers: A 10-year experience in an urban emergency hospital [Abstract].  Journal of Gastrointestinal Surgery ,  7 (7), 836–842.  Laryngopharyngeal reflux disease (LPR). (n.d.).  Mouth or throat pain or sores. (2015, July 15).  Mouth and throat sores (Mucositis). (2017, November 9).  Risk factors for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. (2017, November 27).  Signs and symptoms of laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. (2017, November 27).  Sulowski, C. &amp; Flanagan, J. (2009, October 16). Herpangina and Hand-Foot-and-Mouth Disease.  Tests for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. (2017, November 27).  Vocal cord granuloma. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. "What you should know about throat ulcers."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320621.php&gt;    APA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. (2018, January 15). "What you should know about throat ulcers."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  