 When fibrosarcoma strikes, the body's fibroblasts lose control and multiply excessively. This either creates fibrous tissue where it is not supposed to be or in excess quantities. Like other  cancers , fibrosarcoma can spread throughout the body.  Fibrosarcoma is part of a wider family of cancers known as  sarcomas . Other examples include osteosarcoma, which specifically affects bone, and rhabdomyosarcoma, which specifically affects muscle.  Rarely, fibrosarcoma can occur in bone, but it usually affects the nearby fibrous tissue, not the bone itself.  In this article, we take a look at the symptoms of fibrosarcoma, how doctors may diagnose it, and what the outlook is for people with this disease.  Fibrosarcoma is not easy to identify by symptoms alone, not least of all because it shares symptoms with other forms of sarcoma.  According to  Macmillan Cancer Support , the symptoms of soft tissue sarcomas, such as fibrosarcoma, take a long time to appear. When they do appear, symptoms can include:  Fibrosarcoma affecting bones can be even trickier to identify by symptoms alone. According to  Macmillan Cancer Support , symptoms of primary  bone cancer  include:  Fibrosarcoma can occur throughout the body but is more likely to appear in specific locations, such as the soft tissues, than in others.  Fibrosarcoma of the bone is rare and  around 70 percent  all bone fibrosarcomas develop in the long bones — such as the thighbone, shinbone, and jawbone. The thighbone is the bone that is most commonly affected by fibrosarcoma.  The  American Cancer Society  list the following risk factors for developing soft tissue sarcomas that may include fibrosarcoma:  The American Cancer Society list a variety of tests that are routinely carried out to diagnose  soft tissue sarcomas  and to determine which variant of cancer is at work.  These tests include:  With the help of these tests, doctors can identify fibrosarcoma by examining the locations in which it most commonly appears. Specific key features also signal fibrosarcoma, such as tumors that appear without  calcium  buildups on X-rays.  Identifying fibrosarcoma is not always a straightforward process, however. A  2014 study  warns against confusing it with osteosarcoma, which has similar features.  As a result, doctors may carry out a variety of tests, including a biopsy, to ensure a correct diagnosis.  Staging is a term used to describe how far cancer has spread in the body, and how much cancerous tissue is present.  One of the most common staging systems is the number system, which ranges from 1–4 with a few secondary classes.  The  number stages  for soft tissues sarcomas, such as fibrosarcoma are:  The grade of tumor is how abnormal its cells and tissues appear under a microscope. The higher the grade, the more abnormal it appears and the more quickly it is likely to grow and spread.  Treatment for fibrosarcoma depends on the stage of the cancer.  The  American National Cancer Institute  list the following possible treatments for soft tissue sarcomas such as fibrosarcoma in adults:   Stage 1    Stage 2    Stage 3    Stage 4   A prognosis is a prediction of the development of a disease, recovery, and survival rate following treatment.  With any form of cancer, the prognosis is significantly affected by the stage at which the cancer was first identified and treated.  A prognosis typically refers to 5-year survival rate. For high-grade fibrosarcomas, 5-year survival rates are  around 30 percent . For low-grade fibrosarcomas, these survival rates increase to 50–80 percent.  There do not appear to be any clear steps for specifically preventing fibrosarcoma.  The best approaches to take are avoiding exposure to the relevant risk factors as much as possible, and tending to one's overall health.    
 Adult soft tissue sarcoma treatment (PDQ) — patient version. (2017, May 15).  Adult soft tissue sarcoma treatment (PDQ) — patient version. (2017, May 15).  Grading and staging of soft tissue sarcomas. (2016, June 30).  How are soft tissue sarcomas diagnosed? (2016, February 9).  How is bone cancer diagnosed? (2016, January 21).  Krygier, J., &amp; Lewis, V. (2009). Fibrosarcoma of bone.  Symptoms of primary bone cancer. (2014, March 31).  Symptoms of soft tissue sarcomas. (2016, May 31).  What are the risk factors for bone cancer? (2016, January 21).  What are the risk factors for soft tissue sarcomas? (2016, February 9).  Wojcik, J. B., Bellizzi, A. M., Dal Cin, P., Bredella, M. A., Fletcher, C. D., Hornicek, F. J., … Nielsen, G. P. (2014, November). Primary sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma of bone: Analysis of a series [Abstract].  The American Journal of Surgical Pathology ,  38 (11), 1538–1544.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Wessels, Dan. "What is fibrosarcoma and what are the symptoms?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320614.php&gt;    APA  Wessels, D. (2018, January 15). "What is fibrosarcoma and what are the symptoms?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  