 The leaves of the Senna plant are also used in some teas to help relieve  constipation  or promote weight loss.  The most common Cassia senna plants used are the  C. acutifolia , and  C. angustifolia  plants, which are grown in the Middle East and India.  Senna is most often used as a laxative, either to relieve constipation or in some cases, to help with weight loss. It is also an ingredient in some conventional over-the-counter laxatives.  The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have approved senna as a non-prescription drug to treat constipation. The most common doses are:  It is not recommended to use senna for longer than 2 weeks at a time.  There have been some case reports of people suffering from liver damage,  coma  or nerve damage after using senna. In these cases, people were using senna at much higher than the recommended doses and for more extended periods of time.  People with certain medical conditions should not use senna, including:  Also, anyone with abdominal pain or children under the age of 2 years should not use senna.  Senna may or may not be safe for use during pregnancy. Pregnant women with constipation should speak with their doctor before using senna or any other laxative.  Senna appears to be safe for women who are breast-feeding, when used in the recommended amount. Even though a small amount of the herb passes into the breast milk, it does not appear to have any effect on a nursing baby's stool.  Senna can cause some uncomfortable and even some serious side effects.  They can include:  Long-term use of senna can cause dependence in order to have a bowel movement, finger clubbing (usually reversible), rectal bleeding, and wasting.  Someone experiencing any of these side effects should speak with their doctor, especially if they do not go away.  It is essential to drink plenty of fluids or electrolyte replacement solutions, such as Gatorade, when taking senna. This is to prevent a person from losing too much fluid or electrolytes, especially if they have diarrhea.  To deal with cramping or abdominal pain, people can reduce the dose until the discomfort subsides.  There are several drug interactions to be noted. By being aware of these, people can make sure that they are drinking senna tea safely.  People taking the following medications or herbal supplements should avoid taking senna:  Senna is generally well tolerated and thought to be safe for most people. However, it does have the potential to cause serious complications in some people with certain health conditions and who take certain medications.  It is best to consult a doctor with any questions about taking senna.    
 Senna. (2009).  Senna. (2009).  Senna. (2015, February 16).  Senna. (n.d.).  Senna. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "Is senna tea safe to drink?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320659.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, January 20). "Is senna tea safe to drink?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  