 Though the Indian gooseberry tree is native to India, today it is also grown commercially in regions of the Middle East and Asia. While all parts of the amla tree are believed to hold medicinal benefits, amla fruits are very high in  vitamin  C, as well as several other  antioxidants  and nutrients.  Amla fruits have been eaten, or made into tonics and oils, for thousands of years and used both as a therapeutic and preventative medicine.  Amla oil is made by soaking dried amla fruits in a type of oil for several days, often coconut, sesame, or mineral oil.  This encourages the fruit's own oils, full of the fruit's nutrients, to release themselves into the mixture. Before use the mixture is filtered and purified to remove the fruits.  Many health stores, natural pharmacies, and Indian grocery stores sell dried, fresh, or frozen amla fruits, as well as amla powders and juices.  Amla fruits are typically in season from October through March. Some health stores also sell amla products. And amla powders and formulas can be easily purchased online.  Making amla oil at home allows people to choose the potency and oil base, individualizing the dose, nutrients, and ultimately health benefits of the mixture. And there's several different ways to make amla oil, depending on its intended use or individual preferences.  Steps for making amla oil from fresh or dried amla fruits, or juice, at home include:  Steps for making amla oil from amla powder at home include:  Most research suggests glass jars help natural oils stay fresh longer than plastic products do. Glass also has less of chance of reacting with the compounds in the mixture, changing their potency or effect. Most natural oils can be kept fresh for around one year if stored in a cool, dark place.  Amla oil is most commonly used to promote hair and scalp health, but amla oil has many other uses. Common uses of amla oil include:  Most of the reported health benefits of amla oil have not been scientifically proven.  But amla fruits are known to be high in powerful antioxidants and other nutrients that have very well established health benefits. Amla oils also contain additional nutrients and antioxidants associated with the type of oil used.  Common compounds and nutrients found in amla fruit and oil:  There are some studies that have specifically looked at the health benefits of amla oil. Most of the studies that do exist exploring the benefits of amla and amla oil did not use human subjects.  However, amla has been practically used and consumed by humans for thousands, even tens-of-thousands, of years. And amla is very important to several ancient medicine systems, whose teachings are now slowly being backed by scientific research.  A  December 2017  study reconfirmed previous findings that the seven phenols found in amla oil fruits had anti-cancer properties. Another study from  late 2017  found that hypothyroid female rats on a high-fat diet for 6 weeks reduced oxidative  stress  and inflammation. Many  studies  have also demonstrated amla may have anti-diabetic properties.  A  2016 study  found that broiler chickens given even very low doses of amla extract had increased immune health and grew faster than chickens not given amla.  As with its other possible benefits, amla's hair health benefits are still being confirmed using modern-day science.  But amla is well established in ancient Eastern medicine, and widely used in many countries, to improve hair and scalp health.  A  2012 study  found that amla oil was a powerful inhibitor of 5-alpha reductase. The medication finasteride, used to treat male  baldness , also works by inhibiting 5-alpha reductase.  Potential hair and scalp benefits of amla oil include:   Side effects   Amla oil is not commonly associated with any side effects. But in some rare cases, amla oil use has been reported to trigger Lichen planus pigmentosus (LPP), especially with UV exposure and in naturally darker skinned individuals. Amla oil is also known to rarely cause inflammation and skin irritation in some people.  More than a dozen studies have demonstrated the potential antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral properties of amla fruits and extracts. More recently, amla has been proposed as a replacement to conventional  antibiotics  used in food production.  Amla oil can be safely used for a wide variety of benefits, however it should not serve as a replacement for any medical treatment.    
 Ansari, A., Shahriar, M. S. Z., Hassan, M. M., Das, S. R., Rokeya, B., Haque, M. A., ... &amp; Sarkar, T. (2014). Emblica officinalis improves glycemic status and oxidative stress in STZ induced type 2 diabetic model rats.  Asian Pacific journal of tropical medicine ,  7 (1), 21-25.  Ansari, A., Shahriar, M. S. Z., Hassan, M. M., Das, S. R., Rokeya, B., Haque, M. A., ... &amp; Sarkar, T. (2014). Emblica officinalis improves glycemic status and oxidative stress in STZ induced type 2 diabetic model rats.  Asian Pacific journal of tropical medicine ,  7 (1), 21-25.  Gupta, R. (2017, September 17). Amla: A novel Ayurvedic herb with its health benefits.  Lichen planus pigmentosus (LPP). (2016, November 8).  Muthu, P. R., Bobby, Z., Sankar, P., Vickneshwaran, V., &amp; Jacob, S. E. (2017). Amla (Emblica officinalis) improves hepatic and renal oxidative stress and the inflammatory response in hypothyroid female wistar rats fed with a high-fat diet.  Journal of Basic and Clinical Physiology and Pharmacology .  Patel, A. P., Bhagwat, S. R., Pawar, M. M., Prajapati, K. B., Chauhan, H. D., &amp; Makwana, R. B. (2016). Evaluation of  Emblica officinalis  fruit powder as a growth promoter in commercial broiler chickens.  Veterinary World ,  9 (2), 207–210.  Zhang, J., Miao, D., Zhu, W.-F., Xu, J., Liu, W.-Y., Kitdamrongtham, W.,… Feng, F. (2017). Biological activities of phenolics from the fruits of  Phyllanthus emblica L . (Euphorbiaceae).  Chem. Biodiversity ,  14 (12).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Does amla oil really work?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320709.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, January 24). "Does amla oil really work?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  