 People who find themselves in an abusive relationship often do not feel safe or happy. Yet, they feel unable to leave for many reasons. These include fear and a belief that they are the cause of the abuse.  Abuse can affect people of any gender, age, social class, or education. The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  refer to the type of abuse that happens within a relationship as intimate partner violence (IPV).  The CDC note that an intimate partner relationship can take many forms. It includes—but is not limited to—spouses, people who are dating, sexual partners, and people who do not have a sexual relationship. The relationship may be heterosexual or same-sex.  According to the National Coalition Against Domestic Violence (NCADV),  1 in 4 women  and 1 in 9 men in the United States experience violence from an intimate partner. Fifteen percent of all violent crime involves an intimate partner.  Many agencies and organizations exist to help people who experience IPV. Read on to find out more about abuse in relationships and how to get help.  Psychotherapist Lenore Walker  developed the concept  of battered woman syndrome (BWS) in the late 1970s.  She wanted to describe the unique pattern of behavior and emotions that can develop when a person experiences abuse, and as they try to find ways to survive their situation.  Walker noted that the patterns of behavior that result from abuse often resemble those of  post-traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD). She describes it as a sub-type of PTSD.  Abuse of an intimate partner can take many forms, including emotional, physical, and financial abuse.  The  CDC  currently list the following as types of IPV:  Coercive control is a legal offense in some countries, but not in the U.S.  According to the  NCADV , a person who is experiencing abuse may:  When a person has been through an abusive relationship, the impact can continue long after leaving the relationship.  The person may:  The person may also behave in ways that can be difficult for someone outside the relationship to understand.  These include:  Physical abuse can lead to injuries such as organ damage, broken bones, and lost teeth. Sometimes the injuries can be lasting and possibly life-threatening.  The impact of abuse on a person's wellbeing can be severe. For this reason, it is important to know that help is available and to seek help.  Abuse can happen on a single occasion, it can be a long-term problem, it can happen most of the time or only from time to time.  It often occurs in  cycles .  According to the  NCADV , people who carry out abuse can often be charming and pleasant outside the periods of abuse. These factors, too, can make it hard for a partner to leave.  The experience of abuse can lead to:  Even if the individual leaves the relationship, they may experience lasting complications.  The impact of abuse can last for years. On average, a person who leaves an abusive relationship will do so  seven times  before they make the final break, according to the National Domestic Violence Hotline.  Leaving an abusive relationship can be difficult for a person to do alone. However, support groups and advocates are available to help those who are concerned about their situation or have decided to make the break.  It can take time to make the decision.  Ways to plan ahead include:  Challenges that can make it harder to act include:  The  CDC  note that a number of factors or characteristics may be present in a person who uses violence in a relationship.  These include, but are not limited to, the following:  In time, scientists might find an effective way to help a person who carries out abuse to change their behavior. However, most research so far has focused on  people referred  by the criminal justice system, which means they already have a conviction for a crime against a partner.  Some studies have shown an "alarmingly high" rate of repeat offenses. Overall, there is not enough evidence to support any specific intervention to help people who carry out this type of abuse.  The CDC  recommend  a range of community programs in an attempt to prevent it.  One  suggestion  is that carefully designed  cognitive behavioral therapy  (CBT) for couples might help by enhancing communication and problem-solving skills.  However, experts to not currently recommend this, as undergoing experimental therapy while staying in an abusive relationship could increase the risk for the partner who is experiencing the abuse.  Help is available. There are organizations that specialize in offering to support those who are experiencing or trying to leave an abusive relationship.  They can offer advice, help the person get medical assistance, and assist with finding accommodation where the person can stay until they feel safe and their situation becomes stable.  These organizations can also put people in touch with  an advocate , who will stand by them as they go through the process of recovery. Advocates play an important role in coordinating care for survivors and their families.  Here are some ways to find help:  If you or someone you know is in immediate danger, calling 911 may help protect them from serious harm.  After leaving an abusive relationship, it can take a long time to deal with the emotional and physical impact of the abuse, and the person may need a lot of support.  Options that can help with recovery include:   Group CBT  can give individuals the chance to share what they have been through with others who have had a similar experience and join with others in finding new ways to cope. It is essential to create an atmosphere where members can feel comfortable sharing their thoughts and feelings.  Not only health problems can arise from abuse. There can also be  legal implications .  In 2005, the Federal Violence Against Women Act declared that abuse is a violation of a woman's human rights.  If there are children, the court may need to decide on custody arrangements. This can be difficult for the parent who has experienced the abuse, as the court may consider it best for children to have equal access to both parents.  Intimate partner abuse can lead to mental and physical health problems, feelings of fear, low self-esteem, and guilt, and symptoms of PTSD, even after leaving the relationship.  Figures published by the CDC show that from 2003–2014, more than  50 percent  of all homicides of adult women in the U.S. involved IPV. Over 11 percent of these women experienced violence in the month before they died.  These statistics underline the importance of knowing that, for people who are in an abusive relationship, help is at hand.  To get information about help in your state,  click here .   Article last updated by Yvette Brazier on Mon  3 December 2018.  Visit our  Psychology / Psychiatry  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Psychology / Psychiatry.   
 50 obstacles to leaving: 1–10. (2013, June 10).  50 obstacles to leaving: 1–10. (2013, June 10).  Battered woman syndrome. (n.d.).  Couture, A., &amp; Ammar, N. (2014, January 22). Battered woman syndrome [Abstract].  The Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal Justice , 1–6.  Dynamics of abuse. (n.d.).  Eckhardt, C. I., Murphy, C., Sprunger, J. G. (2014, August 28). Interventions for perpetrators of intimate partner violence.  Psychiatric Times .  Eckhart, C. I., Murphy, C. M., Whitaker, D. J., Sprunger, J., Dykstra, R., &amp; Woodard, K. (2013). The effectiveness of intervention programs for perpetrators and victims of intimate partner violence.  Partner Abuse, 4 (2), 196–231.  Intimate partner violence. (n.d.).  Intimate partner violence: Definitions. (2018, October 28).  Intimate partner violence prevention strategies. (2018, October 23).  Intimate partner violence: Risk and protective factors for perpetration. (2018, October 23).  Personalized safety plan. (n.d.).  Petrosky, E., Blair, J. M., Betz, C. J., Fowler, K. A., Jack, S. P., &amp; Lyons, B. H. (2017, July 21). Racial and ethnic differences in homicides of adult women and the role of intimate partner violence — United States, 2003–2014.  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) ,  66 (28), 741–746.  Resources by state on violence against women. (2018, November 15).  Resources for victims and survivors of domestic violence national crisis organizations and assistance. (n.d.).  Statistics. (n.d.).  The National Domestic Violence Hotline. (n.d.).  Sax, K. (2012, November). Intimate partner violence: A group cognitive-behavioral therapy model. The Group Psychiatrist.  Victim protection, support and assistance. (n.d.).  Walker, L. E. (2009, July 8). Battered woman syndrome.  Psychiatric Times.   Walker, L. E. (2016, May 19). Battered woman syndrome: Key elements of a diagnosis and treatment plan.  Walker, L. E. (2009, July 8). Battered woman syndrome page 3 of 4.  Psychiatric Times.   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Battered woman syndrome and intimate partner violence."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Dec. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320747.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, December 3). "Battered woman syndrome and intimate partner violence."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  