 Basilar skull  fractures  can lead to permanent brain injury,  meningitis , or other complications.  Minor basilar fractures, however, have a good outlook if the person receives immediate medical care, is carefully observed in hospital, and follows proper aftercare at home.  Battle's sign is a crescent-shaped bruise that appears behind one or both ears. It was named after an  English surgeon , Dr. William Henry Battle, and can be an indication of a serious head injury.  The skull is made up of more than 20 different bones. The basilar bones at the base of the skull protect the following structures:  When one of the basilar bones is broken, blood may pool behind the ear, creating the Battle's sign bruise.  While Battle's sign may look like an ordinary bruise, it is not a result of direct injury behind the ear. Instead, it is a sign that one or more of the skull's bones have been broken.  The size of Battle's sign can vary but may also extend down the back of the neck.  A person with a basilar skull fracture may also have other symptoms in addition to Battle's sign, including:  Battle's sign may not appear right away. It may take a day or more for the bruise to appear after the skull has been fractured.  Anyone who might have suffered a head injury should seek emergency medical care, even if no bruise is visible.  Battle's sign occurs because of a broken bone in the skull, usually after a severe impact to the head. The most common causes of a skull fracture and Battle's sign include:  Wearing proper helmets, using seatbelts, and wearing protective equipment for sports and activities can help reduce the risk of skull fractures.  Any head injury can cause serious complications and become life-threatening. A head injury may result in permanent brain injury, bleeding, and other problems. For this reason, emergency medical care is needed to check any blow to the head.  Some complications of basilar skull fractures include:  Bacterial meningitis is a dangerous infection of the brain and spinal cord that requires emergency medical treatment.  Leakage of brain and spinal fluids occurs in  up to 20.8 percent  of people with basilar skull fractures. This increases the risk of bacterial meningitis. In fact, up to  40 percent  of people with a spinal fluid leak will develop meningitis.  Meningitis may occur after a fracture because bacteria from the nose, ears, and throat can enter the brain or spinal cord if the base of the skull is injured.  Signs of meningitis include:  A person must seek emergency care after a head injury, especially if any of these symptoms appear, as meningitis is life-threatening.  Although meningitis is treated with  antibiotics , experts say that giving antibiotics after all basilar skull fractures may not be helpful.   One study  found that there is not enough evidence to support giving people antibiotics for basilar skull fractures alone.   Another review  also states that using antibiotics to prevent meningitis after a basilar skull fracture does not improve outcomes. The researchers conclude that antibiotics should only be given if the person has meningitis.  Basilar skull fractures can also cause injuries to the blood vessels that supply the brain. These are called cerebrovascular injuries.  People with basilar skull fractures are at  high risk  of having a cerebrovascular injury. This type of injury can cause permanent brain damage or death.  Therefore, people with possible basilar skull fractures should undergo a computed tomography (CT) scan to check for this complication.  Battle's sign means a person should seek medical care immediately. But, the appearance of this bruise is not enough to determine what treatment is needed. A doctor will need to evaluate a person's neurological health as well.  Some tests that a person may receive include:  These tests can show whether the brain is injured and the extent of injury to help the doctor decide on a treatment plan. They can also reveal whether the broken bones have moved.  In severe cases, surgery may be needed to treat broken bones, brain injuries, or brain and spinal fluid leaks.  Not all of these tests may be required after minor head injuries, depending on the person's age, underlying health problems, and any medications they are taking.  Usually, younger children who have no symptoms of neurological problems recover well after minor head injuries.  However, all head injuries need to be evaluated by a doctor to rule out skull fractures, brain injuries, and other complications.  If there are no signs of brain injury, bleeding, or other complications, careful observation by a doctor and home care may be adequate treatment for some minor basilar skull fractures.  Children with basilar skull fractures  could be released  from the hospital to recover at home if they:  Though many basilar skull fractures do heal on their own, diligent aftercare at home is needed. Once a person has received proper medical treatment and been discharged, they should:  Basilar skull fractures can range from minor to severe. Even if a person's symptoms are mild, Battle's sign should never be ignored. Only a doctor can determine what medical care is needed after a head injury.  Any head injury, including those with Battle's sign, is an indication that a person should seek emergency care.  Fortunately, many basilar skull fractures heal well after a person receives medical treatment.    
 Arneitz, C., Sinzig, M., &amp; Fasching, G. (2016, November 16). Diagnostic and clinical management of skull fractures in children.  Journal of Clinical Imaging Science ,  6 , 47.  Arneitz, C., Sinzig, M., &amp; Fasching, G. (2016, November 16). Diagnostic and clinical management of skull fractures in children.  Journal of Clinical Imaging Science ,  6 , 47.  Bacterial meningitis. (2017, January 25).  Nellis, J. C., Kesser, B. W., &amp; Park, S. S. (2014, January). What is the efficacy of prophylactic antibiotics in basilar skull fractures?  The Laryngoscope ,  124 (1), 8–9.  Ratilal, B. O., Costa, J., Pappamikail, L., &amp; Sampaio, C. (2015, April 28). Antibiotic prophylaxis for preventing meningitis in patients with basilar skull fractures.  Cochrane Database of Systemic Reviews ,  4 .  Rush, B. (2017, March 28). Battle's sign.  Encyclopedia of Clinical Neuropsychology . Springer, Cham.  Sunder, R., &amp; Tyler, K. (2013, March 19). Basal skull fracture and the halo sign.  Canadian Medical Association Journal ,  185 (5), 416.  Tubbs, R. S., Shoja, M. M., Loukas, M., Oakes, W. J., &amp; Cohen-Gadol, A. (2010, January). William Henry Battle and Battle's sign: Mastoid ecchymosis as an indicator of basilar skull fracture: Historical vignette.  Journal of Neurosurgery ,  112 (1), 186–188.  Wang, X., Xu, M., Liang, H., &amp; Xu, L. (2011, January 10). Comparison of CT and MRI in diagnosis of cerebrospinal leak induced by multiple fractures of skull base.  Radiology and Oncology ,  45 (2), 91–96.  Watanabe, K., &amp; Kida, W. (2012, September 20). Battle's sign.  The New England Journal of Medicine ,  367 (12), 1135.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "What causes Battle's sign?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320787.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, January 31). "What causes Battle's sign?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  