 The average person has  2 to 4 million sweat glands . There are two different kinds of sweat glands: the eccrine, which are found all over the body and help control body temperature, and the apocrine, which are located primarily in the groin and underarm areas.  The sweat produced by the eccrine sweat glands is mostly water, which helps to cool the body down. While heat can sometimes trigger the apocrine sweat glands, these glands are usually activated by  stress  and hormonal changes, which is why they play a significant role in cold sweats.   Anxiety  and stress are the most common prompts for the fight or flight response and the resulting cold sweats.  Other situations and conditions that prompt cold sweats may include:  The fight or flight response, which helped ancient humans survive in a more physically dangerous world, prepared the body to battle with an enemy or run away. The fight or flight response still operates in people today, but it is more likely triggered by a traffic jam than a saber-toothed tiger.  The physical responses sparked by the stress response include:  Cold sweats are different from regular sweats in that they do not develop as part of the body's cooling response. This means that people experiencing a cold sweat may have skin that is clammy and cool, and they may report feeling cold. Sometimes the skin may appear quite pale.  Cold sweats on their own do not usually lead to complications. However, if cold sweats are due to underlying health conditions, such as  heart disease , life-threatening complications can develop. Also, because the skin is frequently wet, skin infections are a potential complication.  Common treatments for cold sweats include:  The following tips can help individuals manage and prevent cold sweats:  Sometimes, an underlying condition will be evident; for example, when a person is sweating due to the pain and shock of an injury. Treating the injury and managing the symptoms of shock can usually bring cold sweats under control.  At other times, the underlying causes can be murkier or more challenging to confront. While individuals are working with their care providers to identify more complex issues, it can be helpful to treat the symptoms at the same time.    
 Anxiety disorders. (2016 March).  Anxiety disorders. (2016 March).  Common drugs/medications known to cause diaphoresis. (n.d.).  Edgerly, D. (2008, April 30). Let's talk shock.  Journal of Emergency Medical Services.   Gross, K. M., Schote, A. B., Schneider, K. K., Schulz, A., &amp; Meyer, J. (2014, March 19). Elevated social stress levels and depressive symptoms in primary hyperhidrosis.  PloS one ,  9 (3), e92412.  Hyperhidrosis. Overview. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/dry-sweaty-skin/hyperhidrosis   Low blood glucose (hypoglycemia). (2016, August).  Menopause 101: A primer for the perimenopausal. (n.d.).  Skin glands and secretions. (n.d.).  Sweating under stress. (n.d.).  Hansen, J. (2013, May 21). The science of sweat.  Two types of hyperhidrosis. (n.d.).  Understanding sweating. (n.d.).  Understanding the stress response. (2016, March 18).  Warning signs of a heart attack. (2016, June).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "What to do about cold sweats."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320713.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, January 24). "What to do about cold sweats."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  