 Although it is similar to wrinkles in many ways, crepey skin is  not necessarily linked  to old age. However, as people age, their skin can become more loose and flaccid.  Crepey skin typically affects large areas of skin and can make it noticeably more fragile and thin.  Both  skin type and genetics  can determine whether a person gets crepey skin and it is more common in older people, not usually appearing until people are  at least in their 40s .  However, the most common cause of crepey skin is from ultraviolet (UV) radiation. The American Association of Dermatology says that exposure to UV radiation is the most  preventable cause  of early skin damage.  The damage can result either from exposure to the sun or the use of tanning beds.  Over time, the UV radiation will break down the elastin fibers in the skin, which allow the skin to stretch and return to its normal position.  While those fibers can heal, long-term exposure to UV radiation may mean that they are unable to repair completely.  People with fair skin are particularly susceptible to crepey skin, wrinkles, skin damage, and even  skin cancer  caused by the exposure to UV radiation.   Other causes  of crepey skin include:  There are many different treatments for crepey skin depending on how severe it is, what has caused it, and where it occurs on the body. People who have crepey skin can speak to their dermatologist to find out what is the best course of treatment for them.  Many  over-the-counter products  contain retinol, which is a member of the  vitamin  A family.  Other products contain alpha hydroxy acids, including glycolic acid, lactic acid, malic acid, citric acid, and tartaric acid.  It is important to use these products as directed, stop using them if they sting or burn, and limit the number of products used. Also, people should give them time to work as some can take months before having any effect.  Tretinoin is a topical prescription cream that a person can apply directly to the problem area. It is also part of the vitamin A family and is often used on the face to protect the skin from UV exposure.  Other topical treatments may contain stabilized vitamin C.  Dermatologists may use a radiofrequency device,  ultrasound , or a pulsed light device, often known as laser treatment, to  help treat crepey skin  from the inside out.  The device heats up small areas of skin, putting energy deep into the skin. This procedure helps the  collagen  to remodel and makes the skin tighter as a result.  Areas of the skin attached to muscles, such as the upper arm,  do not respond as well  to this type of treatment as other areas, such as the face and neck, do.  This treatment used to be painful and require anesthesia, but over time the technology has developed and now people can have the treatment without anesthesia.  Fillers, such as Radiesse, have been  shown to be an effective treatment  for crepey skin, particularly on the upper arm.  The filler is injected into the skin and has a volumizing effect on the skin and yet remains a relatively non-invasive treatment.  Surgery is most often carried out on people who have lost a large amount of weight and have been left with an excess of crepey skin.  A plastic surgeon may recommend an operation to remove the skin, but people should consider this carefully as it does carry some risks.  The  most effective way  to prevent crepey skin from developing is to protect the skin from UV exposure by seeking shade, wearing protective clothing, and wearing a sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of 30 or higher when outside in the sun.  As people age, it is essential that they adapt their skincare routine accordingly. Once people are in their 40s, the skin no longer produces as much of the oil that protects it from chemicals that cause  inflammation  and irritation.  The exposure to UV radiation from tanning beds is shown to damage the DNA of skin cells, which can lead to premature skin aging and skin cancer. People are advised not to use them.  People can keep their skin hydrated by using a good moisturizer to trap water under the skin to keep it looking young and healthy.  Using topical creams that contain retinol can help restore the skin's elasticity and thicken collagen, which might  reduce the chance of developing crepey skin .  What people eat can affect their skin and to try to reduce the chances of developing crepey skin, it is essential to  include the following  in a balanced diet:  There are also some home remedies that people have found useful in treating and preventing crepey skin:  Any person who wants to try any of these home remedies should talk to their dermatologist first.    
 Aging skin and skin care products (n.d.)  Aging skin and skin care products (n.d.)  Amselem, M. (2016) Radiesse: A novel rejuvenation treatment for the upper arms.  Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology (9), 9–14.  Crepey skin? A surprising cause — and 3 expert fixes (2017, January 17).  Gold, M. H. (2010, May) Update on tissue tightening.   The Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology  ,  3 (5), 36-41.  Schagen, S.K., Zampeli, V. A., Makrantonaki, E., Zouboulis, C. C. (2012, July 1) Discovering the link between nutrition and skin aging.  Dermato-endocrinology ,  4 (3), 298–307.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "How to prevent and improve crepey skin."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320789.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2018, January 31). "How to prevent and improve crepey skin."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  