 Trench foot got its name during the First World War (1914-1918) when around  75,000 British and 2,000 American soldiers  developed the condition after spending long periods of time in the cold, wet trenches on the front line.  Later, sailors serving during World War II (1939-1945) also developed the condition, and there are reports of it being experienced by homeless people today.  Trench foot or immersion foot is a type of tissue damage caused by prolonged exposure to cold and wet conditions. It leads to swelling, pain, and sensory disturbances in the feet. It can lead to damage to the blood vessels, nerves, skin, and muscle.  Trench foot is distinct from  frostbite , another form of tissue damage to the feet, in that the skin does not freeze. It is known as a non-freezing cold injury (NFCI).  People who have the condition today do not experience the same level of tissue loss as the soldiers that developed it during the wars.  It is a preventable condition that causes long-term damage and it is not contagious.  Symptoms of trench foot can include:  Once the foot warms up, people may notice their foot changes from white to red, eventually becoming dry and painful. Blisters can form, leading to skin and tissue falling off the injured foot.  If trench foot is left untreated, it can lead to  gangrene  and even the need for amputation.  Cases of trench foot are categorized into one of the four following stages:  Trench foot results from exposure to temperatures of between 0°C to 15°C and the risk increases if the feet are also wet. It occurs when low temperatures restrict blood flow to the affected area.  Some people can develop symptoms after just an hour of exposure; in others, symptoms may not appear for up to a week.  The severity of the injury will depend on the degree of cold, the wetness of the tissue, and how long a person was exposed to the conditions.  Military personnel are the  most likely to be affected , and there is a suggestion that military  stress  contributes to the development of trench foot.  Trench foot has also  been known to occur  among people that fish for a living and homeless people. Studies have also shown that people of African ethnicity are more likely to develop the condition than Caucasians.  Anyone who suspects they have trench foot should seek medical attention. A healthcare professional will examine the foot to decide what stage the trench foot has reached.  While the immediate effects of trench foot can be alleviated, the condition can lead to long-term tissue damage and chronic pain. A person with trench foot may require long-term follow-up care.  The first thing to do is to remove the person from the cold, wet environment and warm the affected limb up slowly. Quickly warming the foot can make the damage worse.  People can take painkillers to ease the pain and should protect any pressure sores.  Other steps include:  In serious cases, people will find it difficult to walk because of the swelling, pain, and blisters. They should avoid walking and elevate their feet as this will help to reduce the swelling. Ibuprofen will also help to reduce  inflammation .  Hydration,  nutrition , shelter, and suitable protective clothing are necessary to prevent trench foot.  When getting ready for outdoor activities, tips include:  To help prevent trench foot, people should take off their wet shoes and socks, and air-dry their feet.    
 Atenstaedt, R. L. (2006, Winter). Trench foot: the medical response in the first World War 1914-18 [Abstract].  Atenstaedt, R. L. (2006, Winter). Trench foot: the medical response in the first World War 1914-18 [Abstract].  Heil, K., Thomas, R., Robertson, G., Porter, A., Milner, R., &amp; Wood, A. (2016, March 1). Freezing and non-freezing cold weather injuries: A systematic review.  British Medical Journal ,  117 (1), 79–93.  Roberts, A. (2008, September). Synopsis of causation: Cold injury.  Schimelpfenig, T. (2005, January). Non-freezing cold injury — Immersion injury.  Trench foot or immersion foot. (2005, September 8).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "What you should know about trench foot."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320780.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, January 30). "What you should know about trench foot."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  