 Their name comes from the Latin word  clavus , which means nail since the shape of a dried clove resembles that of a nail.  People have used cloves in cooking and traditional medicine for many years, but it is only recently that scientists have begun studying their potential health benefits.  Read on to learn more about potential health benefits, uses, and risks of cloves.  Cloves have a variety of potential health benefits, including:  Researchers are studying clove oil as a natural method for maintaining oral health due to its effect on plaque,  gingivitis , and bacteria in the mouth.   Researchers  compared the effectiveness of an herbal mouth rinse containing clove, basil, and tea tree oil with a commercially available essential oil mouth rinse.  Both mouth rinses were effective against plaque and gingivitis, showing that they may help decrease oral  inflammation  and bacteria.  The researchers also found that the mouth rinse that contained clove decreased the number of harmful bacteria more than the commercial mouth rinse.   A study  in mice found that clove extract and nigericin, a component of clove extract, reduced  insulin resistance  in mouse muscle cells.  Mice with  diabetes  that consumed nigericin also had less insulin resistance and improvements in glucose tolerance,  insulin  secretion, and beta cell function.   Another animal study  looked at the effect of clove bud powder on laboratory markers in a rat model of diabetes. They found that blood sugar level was lower in rats that received the clove powder compared to those in the control group that did not receive the clove powder.  Many herbs and spices are high in  antioxidants , which are chemicals that play a part in reducing damage to cells that could lead to  cancer . According to   Today's Dietitian  , "just 1/2 teaspoon of ground clove is said to contain more antioxidants than 1/2 cup of  blueberries ."  In  one laboratory study , scientists found that clove extract was able to slow the growth of multiple types of human cancer cells. Clove extract also increased cell death in  colon cancer  cells.  The same study also looked at the effect of clove extract on  tumor  growth in mice. Tumors grew significantly less in the mice treated with clove extract compared to those in the control group.  In  another study , scientists looked at the effect of different preparations of clove extract on human  breast cancer  cells. They found that clove essential oil and ethanol extract of clove were both toxic to breast cancer cells.  The authors reported that cloves might have a beneficial role in the future of cancer treatment since they can cause cell death and slow cell multiplication.  Scientists have also studied cloves regarding their potential effect on  obesity . In  a study  of mice, researchers found that clove extract reduced the incidence of obesity resulting from a high-fat diet.  Mice who received the clove extract had lower  body weight , less abdominal fat, and less liver fat than those in the control group.  According to the  National Center for Biotechnology Information , multiple hazards are associated with clove oil. It may cause skin, eye, and respiratory irritation, or an allergic reaction on the skin. It is also flammable and could be fatal if it is swallowed and goes into the airway.  In one  case report , a 15-month-old child experienced liver failure after consuming 10 milliliters (ml) of clove oil.  Another incident involved a 2-year-old child who drank 5 to 10 ml of clove oil. The child experienced multiple medical problems, including  coma , liver damage, and problems with blood clotting.   Cloves may also  increase the chance of bleeding or increase the body's response to warfarin. It is important to discuss the use of any herbal products with a medical professional so that they can review potential side effects and interactions.  Cloves are known for their strong taste and smell and can be purchased ground or whole for use in cooking.  Many cuisines include cloves, and it is also an ingredient in certain condiments, including ketchup and Worcestershire sauce.  Some perfumes use cloves for the aroma and clove oil is sold for use as an essential oil.  Cloves are commonly used in Ayurveda, which is traditional Indian medicine. They have also been used traditionally to cause a numbing sensation.  Ground cloves can be used in similar ways as  cinnamon  and  ginger  and can be used to flavor applesauce, oatmeal, muffins, and cookies.  This recipe for  gingerbread cake with cream cheese frosting  uses ground cloves.  Cloves are also sometimes used to make chai, which is a mixture of tea, spices, and milk popular in India and Pakistan. This  cardamom ginger chai recipe  incorporates cloves.  Cloves can be used in savory dishes as in this recipe for  baked chicken with artichokes, cinnamon, and preserved lemons  and this one for  slow-cooker braised beef with carrots &amp; turnips .  According to the United States Department of Agriculture  National Nutrient Database , 2.1 grams (g) or 1 teaspoon of ground cloves contains:  The same amount of ground cloves also provides 1.263 milligrams (mg) of manganese, which is 63 percent of the  Daily Value (DV)  for manganese.  Clove is a fragrant spice that can add flavor to many dishes. Its potential medicinal benefits are being studied, but more research is needed.  As with all herbal products, people should discuss the usage and safety of cloves with a medical professional.    
 A food labeling guide guidance for industry. (2013, January).  A food labeling guide guidance for industry. (2013, January).  Adefegha, S. A., Oboh, G., Adefegha, O. M., &amp; Athayde, M. L. (2014, October). Antihyperglycemic, hypolipidemic, hepatoprotective and antioxidative effects of dietary clove (Szyzgium aromaticum) bud powder in a high-fat diet/streptozotocin-induced diabetes rat model [Abstract].  Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture ,  94 (13), 2726–2737.  Clove oil. (2018, January 14).  Cloves. (n.d.).  Ding, Y., Gu, Z., Wang, Y., Wang, S., Chen, H., Zhang, H., ... Chen, Y. Q. (2017, August 1). Clove extract functions as a natural fatty acid synthesis inhibitor and prevents obesity in a mouse model [Abstract].  Food &amp; Function ,  8 (8), 2847–2856.  Full report (all nutrients): 02011, spices, cloves, ground. (2016, May).  Ghaffar, S., Afridi, S. K., Aftab, M. F., Murtaza, M., Hafizur, R. M., Sara, S., . . . Waraich, R. S. (2017, April). Clove and its active compound attenuate free fatty acid-mediated insulin resistance in skeletal muscle cells and in mice [Abstract].  Journal of Medicinal Food ,  20 (4), 335–344.  Hartnoll, G., Moore, D., &amp; Douek, D. (1993, September). Near fatal ingestion of oil of cloves.  Archives of Disease in Childhood ,  69 (3), 392–393.  Heck, A. M., DeWitt, B. A., &amp; Lukes, A. L. (2000, July 1). Potential interactions between alternative therapies and warfarin [Abstract].  American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy ,  57 (13), 1221–1227.  Janes, S. E. J., Price, C. S. G., &amp; Thomas, D. (2005, August). Essential oil poisoning: N-acetylcysteine for eugenol-induced hepatic failure and analysis of a national database [Abstract].  European Journal of Pediatrics ,  164 (8), 520–522.  Kothiwale, S. V., Patwardhan, V., Gandhi, M., Sohoni, R., &amp; Kumar, A. (2014, May–June). A comparative study of antiplaque and antigingivitis effects of herbal mouthrinse containing tea tree oil, clove, and basil with commercially available essential oil mouthrinse.  Journal of Indian Society of Periodontology ,  18 (3), 316–320.  Kumar, P. S., Febriyanti, R. M., Sofyan, F. F., Luftimas, D. E., &amp; Abdulah, R. (2014, October–December). Anticancer potential of Syzygium aromaticum L. in MCF-7 human breast cancer cell lines.  Pharmacognosy Research ,  6 (4), 350–354.  Liu, H., Schmitz, J. C., Wei, J., Cao, S., Beumer, J. H., Strychor, S., ... Lin, X. (2014, August 14). Clove extract inhibits tumor growth and promotes cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.  Oncology Research ,  21 (5), 247–259.  Tempest, M. (2012, March). Adding spice for a healthier life — evidence shows antioxidant-rich herbs and spices may cut chronic disease risk.  Today's Dietitian ,  14 (3), 40.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Metropulos, Megan. "Cloves: Nutritional facts and health benefits."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320768.php&gt;    APA  Metropulos, M. (2018, January 30). "Cloves: Nutritional facts and health benefits."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  