 Iliotibial (IT) band syndrome is often caused by repetitively bending the knee during physical activities, such as running, cycling, swimming, and climbing.  The IT band is a group of fibers that run the length of the upper leg, from the hip to the top of the shin.  When overused, the IT band can become tightened. The tightening can cause the band to rub against the outside of the knee. The rubbing can lead to pain and swelling.  IT band syndrome may begin as mild pain and intensify if left untreated. The best treatment is often to stop doing the activity that is causing the pain. In more severe cases, surgical options may need to be considered.  Symptoms of IT band syndrome may vary slightly from person to person in intensity and how they appear.  Some symptoms include:  Symptoms typically begin a short time after starting the physical activity.  The most common symptom of IT band syndrome is pain on the outside of the knee that gets worse if the person continues the activity causing the pain.  As a person continues to run or participate in a similar activity, the IT band will continue to rub against the outside of the knee, leading to swelling and severe pain.  IT band syndrome is often relatively easy to treat. There are two main types of treatment for the condition:  Some of the most common ways to treat IT band syndrome include:  The most important treatment is to stop the activity that causes the pain altogether. Resting for  up to 6 weeks  will typically allow the leg to heal fully.  Anyone who runs enough can develop IT band syndrome. However, there are some stretches and exercises that help both prevent and treat the condition.  People should aim to do a combination of stretching and specific exercises that focus on the IT band. Some of these exercises and stretches are described below.   Glute stretch   This stretch is easy to perform.   Standing stretch   This stretch should be felt on the outer muscles of hamstring.   Foam roller stretch   This exercise helps massage out and gently stretch the tight IT band.  Foam rollers are widely available to purchase  from sports stores and online .   Standing or lying hip abduction   In the standing position:  In the lying position:  A person may add  a weight or resistance band  to their stretching as they get stronger, which are also available online.   Hip abduction machine   People with access to a gym may be able to use a piece of equipment that targets the hip abductors, the muscles that move the leg out away from the body. Stretching these muscles can help treat and prevent knee pain.  The machine requires the user to sit with their legs together, their knees bent, and their feet on the footrest.  The machine has pads attached to a weighted pulley system designed to sit on the outside of the legs just above the knees. The person then opens their legs, pressing against the machine's resistance   Training modifications   A person who has experienced IT band syndrome may want to speak to a physical therapist to identify ways in which they can modify the way they run or perform other exercises.  Training modifications may include:  A person with IT band syndrome should immediately stop any activity that is causing symptoms. Often, this means no running, as well as avoiding cycling, long flights of steps, and other activities that involve bending the knees.  When getting back into these activities, people often need to ease themselves back in slowly, to help avoid the syndrome from coming back.  Runners should always increase the distance of their runs gradually.  Physical therapists and trainers can often tell whether a person has IT band syndrome. For those people who are not working with one of these specialists, a family doctor can also diagnose the problem.  To determine whether a person has IT band syndrome, a healthcare professional will likely talk to the person about their symptoms. They will need to know when the pain began and what activities cause the pain.  The doctor or other healthcare professional will then likely perform the Ober's test. For this test, the person lies on their pain-free side with the bottom knee and hip at a 90-degree angle. The doctor or physiotherapist will steady the pelvis and then lift the affected leg. They then bring the hip back toward the ground.  A person tests positive for IT band syndrome when there is less than a 10-degree angle from the natural horizontal position.  The healthcare provider will also watch how the person stands and walks to check for pronation of the foot. They will also look for tightness in the upper leg muscles and hips.  A tight iliotibial band is the main cause of IT band syndrome.  When working normally, the IT band will glide across the outside of the knee over a fluid-filled sac called a bursa. If the IT band becomes too tight, the band will rub against the knee, causing friction, swelling, and pain.  Some people may be more prone to developing IT band syndrome than others. Some factors that can increase a person's risk include:  A person with IT band syndrome should see a full recovery once they have stopped the offending activity for a while.  People can reduce risks of being re-injured through stretches and exercises that both strengthen the legs and keep them less tight.  Once rested and healed, a person should be able to return to their preferred activity, though easing back in gently is a good idea.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Battaglia, P. J., D'Angelo, K., &amp; Kettner, N. W. (2016, December). Posterior, lateral, and anterior hip pain due to musculoskeletal origin: A narrative literature review of history, physical examination, and diagnostic imaging.  Journal of Chiropractic Medicine ,  15 (4), 281–293.  Battaglia, P. J., D'Angelo, K., &amp; Kettner, N. W. (2016, December). Posterior, lateral, and anterior hip pain due to musculoskeletal origin: A narrative literature review of history, physical examination, and diagnostic imaging.  Journal of Chiropractic Medicine ,  15 (4), 281–293.  Flato, R., Passanante, G. J., Skalski, M. R., Patel, D. B., White, E. A., &amp; Matcuk, Jr, G. R. (2017, May). The iliotibial tract: Imaging, anatomy, injuries, and other pathology [Abstract].  Skeletal Radiology ,  46 (5), 605–622.  Hafer, J. F., Brown, A. M., &amp; Boyer, K. A. (2017, August). Exertion and pain do not alter coordination variability in runners with iliotibial band syndrome [Abstract].  Clinical Biomechanics ,  47 , 73–78.  Khaund, R., &amp; Flynn, S. H. (2005, April 15). Iliotibial band syndrome: A common source of knee pain.  American Family Physician ,  71 (8), 1545–50.  Pierce, T. P., Mease, S. J., Issa, K., Festa, A., McInerney, V. K., &amp; Scillia, A. J. (2017, June 12). Iliotibial band lengthening: An arthroscopic surgical technique.  Arthroscopy Techniques ,  6 (3), e785–e789.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is iliotibial band syndrome and how is it treated?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320757.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, January 29). "What is iliotibial band syndrome and how is it treated?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  