 Melanin is the pigment that gives skin cells and moles their color. Because it does not have this pigment, amelanotic  melanoma  can be hard to detect.  Healthy moles and other  skin cancers  contain melanin, but amelanotic melanoma growths cannot produce melanin and therefore lack pigment. This usually results in a very pale pink or reddish lesion.  Amelanotic melanoma is a relatively uncommon form of  cancer . A 2012 database study of people with melanoma found that just  3.9 percent  had amelanotic melanoma.  Nearly  70 percent  of people with amelanotic melanomas had red skin lesions. In a larger-scale 2014 study, about  8 percent  of people with melanoma had amelanotic growths.  In itself, an amelanotic melanoma is no more dangerous than any other form of melanoma. Most people who are diagnosed and treated at an early stage survive.  However,  the fatality rates  for amelanotic melanoma tend to be higher than for other types of melanoma. This is because amelanotic melanoma often goes undetected for longer, which gives it time to spread.  A 2014 study found that  88 percent  of people with amelanotic melanoma had survived 5 years following diagnosis, compared to 95 percent of people with pigmented melanoma.  The primary symptom of amelanotic melanoma is an unusual skin growth. Unlike pigmented melanoma, however, amelanotic melanomas are often very faint. They may be pink or red. Some lesions resemble a tiny scar or  acne  that is healing.  Regular skin checks can help detect amelanotic melanoma. People should know how their skin usually looks, including what their typical scab and healing pattern is, and how their moles typically look.  Some people may find it helpful to take pictures of their moles so that they have a reference to see if the moles have changed. A person should always talk to a doctor if they notice changes in their skin.  Doctors often tell people to follow the ABCD symptom guidelines for skin cancer:  However, amelanotic melanoma does not follow this pattern, which is why a person may not notice it until the later stages.  Sun exposure is the primary risk factor for amelanotic melanoma. These growths tend to occur more often on areas of the body that are frequently exposed to the sun.  Using tanning beds and experiencing frequent sunburns can further increase the risk of developing amelanotic melanoma. The risk of developing any form of melanoma, including amelanotic melanoma, also increases with age.  Melanoma is rare in children, but amelanotic melanoma accounts  for a large percentage  of these melanomas in children.  Other risk factors for amelanotic melanoma include:  To diagnose amelanotic melanoma, a doctor may compare the growth to other skin growths or ask about the history of the lesion.  A biopsy can test the lesion for cancer. If the growth is cancerous, a doctor will assign the lesion a  Breslow  thickness score that indicates how thick it is. The doctor will also give the lesion a  Clark  level of invasion, which provides details on how deep into the skin the lesion has spread.  These two scores, along with details about whether the cancer has spread to other areas of the body, help a doctor decide what stage the cancer is at.  The thicker a lesion is, the more likely it is to spread to other areas of the body. This process of spreading is called metastasis.  Early stage cancers may be removed. This can usually be done on an outpatient basis.  However, if the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes or other areas of the body, more aggressive treatment may be necessary. This can include removing the growth, removing lymph nodes, and removing cancerous cells in other areas of the body.  Other treatment options include any one or combination of:  A person with amelanotic melanoma may need chemotherapy, radiation, or immunotherapy to fight cancer that has spread elsewhere in the body.  Minimizing excessive sun exposure is the best strategy for preventing melanoma, including amelanotic melanoma.  A person should wear sunscreen every time that they are outside. During times of prolonged or direct sun exposure, wearing loose-fitting clothing and a hat can help protect the skin. People should also avoid tanning beds.  Regular skin checks do not prevent amelanotic melanoma but can help people detect signs of melanoma early. Early detection increases the chances of successfully treating cancer.  A person should not wait for a suspicious growth to get worse. While dark moles are often more noticeable, people should also look for red or pink lesions that could be amelanotic melanoma.  People with many moles, a history of skin cancer, or very fair skin should discuss with their doctors how frequently they should check their skin for changes, and whether they should see a dermatologist regularly.  Most skin changes are not cancer, but a quick appointment with a doctor offers peace of mind and can help people with melanoma get immediate and life-saving treatment.    
 Al-Ani, A. (2018, January). Amelanotic melanoma.  Al-Ani, A. (2018, January). Amelanotic melanoma.  Amelanotic melanoma. (n.d.).  Clark and Breslow staging. (2015, November 12).  McClain, S. E., Mayo, K. B., Shada, A. L., Smolkin, M. E., Patterson, J. W., &amp; Slingluff, Jr, C. L. (2012, June 14). Amelanotic melanomas presenting as red skin lesions: A diagnostic challenge with potentially lethal consequences.  International Journal of Dermatology ,  51 (4), 420-426.  Oakley, A. (2015, December). Melanoma.  Stefanaki, C., Chardalias, L., Soura, E., Katsarou, A., &amp; Stratigos, A. (2017, May 22). Paediatric melanoma [Abstract].  Dermatology and Venereology ,  31 (10), 1604–1615.  Thomas, N. E., Kricker, A., Waxweiler, W. T., Dillon, P. M., Busam, K. J., From, L., . . . Berwick, M. (2014, December). Comparison of clinicopathologic features and survival of histopathologically amelanotic and pigmented melanomas.  JAMA Dermatology ,  150 (12), 1306–1314.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Amelanotic melanoma: Symptoms, treatment, and prevention."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320720.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, January 25). "Amelanotic melanoma: Symptoms, treatment, and prevention."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  