 Although acute  hepatitis C  often leads to a more severe form of infection known as chronic hepatitis C, this is not always the case. Some people clear the virus from their bodies and are cured.  Many people with acute hepatitis C are unaware that they have the disease because it usually causes no symptoms.  In this article, we take a look at the symptoms that can appear, how the disease is transmitted, and what treatment is available.  Acute hepatitis C is a short-term disease that occurs in the  first 2 weeks to 6 months  of a person becoming infected with HCV.  Around  20−40 percent  of people who get the virus clear it from their body during this period and become cured.  For most people, however, the virus remains in their body, and they develop chronic hepatitis C.  The chronic disease is serious and can lead to long-term liver problems, such as scarring, liver failure,  cancer , or even death.  Around  70–80 percent  of people with acute hepatitis C have no symptoms.  On the other hand, some individuals can have mild to severe symptoms soon after they become infected. Symptoms usually appear  6–7 weeks  after infection and may include:  Acute hepatitis C can occur after someone is exposed to HCV through one of a variety of different routes.  The main route of transmission is through contact with the blood of an infected person when needles are shared to inject drugs.  Some people, especially healthcare workers, can also become infected through:  HCV can also be passed from a mother to her unborn child.  Although less frequent routes for transmission, a person can also get hepatitis C by:  HCV is not transmitted by kissing, hugging, coughing, sneezing, holding hands, sharing eating utensils, or breast-feeding. It is also not transmitted through food or water.  A person should see a doctor to get tested for hepatitis C if they:  Healthcare workers who have been in contact with blood from patients through a needlestick or other sharp object injury should also consider testing.  A diagnosis of hepatitis C is made through blood tests.  An initial blood test can be carried out to look for antibodies to HCV. Antibodies are proteins that the immune system produces against foreign substances in the body, such as viruses or bacteria.  A second test can be performed to look for the genetic material of the virus and confirm the results of the first test.  If the diagnosis of hepatitis C is positive, the doctor may ask for a further test to check the levels of liver enzymes and to see how much the disease has damaged the liver.  This test can help to distinguish between acute and chronic hepatitis C and point the doctor toward the best treatment option for that person.  Acute hepatitis C is a disease that can be treated. Treatment aims to reduce a person's risk of developing chronic hepatitis C and transmitting the virus to someone else, as well as improving their symptoms.  However, as acute hepatitis C usually causes no symptoms, many people do not get diagnosed or treated.  The best way to treat acute hepatitis C and at what point treatment should begin is still not completely clear.  Some doctors may choose to delay treatment during the first 6 months after diagnosis, to see if the body clears the virus. If it does, treatment is not recommended.  If the doctor decides to start treatment after the  first 6 months  of infection, recommendations are the same as for chronic hepatitis C.  Medications may include:  People who receive treatment for acute hepatitis C can be given one or more of these medications for a period that can go  up to 24 weeks .  A person has a higher chance of getting hepatitis C if they:  The following people also have an increased risk of getting hepatitis C, although the increase is much lower than with the factors above:  There is currently no vaccine to prevent hepatitis C, although it is being investigated. The best preventive measures are as follows:   Researchers suggest  that starting treatment with DAAs early could serve as a preventive measure, reducing the risk of hepatitis C transmission. Further studies continue to be carried out to test this theory.  Around  20−40 percent  of people who get HCV will clear it from their body without treatment and will not develop the more severe chronic hepatitis C. Those who develop chronic hepatitis C usually have a mild clinical progression.  Since people with acute hepatitis C typically show no symptoms, an early diagnosis is the best way to prevent both the spread of the disease and the progression to its more serious chronic form.    
 Blackard, J. T., Shata, M. T., Shire, N. J., &amp; Sherman, K. E. (2008, January). Acute hepatitis C virus infection: A chronic problem.  Hepatology ,  47 (1), 321–331.  Blackard, J. T., Shata, M. T., Shire, N. J., &amp; Sherman, K. E. (2008, January). Acute hepatitis C virus infection: A chronic problem.  Hepatology ,  47 (1), 321–331.  Boesecke, C., Wedemeyer, H., &amp; Rockstroh, J. K. (2012, December). Diagnosis and treatment of acute hepatitis C virus infection [Abstract].  Infectious Disease Clinics of North America ,  26 (4), 995–1010.  Chung, R. T. (2005, July 1). Acute hepatitis C virus infection.  Clinical Infectious Diseases ,  41 (Suppl_1), S14–S17.  Grebely, J., Page, K., Sacks-Davis, R., van der Loeff, M. S., Rice, T. M., Bruneau, J., … Prins, M. (2014, January). The effects of female sex, viral genotype and  IL28B  genotype on spontaneous clearance of acute hepatitis C virus infection.  Hepatology ,  59 (1), 109–120.  Hepatitis C FAQs for the public. (2016, October 17).  Hullegie, S. J., Arends, J. E., Rijnders, B. J., Irving, W. L., Salmon, D., Prins, M., … Hoepelman. A. I. (2015, August). Current knowledge and future perspectives on acute hepatitis C infection [Abstract].  Clinical Microbiology and Infection ,  21 (8), 797.e9–797.e17.  Lampejo, T., Agarwal, K., &amp; Carey, I. (2017, November 27). Interferon-free direct-acting antiviral therapy for acute hepatitis C virus infection in HIV-infected individuals: A literature review [Abstract].  Digestive and Liver Disease .  Maheshwari, A., &amp; Thuluvath, P. J. (2010, February). Management of acute hepatitis C [Abstract].  Clinical Liver Disease ,  14 (1), 169–176.  Management of acute HCV infection. (2017, September 21).  Martinello, M., &amp; Matthews, G. V. (2015, October). Enhancing the detection and management of acute hepatitis C virus infection.  The International Journal of Drug Policy ,  26 (10), 899–910.  Sagnelli, E., Santantonio, T., Coppola, N., Fasano, M., Pisaturo, M., &amp; Sagnelli, C. (2014, August). Acute hepatitis C: Clinical and laboratory diagnosis, course of the disease, treatment [Abstract].  Infection ,  42 (4), 601–610.  Santantonio, T., Wiegand, J., &amp; Gerlach, J. T. (2008, October). Acute hepatitis C: Current status and remaining challenges.  Journal of Hepatology ,  49 (4), 625–633.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "What is acute hepatitis C and is it serious?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320722.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, January 25). "What is acute hepatitis C and is it serious?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  