 Everything a person eats or drinks passes through the liver and is converted into energy or chemicals that allow the body to function normally.  An untreated  hepatitis C  infection can damage the liver and lead to  cirrhosis , or scarring. If  hepatitis  causes liver damage, a person may need to modify their diet.  Hepatitis C that affects a person's diet will usually fall into one of the following  categories :  In most cases of hepatitis C, a special diet is  not necessary . However, a poor diet combined with hepatitis C can lead to further liver damage.  Being overweight can lead to a fatty liver. When combined with hepatitis C, this can result in cirrhosis.  Drinking alcohol is another factor that can  increase damage to the liver , so those with hepatitis C are advised to stop drinking alcohol or limit their intake.  Furthermore, people with hepatitis C are at an increased risk of  developing diabetes . This means that a healthful diet is even more crucial for reducing body fat and controlling blood sugar.  A healthful diet can  improve the liver health  of a person with hepatitis C and reduce the chance of developing cirrhosis. Eating well helps keep the immune system strong to fight off illness.  While most people with hepatitis C do not require a special diet, there are certain foods people can eat to maintain good liver health.  A healthful and balanced diet should include plenty of fruit and vegetables. These food groups are full of necessary  vitamins  and minerals that enable the liver to function properly.  Fresh fruit and vegetables are ideal, but they can also be frozen or canned. People should aim to consume at least 5 portions of fruit and vegetables a day.  Leafy green vegetables can lessen fatty acid composition in the liver, so they are  particularly beneficial  to people with hepatitis C. Good examples include  kale , spinach, and cabbage.  Leafy green vegetables are sources of iron, which may be harmful to those with hepatitis C when consumed in excess. While it is unlikely a person would eat enough leafy greens to cause an iron overload, people with liver damage may wish to monitor their intake. A doctor or dietitian can help a person determine the right amount for them.  Getting adequate amounts of protein is important, as it provides energy and can keep a person feeling full. Replacing a portion of simple  carbohydrates  with protein is a good way to reduce the risk of conditions such as diabetes.  Good sources of protein include:  Dairy products also provide protein,  calcium , and  vitamin D . Low-fat or fat-free versions of dairy are the  best choices  for people with hepatitis C. People should limit dairy products with added sugar.  Cereals, breads, and grains are all examples of complex carbohydrates and are packed with B vitamins and minerals, as well as zinc and fiber.  Complex carbohydrates include:  There are also things that people with hepatitis C should try to avoid or limit in their diet due to the effects they may have on the liver.  Small amounts of fat and oils are important to store energy, protect body tissues, and transport vitamins round the blood.  However, fat can also cause abnormalities, such as a fatty buildup in the liver, leading to cirrhosis.  People with hepatitis C should try to consume unsaturated fats, such as those in nuts and seeds, olive oil, and  fish oils .  It is best to limit saturated fats, such as those found in meat, full-fat dairy products, fast food, and cookies.  Monitoring salt intake is important for people with hepatitis C. For people with cirrhosis in particular,  reducing sodium is vital  for limiting the accumulation of fluid in the abdomen, which is known as ascites.  To reduce salt intake, a person should avoid eating processed or packaged foods.  There is believed to be a link between hepatitis C and blood sugar levels, which can  increase the risk  of developing diabetes.  The liver helps regulate blood sugar levels. Foods high in sugar, such as pastries, desserts, and candy, are high in  calories  but have little to no nutritional value, and can cause spikes in blood sugar.  People who have chronic hepatitis C have problems releasing iron. Excess iron can cause an overload in the blood and organs.  Iron is important for the body to function so should not be eliminated entirely. Reducing the intake of iron-rich foods, such as red meat, liver, and iron-fortified cereals may be advisable.  The best way for people to get vitamins and minerals is through food, but supplements can be helpful for someone with hepatitis C, especially if they have a loss of appetite.  People should speak to a doctor before taking any supplements, as they may interact with other medications and can be dangerous if taken in high doses.  Most people with hepatitis C will not have to follow a special diet unless their liver is badly damaged. However, a healthful diet can help manage hepatitis C and prevent complications and related conditions from developing.  It is especially important to avoid fatty foods and alcohol if a person is worried about their liver health. A doctor or dietitian can help an individual develop a personalized diet plan that works for them.    
 Diet. (n.d.).  Diet. (n.d.).  Diet and nutrition: Entire lesson. (n.d.).  Hepatitis C. (n.d.).  Hepatitis C: Lifestyle FAQs. (2015, July 10).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "What to eat if you have hepatitis C."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320727.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2018, January 25). "What to eat if you have hepatitis C."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  