 Over time, painful swallowing can lead to damage to the throat, unintended weight loss, and other complications.  In this article, we look at the common causes of odynophagia and their symptoms, as well as what treatments are available.  Odynophagia is a disorder in which swallowing feels painful. A person may feel pain in the throat, mouth, or food pipe (esophagus) when swallowing food, liquid, or saliva.  Painful swallowing is a symptom of many medical conditions. The location and intensity of pain depend on the cause.  In some cases, odynophagia resolves very quickly, but it can also persist long-term and can be an indication of a more serious health condition.   Dysphagia  is when a person finds it difficult to swallow, whereas odynophagia is when swallowing is painful. Dysphagia may occur alongside odynophagia, but the two conditions can also occur separately.  When they occur together, this means that swallowing is both difficult and painful.  Dysphagia is often more serious than odynophagia. Dysphagia can cause coughing or choking. In extreme cases, this can result in irritations or bacteria in the lungs, which can lead to  pneumonia .  Both dysphagia and odynophagia can be caused by infections or inflammations. However, dysphagia can also be a symptom of  anxiety  and can be caused by psychological factors.  A person might also find it difficult to swallow due to a fear of swallowing, a condition known as phagophobia.  Odynophagia and dysphagia are sometimes confused with globus sensation, where it feels as if there is a lump in the throat. However, unlike odynophagia and dysphagia, globus sensation does not affect the swallowing mechanism directly.  Symptoms of odynophagia can be short-term or long-term depending on the cause of pain.  Common symptoms include:  Where an infection causes odynophagia, a person may notice other signs of infection, such as a  fever , aches and pains,  fatigue , and a general feeling of being unwell.  A wide range of factors can cause painful swallowing, including:  Treatments for painful swallowing include:  In severe cases where swallowing is impossible due to pain, a feeding tube may be recommended to prevent weight loss.  When odynophagia is caused by cancer or GERD, surgery is also an option.  In many cases, odynophagia resolves without treatment. Painful swallowing due to a common cold or flu should disappear within a week.  The cause of odynophagia can often be determined by a visual inspection of the throat, particularly where inflammation or infection is involved. In other cases, a throat swab or an  endoscopy  may be required.  A person should talk to a doctor if there is no apparent cause of painful swallowing. A person should also seek immediate medical attention if odynophagia makes it difficult to eat or breath.  A person should consult a doctor if odynophagia persists for several weeks, is accompanied by weight loss or dehydration, or if a new lump has appeared.    
  Candida  infections of the mouth, throat, and esophagus. (2017, August 4).   Candida  infections of the mouth, throat, and esophagus. (2017, August 4).  Dysphagia. (2017, March 6).  Evans, I. M., &amp; Pechtel, P. (2011). Phagophobia: Behavioral treatment of a complex case involving fear of fear [Abstract].  Clinical Case Studies ,  10 (1), 37–52.  Greenberger, N. J. (n.d.). Difficulty swallowing.  Layke, J. C., &amp; Lopez, P. P. (2006, June 15). Esophageal cancer: A review and update.  American Family Physician ,  73 (12), 2187–2194.  Lynch, K. L. (n.d.). Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).  Sasaki, C. T. (n.d.). Tonsillopharyngitis (tonsillitis, pharyngitis).  Subramaniam, S., Goodchild, G., &amp; Besherdas, K. (2014). PTU-051 Odynophagia – a symptom worth asking about? [Abstract]. Gut ,  63 (1), 60–61.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Smith, Amy. "Odynophagia: Symptoms, causes, and dysphagia."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320785.php&gt;    APA  Smith, A. (2018, January 31). "Odynophagia: Symptoms, causes, and dysphagia."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  