  Eczema  that affects the scalp may sometimes be seborrheic dermatitis, which people also refer to as  dandruff . This form of eczema is the type that most often affects the scalp. In babies, it is known as cradle cap.  There may be itchy, red, and sometimes inflamed skin that is typical of different kinds of eczema.  Scalp eczema can be a stubborn condition that persists for years. It can come and go without warning, and it can disappear on its own. Symptoms of scalp eczema can be effectively managed, but the condition cannot be cured completely.  In this article, we will examine the risk factors linked to scalp eczema, how to help prevent it, and what to do about it when it occurs.  No one really knows what causes scalp eczema, but it affects up to  5 percent  of the general population. Slightly more men are affected than women.  Genes, hormones, illness, and  stress  have all been known to trigger scalp eczema in some people.  Other medical conditions can make people more prone to scalp eczema. These include:  Other risk factors linked to scalp eczema include the following:  Once triggered, scalp eczema can be made worse by a combination of otherwise normal skin properties.  Naturally occurring oil called sebum, yeast that lives on the skin, and a skin fungus called  Malassezia , all play a role.  Sebum is a waxy, fatty substance that is expelled by the sebaceous glands. Too much of this can cause greasy scales to develop on the scalp. This can then cause the overgrowth of an otherwise normal skin fungus called  Malassezia .  Dandruff occurs when the  Malassezia  fungus irritates the sebaceous glands of the scalp. This triggers the body's immune response and causes the distinctive scaly rash.  In short, dandruff is just one symptom of scalp eczema.  Scalp eczema causes patches of skin to become red, flaky, and itchy. It can also affect other oily areas of the body, such as the face, nose, eyebrows, and eyelids.  This form of eczema can also affect the ear canal. When it does, it may result in the discharge of fluid from the ear.  Scalp eczema can cause the skin to become greasy, waxy, or even blistered. These patches of skin can become infected and will release clear fluid.  The color of the skin can change in the affected area, even after it has healed.  Although scalp eczema cannot be cured, medical treatment can bring relief by removing the scaly buildup and reducing itchiness.  Treatments for scalp eczema usually come in the form of a shampoo or a cream or gel to apply to the scalp.  Shampoos that are most effective against scalp eczema include those that contain one or more of the following ingredients:  In mild cases of scalp eczema, antifungal creams, ointments, or sprays can be effective. Typically, these contain coal tar or corticosteroids that help calm the irritation and stop the flaking.  In more severe cases, a mild corticosteroid can calm the  inflammation . Doctors may prescribe topical corticosteroids to treat an active flare-up marked by redness, itching, and flaking. Corticosteroids are not suitable for use over long periods.  Doctors may also prescribe non-corticosteroid medicine, such as topical drugs that suppress the immune system called calcineurin inhibitors. People can use these for a more extended period than corticosteroids.  In very severe cases, a doctor may prescribe an oral antifungal medication.  Anecdotally, natural remedies have helped relieve the symptoms of scalp eczema in some people. These include the following topical treatments:  The following dietary supplements have been beneficial in some cases:  Scalp eczema can cause extreme discomfort,  anxiety , and infected skin. When any of these things happen, or if scalp eczema persists despite home treatment, it is usually time to see a doctor.  There is no single test for decisively diagnosing scalp eczema. This is because the yeasts and fungus that play a role in scalp eczema occur naturally on the scalp of everyone.  A doctor will aim to rule out other similar skin conditions, such as psoriasis and allergic reactions. They will usually diagnose seborrheic dermatitis after a physical examination of the affected skin.  Some doctors may refer people to a dermatologist, a doctor who specializes in skin conditions.  The doctor may take a skin scraping to determine whether a fungal infection is also present. Rarely, a small sample may be required to rule out the other conditions that resemble scalp eczema.  Flare-ups can be prevented by reducing stress and by avoiding exposure to suspected irritants. Irritants affect people differently, but they can include hair dye, harsh soap, and very hot water.  It can help to keep the scalp clean with a gentle shampoo and warm water. It is a good idea to do this after heavy work or exercise, as sweat can be a trigger in some cases.  Scalp eczema tends to affect babies under the  age of 3 months . It usually clears up completely between the ages of  6 months and 1 year , but it can return during  puberty .  In adults, scalp eczema tends to start during late adolescence. It most often affects adults between the ages of 30 and 60.  In some cases, scalp eczema can clear up without treatment. More often, it lasts for years, and comes and goes without warning. Treatment is often necessary to control the itchy and scaly symptoms.    
 Barak-Shinar, D., Del Río, R., &amp; Green, L. J. (2017, April). Treatment of seborrheic dermatitis using a novel herbal-based cream.  Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology ,  10 (4), 17–23.  Barak-Shinar, D., Del Río, R., &amp; Green, L. J. (2017, April). Treatment of seborrheic dermatitis using a novel herbal-based cream.  Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology ,  10 (4), 17–23.  Dandruff. (2016, August 31).  Kormos, W. (2017, May). What is the best way to treat severe dandruff?  Sasseville, D. (2017, July 6). Cradle cap and seborrheic dermatitis in infants.  Seborrheic dermatitis. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Ingleson, Kanna. "What can be done about eczema on the scalp?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320791.php&gt;    APA  Ingleson, K. (2018, January 31). "What can be done about eczema on the scalp?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  