 It is important to discuss any changes in bowel movements with a healthcare professional. While dietary factors can explain some unusual stools, other types of stool may be a sign of a serious health condition.  Here we talk about sticky poop; its possible causes, treatment, and when to see a doctor.  According to  Dr. Octavio A. Vega , a physician at Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, the ideal stool "...is like a  banana ." Stools should have a soft consistency, round shape, smooth surface, and tapered ends.  Variations in a person's diet may be one reason for alterations in stool consistency.  Experts at  Johns Hopkins  report that black, tarry stools can be caused by iron supplements or medicines that include bismuth, such as Pepto-Bismol.  However, black stools could also signify something more serious, such as an upper gastrointestinal bleed coming from the stomach or small intestine.  Improper digestion due to  celiac disease , a condition involving the pancreas, or an infection can also cause thick and sticky, abnormal looking stools. This type of poop may be hard to flush.  For people who have a problem digesting fats, eating high-fat foods may cause greasy stools. Some examples of high-fat foods include fried foods, fatty cuts of meat, whole milk dairy products, oils, butter, and pastries.  For people with celiac disease, eating gluten can damage the intestines. When this happens, the body has difficulty in absorbing fat. A gluten-free diet is medically necessary for people with this condition.  A healthful diet that includes adequate amounts of fiber from fruits, vegetables, beans, lentils, nuts, seeds, and whole grains, which can all promote gut health. Limiting processed foods, having a regular schedule, exercising, and getting adequate sleep can also help promote healthy bowel movements.  Probiotics or "good" bacteria may be helpful for  diarrhea  that is due to certain causes, but more research is needed.  If you want to buy fiber supplements, then there is an  excellent selection online  with thousands of customer reviews.  In recent years, scientists have expanded their knowledge of how gut health relates to overall health. According to the  National Institutes of Health , "The health of your gut plays a key role in your overall health and well-being."   Stress , genetics, and diet can all affect gut health. Gut bacteria may even have an impact on certain medical conditions, such as allergies,  asthma ,  colon cancer ,  irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS),  obesity ,  rheumatoid arthritis , and  type 2 diabetes .  Experts at  Rush  recommend seeing a doctor if changes in bowel movements persist for more than 1 to 2 weeks, especially in people more than 50 years old. They also advise seeing a doctor if  constipation  or diarrhea lasts longer than a week, as those issues could be a sign of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), IBS, a thyroid problem, or  cancer .  People that experience changes in stool consistency along with other symptoms, such as pain, weight loss, or  fevers , should also see a doctor.  Also, anyone who notices blood in their stool should see a doctor, as it could be a sign of a serious medical condition.  Sticky poop that is not accompanied by other symptoms will probably last for about 1 week.  Unusual poop that might be caused by an underlying condition could last longer than 1 week, be accompanied by other symptoms, contain blood, or have a major change in color.  Complications will vary based on the nature of the medical condition.  When greasy stools are due to fat malabsorption, two primary concerns include weight loss and difficulty absorbing fat-soluble  vitamins . For people who have conditions that impact their pancreas, pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy (PERT) can help with nutrient digestion.  When tarry stools are related to a gastrointestinal bleed, serious complications could include  anemia  and shock. The treatment for a gastrointestinal bleed depends on where the bleed is in the digestive tract, as well as the reason for the bleeding.  In these cases, people should seek medical care right away.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 5 facts about no. 2. (n.d.).  5 facts about no. 2. (n.d.).  5 things your poop can tell you about your health. (n.d.).  Gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. (2016, July).  Keeping your gut in check: Healthy options to stay on tract. (2017, May).  NIH News in Health .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Ware, Megan. "Is sticky poop normal?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320700.php&gt;    APA  Ware, M. (2018, January 23). "Is sticky poop normal?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  