 These patches can occur on the face and neck, hands, feet, back, or chest. Less often, morphea appears on the legs and arms too. Morphea affects less than  3 out of every 100,000 people .  Morphea is usually painless and will disappear on its own, but this may take several years. The condition may return even after it has gone away.  Morphea is considered to be an unusual autoimmune disorder, where the immune system attacks the skin. However, the exact cause of the condition remains unknown.  When morphea occurs, the collagen-producing cells overproduce  collagen , causing it to build up and harden.  This could be as a result of:  Morphea is not a contagious condition and cannot spread from person to person.  The symptoms of morphea differ depending on the stage and severity of the condition.  Common signs and symptoms include:  The appearance of morphea usually only affects the skin and its underlying tissue, although it can also affect the bone.  There are several types of morphea:   Plaque morphea   Plaque morphea usually consists of a few oval lesions that appear on the skin. The lesions are typically painless but may become itchy. Plaque morphea is the most common type of morphea.   Generalized plaque morphea   Generalized plaque morphea is more widespread than plaque morphea. A person with generalized plaque morphea will have more lesions over a greater area of skin. It can also affect deeper tissues, possibly leading to cosmetic disfigurement and lesions joining together.   Pansclerotic morphea   This form of morphea is rare and will require aggressive treatment. Pansclerotic morphea occurs when the lesions cover almost all of the body, except the hands and feet. It progresses quickly, and medical intervention is necessary to try to manage it.   Linear morphea   Linear morphea is usually found on the arms of legs and appears as a single band of thick, discolored skin. The lesions can extend to the tissue under their skin, as well as the muscles, which can lead to deformities.  Sometimes, linear morphea appears as a line on the forehead, which can cause problems with eyesight and alignment of the teeth. This type of morphea is more likely to affect school-aged children.  If a person becomes aware of skin changes, such as hard, thickening, or reddish patches developing, it is essential to seek medical attention as soon as possible.  A doctor may make a referral to a dermatologist (a doctor who specializes in skin conditions). They may also consult a rheumatologist (a doctor who specializes joints, bones, and muscles) before making a diagnosis.  There is no test for morphea, so a diagnosis will usually be made using a physical examination. A biopsy may also be taken to rule out other conditions.  Morphea is more likely to occur in women than in men. Although it can affect adults and children, morphea is usually diagnosed in children between the ages of 2 and 14, or adults in their mid-40s.  Complications of morphea include:  While there is no cure for morphea, there are various treatments which can help stop it spreading, reduce the appearance of lesions on the skin, and control the symptoms until morphea eventually goes away.  Treatment depends on the severity and type of morphea. Some treatment options include:  There are several other precautions a person can take to reduce the time it takes morphea to heal. These include:  In some cases, doctors may prescribe oral medications, such as methotrexate or high-dose steroids.  When lesions threaten joint mobility or disfigurement, doctors may suggest more aggressive treatment, such as:  If a child has head or neck morphea, they may need to make regular visits to an eye doctor.  Morphea is a rare skin condition that will usually only affect the appearance of the skin and will go away without treatment.  However, in more severe cases, morphea can cause mobility issues or deformities.  In children, morphea can cause eye damage and problems with limb growth and movement.  Anyone who suspects they may have morphea should seek medical advice to ensure they get appropriate treatment and recommendations on how to manage the condition.    
 Frequently asked questions. (n.d.).  Frequently asked questions. (n.d.).  Kalus, A. (2015, November). Rheumatologic skin disease [Abstract].  Medical Clinics ,  99 (6), 1287–1303.  Localized scleroderma. (2015, May).  Morphea. (n.d.).  Morphea. (2017, April 13).  Sartori-Valinotti, J. C., Tollefson, M. M., &amp; Reed, A. M. (2013, September 18). Updates on morphea: Role of vascular injury and advances in treatment [Abstract].  Autoimmune Diseases ,  2013 .  Scleroderma. (2016, August 30).  Tolkachjov, S. N., Patel, N. G., &amp; Tollefson, M. M. (2015, April 1). Progressive hemifacial atrophy: A review.  Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases ,  10 (1), 39.  Valančienė, G., Jasaitienė, D., &amp; Valiukevičienė, S. (2010). Pathogenesis and treatment modalities of localized scleroderma.  Medicina (Kaunas) ,  46 (10), 649–656.  Zancanaro, P. C. Q., Isaac, A. R., Garcia, L. T., &amp; Costa, I. M. C. (2009, March–April). Localized scleroderma in children: Clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic aspects.  Anais Brasileiros de Dermatologia ,  84 (2),  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Morphea: Causes, types, and outlook."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320708.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, January 23). "Morphea: Causes, types, and outlook."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  