 Being touched by strangers or without consent can make many people uncomfortable. However, if the fear is intense, appears even when touched by family or friends, and if it causes significant distress, it may be haphephobia.  This condition is different from a hypersensitivity to touch, which is called allodynia. A person with allodynia may also avoid being touched, but they do so because it causes them to feel pain rather than fear.  Fear of being touched is considered a  phobia  when the fear arises almost every time the person is touched, persists for over 6 months, and when it impairs relationships or work life.  The following symptoms may indicate haphephobia:  Children may show the following symptoms when touched:  Doctors refer to the symptoms listed in the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders   ( DSM-5 ) to diagnose phobias, which are anxiety disorders related to specific objects or situations.  Haphephobia may be caused by experiencing or witnessing a traumatic event that involved being touched. A person may not remember the event that triggered the phobia, especially if they were very young at the time.  Phobias can also run in the family. A person can learn a fear of being touched if they observe a loved one expressing fear or avoidance of being touched.  While haphephobia can sometimes occur on its own, it can also be a related to other conditions. These include:  Phobias are relatively common. The National Institute of Mental Health (NIH) estimate that  12.5 percent  of adults in the United States experience a phobia at some point in their lives.  The following factors may make haphephobia more likely:  One of the biggest obstacles in getting over a phobia is avoiding the situation that causes the fear. Treatments aim to help a person cope with the anxiety related to their fear and to overcome their fear gradually.  Effective treatments for phobias include:  There are many types of therapy available to help a person manage or overcome phobias. These include:  Medications such as  beta-blockers  or  antidepressants  can help to alleviate immediate anxiety and panic symptoms. These drugs are often used in combination with psychotherapies.  Breathing exercises and other relaxation techniques are useful for managing anxiety and panic attacks. Focusing on taking long, deep breaths can  reduce the immediate symptoms of anxiety  when a person is touched.  Practicing mindfulness can help a person to understand their thought processes and behaviors and to develop better ways of dealing with anxiety. A  recent review  found that mindfulness is effective for treating and preventing anxiety and depression.  Exercise, taking time to relax and getting enough sleep are powerful ways to promote overall  mental health .  Self-care is often used to reduce anxiety and panic and can also help a person to tackle their phobias.  Specific fears can be extreme, particularly in children, but they often go away without medical treatment.  The fear of being touched is a particularly difficult fear to cope with because of cultural and social expectations around touch.  If this fear persists for over 6 months, leads to an intense avoidance of everyday situations, and gets in the way of personal or work life, a person should contact their doctor.  Specific phobias respond very well to treatment. Using daily coping mechanisms can reduce the impact of a phobia on a person's life and help them overcome the phobia in the long-term.    
 Anxiety disorders. (2016, March).  Anxiety disorders. (2016, March).  Botella, C., Fernández-Álvarez, J., Guillén, V., García-Palacios, A., &amp; Baños, R. (2017, July). Recent progress in virtual reality exposure therapy for phobias: A systematic review.  Current Psychiatry Reports ,  19 (7), 42.  Flamez, B., &amp; Shepard, C. J. (2015, October 5).  Diagnosing and treating children and adolescents: A guide for mental health professionals , 241.  Gotink, R. A., Chu, P., Busschbach, J. J. V., Benson, H., Fricchione, G. L., &amp; Hunink, M. M. (2015, April 16). Standardised mindfulness-based interventions in healthcare: An overview of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of RCTs.  PLOS One ,  10 (4), e0124344.  Hogan, B., &amp; Young, C. (2010, January). Coping with phobias.  Obsessive-compulsive disorder. (2016, January).  Phobias. (2017, March).  Phobias: Treatment. (2016, January 14).  Relaxation techniques. (2017, November 1).  Specific phobias. (n.d.).  Specific phobia. (2017, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Smith, Amy. "Fear of being touched: Causes and treatments for haphephobia."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320763.php&gt;    APA  Smith, A. (2018, January 29). "Fear of being touched: Causes and treatments for haphephobia."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  