 In this article, we look at the reasons for a salpingo-oophorectomy, as well as how to prepare for the surgery and ensure a smooth recovery.  A salpingo-oophorectomy is a surgical procedure, which involves removing a woman's ovaries and fallopian tubes.  A woman can have a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, where both ovaries and fallopian tubes are removed, or a unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, where only one ovary and fallopian tube is removed.  A salpingo-oophorectomy can be performed independently or as part of a total hysterectomy where the uterus is also removed.  This procedure can be performed in a few different ways.  Regardless of which procedure is performed, removing the ovaries will cause a woman to go into  menopause .  After the surgery, a woman may need to take  hormone replacement therapy .  There are many reasons why a woman may need a salpingo-oophorectomy. It can be carried out to treat a disease or to prevent certain types of  cancer  from developing.  Women who know that they are high risk for  ovarian cancer  because of a strong family history may elect to have their ovaries removed once they have had their children.  The removal of the fallopian tubes and ovaries significantly reduces a woman's overall risk of developing this type of cancer; it can also reduce her risk for  breast cancer .  When performing this type of surgery, the surgeon is especially careful to remove all of the affected tissue to prevent cancer from developing.  A salpingo-oophorectomy can be used to treat the following conditions:  Having a salpingo-oophorectomy can be a little overwhelming, and it can help to have an idea of what to expect. Typically, the procedure is performed by a gynecologic oncologist or gynecologic surgical specialist.  Before having the surgery, it is a good idea to make a list of questions for the doctor. It can be helpful to bring paper and a pen to write down the answers.  Some women prefer to bring a friend or family member with them so that they have someone else take notes or also pay attention. A few questions to think about:  The doctor should review and answer all of the questions before surgery and should also discuss the preparations a person may need to make before surgery.  Some people may need preoperative testing, especially if they have other health problems.  Though the doctor will give more specific information, someone having surgery may be required to:  It can also be helpful to prepare a hospital bag with a comfortable robe and socks, lip balm, toiletries, and a book or magazine.  A range of factors can affect the course of recovery, including the type of procedure, whether or not a woman starts hormonal replacement therapy, and the woman's general medical condition.  Typically, the recovery from a laparoscopic or robotic procedure is easier and quicker than open surgery.  A laparoscopic procedure may have a recovery time of about 2 weeks while recovering from an open surgery can take as long as 6 weeks.  There are a variety of things a person can do to make their recovery more comfortable, including:  The doctor should be able to provide additional information about what to expect.  Although a salpingo-oophorectomy is a routine surgery, it is essential to find a surgeon that is both highly qualified and experienced with this type of procedure.  The removal of the fallopian tubes and ovaries can significantly increase survival rate from some cancers and even prevent others from forming.    
 Laparoscopic salpingo-oophorectomy. (n.d.).  Laparoscopic salpingo-oophorectomy. (n.d.).  Laparoscopic salpingo-oophorectomy. (n.d.).  Oophorectomy surgery checklist: How to prepare and suggestions for comfort. (n.d.).  Risk-reducing oophorectomy: Information for patients. (2016, May).  Robotic salpingo-oophorectomy (removal of ovaries and fallopian tubes) for malignant conditions. (n.d.).  Wheeless, C. R., Jr., &amp; Roenneburg, M. L. (n.d.). Salpingo-oophorectomy.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "Salpingo-oophorectomy: Preparation, side effects, and recovery."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320731.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, January 26). "Salpingo-oophorectomy: Preparation, side effects, and recovery."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  