 In medicine, ozone therapy is used to disinfect and treat diseases by limiting the effects of bacteria, viruses, fungi, yeast, and protozoa.  In this article, learn about the uses and benefits of ozone therapy, as well as side effects it may have.  Ozone therapy uses ozone, a colorless gas made up of three oxygen atoms.   Some researchers  believe that ozone has therapeutic effects and the therapy has been studied and used for over 150 years.  A layer of ozone is found in the earth's stratosphere. Its primary purpose is to protect the earth from the sun's ultraviolet radiation, most of which it absorbs.  In medicine, ozone therapy is used to disinfect and treat conditions by disinfecting the area around them, improving the body's intake and use of oxygen, and activating the immune system.  Using a gas as a medical treatment is unusual, so there are special techniques that are employed. Ozone can also be toxic when inhaled.  Ozone therapy has been found to be useful in several ways in medicine. When it was first used  more than 150 years ago , it was to disinfect and treat diseases.  During the First World War, its application to wounds showed not only its ability to disinfect but also to aid blood flow and produce anti-inflammatory effects.  Later, it was found to be a useful treatment for people with  HIV  before pharmaceutical medication was available.  Today it is used for treating the following:  Although ozone is a gas, developments in technology mean it can be used in several forms and different ways, including:  There have been some promising studies examining how ozone may be beneficial to health by:  One review reports that the  effects of ozone therapy  are consistent and safe. However, ozone itself does have dangerous effects.  Exposure to ozone is associated with a  significant increase  in the risk of death from a respiratory disease, and it has  well-known toxic effects  on people's lungs when present with nitrogen dioxide in smog.  Even small amounts of ozone can irritate the lungs and throat, resulting in coughing, shortness of breath, and damage to lung tissue that is more susceptible to infections.  There have been cases where ozone therapy has had adverse effects, some of which were severe. These  reported side effects  include:  These adverse effects are rare and, under normal circumstances, ozone therapy is considered to be safe.  Side effects from ozone therapy can vary depending on what type of treatment someone has undergone.  Ozone should not be inhaled under any circumstance. If it does go into the mouth, nose, or eyes, it can burn and cause coughing, nausea, vomiting, or  headaches . More severe exposure can lead to respiratory complications.  However, other treatment methods can have side effects, too, as outlined by the  American Center for Biological Medicine .  One of the main side effects people having treatment or therapy can have is known as the Herxheimer reaction. This can make the individual have flu-like symptoms and make them feel worse in the short-term.  If ozone therapy is given, using insufflation via the rectum, the person may experience mild discomfort, cramping, and feeling as if they need to pass gas. These side effects are temporary.  Positive side effects include:  There is new research being done on a regular basis into ozone therapy and new developments into its use in medicine.  Anyone who has any questions about ozone therapy and the treatment that is right for them should speak to their doctor.    
 Elvis, A. M., &amp; Ekta, J. S. (2011, January–June). Ozone therapy: A clinical review.  Journal of Natural Science, Biology and Medicine,  2  (1), 66–70.  Elvis, A. M., &amp; Ekta, J. S. (2011, January–June). Ozone therapy: A clinical review.  Journal of Natural Science, Biology and Medicine,  2  (1), 66–70.  Fuccio, C., Luongo, C., Capodanno, P., Giordano, C., Scafuro, M. A., Siniscalco, D., ... Berrino, L. (2009, January 28). A single subcutaneous injection of ozone prevents allodynia and decreases the over-expression of pro-inflammatory caspases in the orbito-frontal cortex of neuropathic mice.  European Journal of Pharmacology,  603  (1–3), 42–49.  Johansson, E., Claesson, R., Van Dijken, J. W. (2009, June). Antibacterial effect of ozone on cariogenic bacterial species.  Journal of Dentistry,  37  (6), 449–453.  Ozone therapy. (n.d.).  Pilkington, K. (2013, September 11). Ozone therapy.  Sagai, M., &amp; Bocci, V. (2011, December 20). Mechanisms of action involved in ozone therapy: Is healing induced via a mild oxidative stress?  Medical Gas Research ,  1 , 29.  Side effects of ozone therapy. (2017, November 7).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "What is ozone therapy? Benefits and risks."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320759.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2018, January 29). "What is ozone therapy? Benefits and risks."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  