 Most of the time, myositis ossificans occurs in the large muscles of the arms or the legs.  Myositis ossificans usually occurs where a person has experienced a single traumatic injury, such as sustaining a hit while playing football or soccer that causes a deep muscle bruise.  It can also happen when there is a repetitive injury to the same area, such as in the thighs of horseback riders. Very rarely, myositis ossificans can occur after a severe muscle strain.  Regardless of the cause, myositis ossificans happens when the body makes an error in the healing process. Muscle cells, also known as fibroblasts, are accidentally replaced by immature bone cells at the site of the injury.  Eventually, this can cause a hard lump or bump to develop within the muscle. This is a gradual process and begins within a few weeks after the initial injury.  It can be hard to predict who will get myositis ossificans, but the condition is more prevalent in active young adults and athletes.  Myositis ossificans occurs in people who participate in sport at all levels, from those who are playing just for fun through to highly competitive or professional athletes.  Also, people who are paralyzed from the waist down are more likely to develop myositis ossificans, even if they do not have a specific injury.  Unlike other typical muscle strains or injuries, people with myositis ossificans may notice that their pain worsens with time instead of getting better.  Someone with this condition may also notice changes in the affected muscle, including:  Before diagnosing myositis ossificans, a doctor will ask about what happened, how long ago it happened, the symptoms, and what steps a person has taken to manage the pain or injury.  If it has been at least 2–3 weeks since the pain or other symptoms started, the doctor may order some imaging tests to look for evidence of bone growth in the soft tissue.  The types of tests that the doctor may use include:  A biopsy of the growth may also be taken and evaluated in a lab.  Sometimes, early diagnostic testing can confuse myositis ossificans with certain types of soft tissue  cancers . As a result, the doctor may order additional testing to confirm the diagnosis.  Myositis ossificans usually resolves on its own. Taking pain relievers, such as naproxen or ibuprofen, can help relieve discomfort.  Other things that a person can do at home include:  After the first 48 to 72 hours, a person can start  physical therapy  to build up strength in the muscle.  Therapy should start with an assisted range of motion exercises — this involves moving the joints slowly and gently in all directions to see how far they will go — and gradually progressing into full dynamic exercise as the muscle regains strength.  If pain relievers, physical therapy, and other home care measures are not effective in treating myositis ossificans, surgical removal of the growth may be needed.  Surgery is usually only used in cases with:  The doctor or surgeon may recommend delaying surgery for a period to reduce the risk that myositis ossificans will reoccur.  While it can be difficult to predict who will get myositis ossificans, it is important to treat every injury promptly using the R.I.C.E. method. This is:  An athlete who sustains an injury may need to leave the game or event, especially if there is significant swelling or bruising.  Gentle stretching and range of motion exercises are also essential after an injury; myositis ossificans is more likely to affect a muscle that is not being used.  If the symptoms do not resolve on their own or with proper home care, it is important to see a doctor.  The outlook for someone with myositis ossificans is good. The condition usually resolves with home care, though some people will have stiffness or discomfort for up to a year after the initial injury.  It is important to rest after an injury and follow a treatment plan recommended by a doctor or physical therapist.  Someone with myositis ossificans should make sure they follow all instructions about activity, stretching, and other exercises to ensure they do not injure the limb further.    
 Abnormal bone tissue growth in muscles. (2013, May).  Abnormal bone tissue growth in muscles. (2013, May).  Lacout, A., Jarraya, M., Marcy, P.-Y., Thariat, J., &amp; Carlier, R. Y. (2012, January–March). Myositis ossificans imaging: Keys to successful diagnosis.  The Indian Journal of Radiology &amp; Imaging ,  22 (1), 35–39.  Murphy, A., &amp; Farooq, S. (n.d.). Myositis ossificans.  Parizhskaya, M., Cohen, L., &amp; Dickman, P. S. (n.d.). Final diagnosis — Myositis ossificans.  Walczak, B. E., Johnson, C. N., &amp; Howe, B. M. (2015, October). Myositis ossificans [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons ,  23 (10), 612–622.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "Myositis ossificans: Symptoms and treatment."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320718.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, January 25). "Myositis ossificans: Symptoms and treatment."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  