 The thyroid is a small gland in the throat that secretes hormones. These hormones affect a person's metabolism, body temperature, and growth. They also affect the way a child's brain develops.  When a person has a problem with their thyroid, it can affect both their physical and  mental health . This article explores  yoga  as a complementary therapy for thyroid problems.  Yoga is an exercise that helps reduce a person's  stress  levels. A  2017 study  found that yoga reduces the symptoms of stress and improves overall well-being.  Stress is often associated with thyroid problems. For this reason, yoga may be beneficial for thyroid health.  There are a variety of conditions that affect the thyroid. Two of the most common conditions are:  Some evidence also exists that supports a more direct link between yoga and improved thyroid function.  A  small study  conducted in 2014 found that yoga improved thyroid function. However, the study noted that further studies with more participants were needed to draw firm conclusions.  A  2016 study  found that 6 months of yoga practice helped to improve  cholesterol  levels and levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). This reduced the need for thyroid replacement therapy in women suffering from  hypothyroidism .  The following yoga poses focus on stimulating the throat. They are thought to improve circulation, as well as stretch and strengthen the neck where the thyroid is located.  It is important to only stay in yoga poses for as long as feels comfortable. Beginners can try one or two poses and build on this each time they practice.  Each of the below yoga poses is easy to try at home with a yoga mat.  The supported shoulder stand pose involves being upside down, which is known in yoga as an inversion.  Inversions help increased blood flow to the throat.  Yoga researchers  believe this helps to stimulate the thyroid.  The Sanskrit name for this pose is Sarvangasana.  To do a supported shoulder stand, a person should:  The Plow Pose is also believed to stimulate the thyroid.  The Sanskrit name for this pose is Halasana.  To do the Plow Pose, a person should begin in the same way as for a shoulder stand.  Rather than holding the legs up in a straight line from the shoulders, they should:  The Plow is a safe pose, but it may feel uncomfortable for people who are overweight or women with larger breasts.  If a person feels like the Plow Pose makes breathing difficult, they should slowly come out of the position.  The Fish Pose is an excellent pose to do after a shoulder stand or Plow, as it stretches the body in the opposite direction. In yoga, people refer to this as a counter pose.  The Sanskrit name for this pose is Matsyasana.  The Fish Pose is straightforward to perform and is perfect for beginners.  To do the Fish Pose, a person should:  The Bridge Pose is good for strengthening the back. It may also help promote thyroid health.  The Sanskrit name for this pose is Setu Bandha Sarvangasana.  To do the Bridge Pose, a person should:  The Cobra Pose gently stimulates the throat and thyroid.  The Sanskrit name for this pose is Bhujangasana.  To do this pose, a person should:  The Boat Pose is good for strengthening the core. It also stimulates the throat and may be beneficial for the thyroid.  The Sanskrit name for this pose is Navasana.  To do this pose, a person should:  The Upward Bow Pose, which is sometimes referred to as the Wheel Pose, provides energy by stretching the chest and lungs.  The Upward Bow also stimulates the thyroid and pituitary glands and strengthens the arms, legs, and spine.  The Sanskrit name for this pose is Urdhva Dhanurasana.  To do this pose, a person should:  The Supported Headstand Pose is one of the most advanced yoga positions, and acts directly on the thyroid glands.  The pose helps blood flow to the heart as well as stimulating the brain's pituitary and pineal glands, which helps to relieve stress.  The pose should not be attempted without prior yoga experience and should be performed under the supervision of an experienced teacher on the first attempt.  The Sanskrit name for this pose is Sirshasana,  To do this pose a person should:  The signs of hyperthyroidism, which is an overproduction of thyroid hormones, include:  Hypothyroidism means that the thyroid does not produce enough thyroid hormones. The signs of hypothyroidism:  If a person suspects they may have a problem with their thyroid, they should speak to their doctor.  A doctor can help to diagnose hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism and recommend appropriate treatments.  It is important to remember that yoga is a complementary therapy. It can be undertaken alongside other treatments recommended by a doctor, but cannot replace them.    
 Cahn, B. R., Goodman, M. S., Peterson, C. T., Maturi, R., &amp; Mills, P. J. (2017, June 26). Yoga, meditation and mind-body health: Increased BDNF, cortisol awakening response, and altered inflammatory market expression and after a 3-month yoga and meditation retreat.  Frontiers in Human Neuroscience .  Cahn, B. R., Goodman, M. S., Peterson, C. T., Maturi, R., &amp; Mills, P. J. (2017, June 26). Yoga, meditation and mind-body health: Increased BDNF, cortisol awakening response, and altered inflammatory market expression and after a 3-month yoga and meditation retreat.  Frontiers in Human Neuroscience .  Pajai, M. S., &amp; Pajai, S. V. (2014, April 7). Role of yoga in prevention of hypothyroidism.  Journal of Pharmaceutical and Scientific Innovation ,  3 (2).  Nilakanthan, S., Metri, K., Raghuram, N., &amp; Hongasandra, N. (2016, June 1). Effect of 6 months intense Yoga practice on lipid profile, thyroxine medication and serum TSH level in women suffering from hypothyroidism: A pilot study.  Journal of Complementary and Integrated Medicine ,  13 (2), 189–193.  Sharma, K., Udayakumara, K., Prasada, T., &amp; Mahabala, P. (2014, July). The effect of yogic practices on thyroid functions.  Yogic Science ,  4 (7), 526–527.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Yoga poses for thyroid conditions."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320744.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, January 27). "Yoga poses for thyroid conditions."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  