 As the blood circulates, it delivers oxygen and nutrients to the body's cells and takes away waste products.  This article discusses six ways to improve circulation that are supported by scientific evidence.  If a person wants to improve their circulation, there are some obvious places to start. These include:  In addition, trying one or more of the following may help improve circulation:  Maintaining a healthy weight helps promote good circulation. If a person is overweight, it may negatively affect their circulation.  A  2009 study  found that losing weight improved circulation for women who were overweight. The participants increased their levels of a protein called adiponectin that is associated with vascular function.  Regular cardiovascular exercise, such as jogging, supports the health of the circulatory system and improves circulation.  A  2003 review  noted that exercise improves the body's ability to take in and use oxygen. It also improves the capacity of blood vessels to dilate, which helps them work more efficiently, allowing the muscles to receive oxygen more easily.  These benefits of exercise improve circulation and mean that daily activities may be less tiring.   Yoga  is a low-impact exercise that is easy to modify for beginners. It involves bending, stretching, and twisting. These movements can help to compress and decompress a person's veins, which may improve circulation.  A  2014 review  of evidence published in the  European Journal of Preventive Cardiology  found yoga was beneficial for the cardiovascular system and a person's metabolism.  A simple yoga position for beginners to try is the downward-facing dog. This helps improve circulation as it puts the hips and heart above the head, allowing gravity to increase blood flow towards the head.  To do the downward-facing dog, a person should:  The  omega-3  fatty acids in oily fish promote cardiovascular health and improve circulation, according to this  2013 study .  Oily fish include:  For those who are vegetarian or vegan,  kale  contains a small amount of omega-3 fatty acid.  Supplements containing omega-3 fatty acids are another option for people who do not eat fish. A range of omega-3 supplements is available for purchase in health food stores, pharmacies, and  online .  The  antioxidants  in tea promote cardiovascular health and may improve circulation. This is true for both black tea and  green tea .  A  2001 study , published in the journal  Circulation , found that black tea improves blood vessel health. Healthy blood vessels help improve circulation.   Another study  found that green tea consumption is associated with a lower rate of  coronary artery disease .  A range of teas is available for purchase online, including  black tea  and  green tea .  Iron is an essential mineral for the circulatory system. It is required to make hemoglobin, one of the major components of red blood cells, which is needed to carry oxygen.  Eating foods rich in iron, such as red meat or spinach, helps the body maintain this essential mineral. However, maintaining a healthful balance is necessary as well.  Too much iron may negatively affect cardiovascular health. A  2013 study  found a link between having too much iron in the body and cardiovascular disease in people with high  cholesterol  and higher waist circumference measurements.  Iron supplements are available for  purchase online .  The health of a person's circulatory system determines how well the blood circulates through their body. The factors that affect this include:   Blood pressure    Blood pressure  is the pressure of the blood on the walls of the blood vessels as it circulates. Blood pressure is measured by "systolic" pressure over "diastolic" pressure.  Systolic pressure is the pressure on the blood vessel wall during the heartbeat when the lower chambers of the heart are pumping blood forward.  Diastolic pressure is the pressure on the blood vessel wall when the lower chambers of the heart are at rest and filling with blood.  According to the  American Heart Association , a normal resting blood pressure in an adult is no more than 120 millimeters (mm) of mercury (Hg) systolic and no more than 80 mm for diastolic. This is abbreviated to 120/80 mmHg.  People with very low blood pressure may experience poor circulation and other related symptoms. However, having a lower blood pressure measurement is not usually a cause for concern in people with a healthy cardiovascular system.   Blood health   The blood carries oxygen and nutrients and removes waste and does these jobs best when it is healthy.  Healthy blood has the right levels of normal red blood cells, which carry oxygen, white blood cells, and platelets. These components are all made in the  bone marrow .   Heart health   The heart is the muscle responsible for pumping a person's blood around their body. The stronger and healthier a person's heart is, the better their circulation.   Blood vessel health   Having healthy veins and arteries makes it easier for the blood to pass through them. If a person's lipid or fat or their cholesterol levels are too high or low, the blood vessels can become injured and blocked.   Other causes   Poor circulation may be a symptom of other underlying health conditions. These include:  Exercise and other measures to promote cardiovascular health may reduce poor circulation caused by these conditions.  If blood flow is reduced to a certain part of a person's body, they may experience the signs and symptoms of poor circulation.  The following symptoms mainly occur in the arms or legs. They include:  If a person experiences the symptoms of poor circulation, it is important that they speak to a doctor. A doctor can help diagnose what might be the problem and suggest treatment for any underlying conditions.  In addition, they may suggest eating a healthful diet, exercising regularly, and  quitting smoking  to improve circulation.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Coppola, A., Marfella, R., Coppola, L., Tagliamonte, E., Fontana, D., Liguori, E., … Astarita, C. (2009, May 29). Effect of weight loss on coronary circulation and adiponectin levels in obese women.  International Journal of Cardiology ,  134 (3), 414–416.  Coppola, A., Marfella, R., Coppola, L., Tagliamonte, E., Fontana, D., Liguori, E., … Astarita, C. (2009, May 29). Effect of weight loss on coronary circulation and adiponectin levels in obese women.  International Journal of Cardiology ,  134 (3), 414–416.  Chu, P., Gotink, R. A., Yeh, G. Y., Goldie, S. J., &amp; Hunink, M. G. M. (2014, December 15). The effectiveness of yoga in modifying risk factors for cardiovascular disease and metabolic syndrome: A systemic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.  European Journal of Preventive Cardiology ,  23 (3), 291–307.  Downward facing dog pose. (2016, June 21).  Duffy, S. J., Keaney Jr, J. F., Holbrook, M., Gokce, N., Swerdloff, P. L., Frei, B., … Vita, J. A. (2001, July 10). Short- and long-term black tea consumption reverses endothelial dysfunction in patients with coronary artery disease.  Circulation ,  104 , 151–156.  Eftekhari, M. H., Mozaffari-Khosravi, H., Shidfar, F., &amp; Zamani, A. (2013, August). Relation between body iron status and cardiovascular risk factors in patients with cardiovascular disease.  International Journal of Preventive Medicine ,  4 (8), 911–916.  Myers, J. (2003, January 7). Exercise and cardiovascular health.  Circulation ,  107 , e2–e5.  Peter, S., Chopra, S., &amp; Jacob, J. J. (2013, May–June). A fish a day, keeps the cardiologist away! – A review of the effect of omega-3 fatty acids in the cardiovascular system.  Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism ,  17 (3), 422–429.  Sano, J., Inami, S., Seimiya, K., Ohba, T., Sakai, S., Takano, T., … Mizuno, K. (2004, July). Effects of green tea intake on the development of coronary artery disease.  Circulation Journal ,  68 (7), 665–670. Retrieve from  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15226633   What is high blood pressure? (2017).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "How to improve circulation."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320793.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, January 31). "How to improve circulation."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  