 Skin affected by  eczema  may produce less fat and oil than healthy skin. If this occurs, the skin will hold less water in, causing gaps to open up between the skin cells. These gaps allow bacteria and irritants to penetrate more easily and cause problems.  There is some debate about whether the condition is separate from eczema that occurs in other parts of the body. One  2013 article , for example, argues that it should be classified separately.  Scrotal eczema shares some of the same symptoms as eczema found elsewhere on the body. In this article, we look at these symptoms, along with steps to help treat and manage the condition.  Scrotal eczema can sometimes be mistaken for other skin conditions, including fungal (yeast) infections.  For this reason, it is essential that anyone experiencing symptoms should see a skin specialist to ensure an accurate diagnosis.  In mild cases of eczema, the affected skin will be red, itchy, dry, and scaly.  More severe cases can include bleeding, crusting, and weeping of sores. Scratching of the itchy skin can also open up sores, which are at risk of infection.  A skin specialist will be able to judge the seriousness of the condition, identify the potential contributing triggers, and diagnose the underlying type of eczema.  The 2013 review  lists  four potentially useful classification categories for scrotal eczema:   Type 1 — mild, acute, dry   The skin appears reddened and irritated, with a clear visual difference between the healthy and affected skin. The affected skin will itch severely and sting.  Mild, acute, dry eczema may last a few days or weeks, and the symptoms may clear up on their own.   Type 2 — severe, chronic, dry   The scrotum appears scaly, and either bright red or unusually pale with a scaly appearance. The thighs and skin under the penis may also be affected.  The burning and itching sensation is more severe in this type of scrotal eczema than in the mild, acute, dry type.   Type 3 — chronic, wet   The whole scrotum and inner sides of the thighs appear soft and moist, with fluid oozing from the area.  Blood vessels can seem to stick out in a "spider vein" pattern, and a bad smell and painful sores are common.   Type 4 — swollen, ulcers   The skin of the scrotum is swollen, with fluid and  pus  oozing from open wounds and ulcers that smell bad. This stage is extremely painful.  In extreme cases,  gangrene  sets in and spreads to the legs and lower abdomen.  Scrotal eczema is not always a stand-alone condition.  For example, a  2007 study  identified two cases of apparent scrotal eczema that were in fact forms of  syphilis . The researchers noted that they were not aware of any such presentations before these two cases.  Researchers have  also noted  that extramammary  Paget's disease  of the scrotum — a rare but serious condition — is often mistaken for eczema and requires proper medical screening to identify.  Doctors may also mistake scrotal eczema for common fungal yeast infections. These conditions also cause itching and irritation around the groin, but they require different treatments.  Due to shared symptoms with these conditions, it is important for people to see a doctor for an accurate diagnosis.  There are various proposed causes and risk factors for scrotal dermatitis. These include the following:  Specific genes may also make people more prone to eczema. A  2017 study  found a link between the genes that cause  asthma ,  hay fever , and eczema.  The primary treatment for scrotal eczema is to remove the sources of the irritation. This could mean wearing loose clothing, immediately stopping the use of any offending over-the-counter medication, and having counseling to deal with  stress .  A doctor may also prescribe steroid creams, antihistamines, and moisturizers.  Research  has been conducted to find out which options are most effective.   Other studies  have also found that ultraviolet (UV) ray therapy is effective in treating moderate to severe cases of eczema.  Preventing scrotal eczema is mainly a matter of avoiding the different risk factors and sources of irritation that can trigger a flare-up.  Steps to take include:  Keeping the groin clean is crucial. People should dry the area thoroughly but gently after each wash to help prevent or manage the issue if eczema has developed.  It is essential that people with scrotal eczema avoid scratching their testicles.  If someone is using steroid cream to treat their eczema, they should wait until the cream is thoroughly dry before having sex. Some condoms and spermicides may irritate the skin. If these do cause a problem, a doctor can suggest an alternative to use.  People should visit their doctor if they experience any signs of irritation. Doing so can help to avoid a worsening of eczema symptoms, and this could also uncover an underlying related medical condition.  Scrotal eczema, like eczema found elsewhere on the body, tends to be triggered by various irritants coming into contact with the skin.  Irritants can include heat and humidity, over-the-counter products that cause irritation or an allergic reaction, and contraceptives, such as condoms.  Some researchers think that there is a genetic reason for eczema. If someone develops problems with eczema, it is likely that they will experience multiple episodes in the future if they reintroduce any of the irritants that cause eczema.  Often, people can treat mild forms of scrotal eczema with a mild, topical steroid cream. Sometimes, however, the symptoms can disappear on their own once irritants are removed.  More severe cases will require a doctor to prescribe medicine and treatments, including specific steroids, antihistamines, moisturizers, and possibly UV ray therapy.  Scrotal eczema may progress from mild to more serious stages quickly if it is not dealt with appropriately. Scrotal eczema may also be a symptom of a more serious underlying health condition. People should arrange to see a doctor as soon as they notice symptoms appearing.    
 Ferreira, M. A., Vonk, J. M., Baurecht, H., Marenholz, I., Tian, C., Hoffman, J. D., … Paternoster, L. (2017, October 30). Shared genetic origin of asthma, hay fever and eczema elucidates allergic disease biology [Abstract].  Nature Genetics , 49 , 1752–1757.  Ferreira, M. A., Vonk, J. M., Baurecht, H., Marenholz, I., Tian, C., Hoffman, J. D., … Paternoster, L. (2017, October 30). Shared genetic origin of asthma, hay fever and eczema elucidates allergic disease biology [Abstract].  Nature Genetics , 49 , 1752–1757.  Jeong, E., Oh, S. T., Lee, J. Y., &amp; Cho, B.K. (2007, December). Secondary syphilis presenting as scrotal eczema.  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  57 (6), 1099–1101.  Juang, G.-D., Lin, M.-Y., &amp; Hwang, T. I.-S. (2011, July). Extramammary Paget's disease of the scrotum.  Journal of the Chinese Medical Association ,  74 (7), 325–328.  Krishnan, A., &amp; Kar, S. (2013, September). Scrotal dermatitis — can we consider it as a separate entity?  Oman Medical Journal ,  28 (5), 302–305.  Majoie, L. I. M., Oldhoff, J. M., van Weelden, H., Laaper-Ertmann, M., Bousema, M. T., Sigurdsson, V., … de Bruin-Weller, M. S. (2009, January). Narrowband ultraviolet B and medium-dose ultraviolet A1 are equally effective in the treatment of moderate to severe atopic dermatitis.  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  60 (1), 77–84.  Ridd, M. J., Redmond, N. M., Hollinghurst, S., Ball, N., Shaw, L., Guy, R., … Purdy, S. (2015, July 15). Choice of moisturiser for eczema treatment (COMET): Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial.  Trials ,  16 , 304.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Wessels, Dan. "What is scrotal eczema?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320771.php&gt;    APA  Wessels, D. (2018, January 30). "What is scrotal eczema?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  