 There are two types of pores. One releases the body's natural oil, called sebum; the other releases sweat. Sometimes the oil-releasing pores may appear enlarged.  It is not possible to get rid of large pores, but there are ways to reduce their appearance. This article explores how to make large pores less visible. It also discusses how to promote skin health and what further treatments are available.  Every person's skin is covered in tiny hairs, apart from on the palms of their hands and feet. Each hair follicle has a pore at the top of it.  The hair follicle has a gland inside it that produces oil. This is called the sebaceous gland. When the sebaceous gland releases oil, the oil rises to the top of the skin and collects in the pore.  According to this  2016 study , the primary causes of enlarged pores are:  When oil collects in the pore and combines with dirt or makeup, the pore can become blocked. This stretches the pore, making it look bigger than it is. If the pore remains clogged, a  pimple  may develop.  How active a person's sebaceous glands are, depends on their genes. It also depends on the size of their pores.  Having large pores is not a health concern. As this  2015 study  explains, pore size is purely an aesthetic consideration.  It may not be possible to get rid of large pores, but most people can reduce their appearance. The best way to do this is to ensure their skin stays supple and their pores remain unclogged.  Here are eight effective ways to reduce the appearance of pores:  If a person has oily skin, they should ensure they use products that are water-based. Using water-based products avoids extra oil getting into the pores.  A person with oily skin and large pores should avoid oil-based products. These may lead to excess oil on the skin, making pores appear larger.  Washing the face is basic skin care. But with so many products available, a person may forget just to use warm water and a cleanser.  Having a good face washing habit is essential. Washing the face every morning and evening helps to wash away oil and dirt from the pores, which helps to reduce their appearance.  If a person has oily skin and wants to reduce the appearance of their pores, they should choose a gel-based cleanser.  A moisturizing cleanser may leave residue in the pores and increase oiliness. A gel-based cleanser helps to clear oil from the pores, reducing their appearance. Various products are available for  purchase online .  A person with oily skin should exfoliate once or twice a week. Exfoliating helps to remove things from the pores that can block them. This includes:  Look for exfoliating products containing salicylic acid, which is a natural acid that helps to release debris from the pores.  It is important not to exfoliate more than twice a week, however. Exfoliating too frequently with products that contain salicylic acid or alcohol can dry out the skin.  Although exfoliation keeps the pores unclogged, they can look bigger if the skin becomes too dry.  A range of exfoliating products, including manual exfoliators and scrubs, is available for  purchase online .  The idea of moisturizing oily skin may be counterintuitive. However, it can help to reduce pore enlargement.  Although moisturizing cleansers may clog the pores, in contrast, moisturizing lotions used after washing and patting the skin dry are beneficial.  This is because moisturizers hydrate and soften the skin. This allows the sebum to penetrate deeper into the skin, rather than sit in the pores on the surface.  In this way, moisturizing prevents pores becoming clogged with oil, reducing their appearance.  Using a clay mask once or twice a week can help to remove oil from the pores. This can prevent them from becoming enlarged, and reduce their appearance.  However, it is a good idea to do this on a different day to exfoliating. Over-treating the skin may cause irritation. When the skin gets irritated, pores may appear enlarged and blemishes may occur.  Compare clay mask products  online .  It is essential to always remove makeup before going to sleep.  Sleeping with makeup on overnight can lead to a person's pores becoming blocked. This is because makeup, oil, and bacteria build up in the pores.  Using cleansing wipes is a quick way to remove makeup if a person is short on time. Look for makeup remover  online .  It is crucial to care for skin in the sun. If a person's skin becomes sun damaged, this can be very drying. When the skin is dry, pores may appear larger.  Keeping the skin protected from the sun keeps it supple. The best ways to do this are:  A range of sunscreens is available for  purchase online .  The home treatments explored above are good ways to reduce the appearance of pores. But the following can promote the health of a person's skin:  Always rinse the skin after exercise. Although sweating is beneficial for the skin, leaving it on the surface may cause further pore clogging.  If a person has ongoing problems with their skin, such as  acne , they should speak to their doctor.  A doctor can refer them to a dermatologist or other skin specialist, who can recommend an appropriate treatment.  There are several treatments available for acne and enlarged pores. These include:  If a person is interested in these treatments, they should speak to their doctor.  The home remedies listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Flament, F., Francois, G., Qiu, H., Ye, C., Hanaya, T., Batisse, D., … Bazin, R. (2015, February 16). Facial skin pores: a multiethnic study.  Clinical, Comestic and Investigational Dermatology ,  8 . 85–93.  Flament, F., Francois, G., Qiu, H., Ye, C., Hanaya, T., Batisse, D., … Bazin, R. (2015, February 16). Facial skin pores: a multiethnic study.  Clinical, Comestic and Investigational Dermatology ,  8 . 85–93.  Lee, S. J., Seok, J., Jeong, S. Y., Park, K. Y., Li, K., &amp; Seo, S. J. (2016, March). Facial pores: Definition, causes, and treatment options [Abstract].  Dermatologic Surgery ,  42 (3), 277–285.  Schittek, B., Hipfel, R., Sauer, B., Bauer, J., Kalbacher, H., Stevanovic, S., ... Garbe, C. (2001, December). Dermcidin: a novel human antibiotic peptide secreted by sweat glands [Abstract].  Nature Immunology ,  2 (12), 1133–1137.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What are the best ways to get rid of large pores?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320775.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, January 30). "What are the best ways to get rid of large pores?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  