 The tragus is a favorite place to get an ear piercing, and while it can look great, this type of piercing can easily become infected if it is not cared for properly.  Tragus is also the name of the hair that grows in the ears.  Any piercing results in an open wound, which can take around 6 to 8 weeks to heal.  However, cartilage piercings, such as the tragus, can take much longer.  Many of the symptoms of infection appear as a result of the body's natural defense system trying to fight it off.  There are many reasons why an infection might develop:  A person who has had their tragus pierced should keep an eye out for the signs and symptoms of an infection so that it can be treated and managed. To identify an infection, a person needs to know what to expect after a tragus piercing.  For around 2 weeks, it is typical to experience:  These are all typical symptoms of the body beginning to heal the wound. Although it can sometimes take around 8 weeks for the wound to fully heal, these symptoms should not last more than 2 weeks.  Infection may be present if a person experiences:  If anyone suspects that they may have an infection, they should talk to a healthcare professional.  Some infections may require a prescription from a doctor. Common treatment options are:  Once treated, piercings typically heal fully.  Make sure that the piercing studio is reputable, licensed and follows good hygiene practices.  Only touch your piercing when necessary after thoroughly washing hands with antibacterial soap. Do not remove or change the jewelry until the piercing has fully healed.  Clean the piercing regularly using a saline solution. Most piercers will provide information on how to properly clean the piercing after they have done it.  Products that may irritate the piercing wound include:  Also, avoid the following ointments, which can create a barrier over the wound site, preventing proper air circulation:  A warm compress can be very soothing on a new piercing and can help reduce redness and swelling and encourage the wound to heal faster. A clean towel soaked in warm water can be helpful.  Alternatively, making a warm compress from chamomile tea bags can be very effective.  Applying a mild antibacterial cream can help kill off the bacteria that cause infection.  Make sure to change bed sheets regularly. This will reduce the number of bacteria that can come into contact with the ear while sleeping. Try to sleep on the side that is not pierced, so the wound does not press into sheets and pillows.  Keep hair tied back so it cannot get caught in the piercing and be careful when dressing or brushing hair.  Baths, swimming pools, and even long showers can all increase the risk of infection.  While the wound is healing it is best to avoid drugs, alcohol and smoking all of which can increase the healing time. Paying close attention to personal hygiene and following good hygiene practices will also minimize the risk of infection and help the piercing to heal faster.  Most ear piercing infections can be treated if caught early and properly managed. However, if left untreated, it is possible for an infection to become severe and enter the bloodstream. Infections near the head and brain can be particularly dangerous.   Sepsis  is a potentially deadly condition that must be treated quickly.  Symptoms of sepsis and septic shock include:  If any of the above symptoms occur after having a tragus piercing, seek medical attention immediately.    
 Avoiding infection after ear piercing. (2007, June 1).  Avoiding infection after ear piercing. (2007, June 1).  Body piercing. (2017, January 9).  Body piercing. (2017, June).  Body piercings: Cleaning and healing. (n.d.).  Body piercing statistics. (2017, March 17).  Drexler, M. (2010). What you need to know about infectious disease. Washington DC: National Academies Press (US). Available from  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK209710/   Ear and face piercing aftercare. (2013, June).  Meltzer, D. I. (2005, November 15). Complications of body piercing.  American Family Physician ,  72 (10), 2029–2034.  Pierced ears. (2014, September).  Sepsis. (2016, February 24).  Suggested aftercare guidelines for body piercings. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "How to prevent a tragus piercing becoming infected."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320799.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, February 1). "How to prevent a tragus piercing becoming infected."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  