 Dermarolling or microneedling is a process that was originally carried out by a dermatologist. Nowadays, it is also commonly done at home with little training. It has gained popularity in recent years as an accessible, effective, and relatively non-invasive skin treatment.  This article explores how dermarollers work and how to use one. It also offers tips for getting the best results.  A dermaroller is a skin care device. On one end is a handle and on the other is a roller with lots of small, fine needles on its surface.  As this  2009 review  explains, dermarollers were invented through a series of discoveries. Two independent studies in the 1990s explored the use of needles to treat scar tissue. But it was not until 2005 that the  first study  reported the use of a dermaroller.  There are a number of different brands of dermaroller available, and they are considered to be relatively inexpensive.  It is important to purchase one from a trusted retailer and to make sure that it is sterile before it is used.  When the dermaroller is rolled over the skin, the small, fine needles on the roller puncture the skin.  The holes that the needles create in the skin are tiny and considered to be superficial. For this reason, the treatment is not seen as invasive.  When the skin is punctured, this creates a controlled skin injury. It does not cause actual damage to the outer layer of skin. The needles help to break down any scar tissue.  As this  2016 study  of the technique explains, the controlled injuries to the skin lead to superficial bleeding. This triggers the body's wound healing response, and the following occurs:  Over the next 5 days, the collagen produced by the body is deposited in the area of treated skin. This helps the skin to become firmer and may reduce the appearance of fine wrinkles.  Research has found that skin treated with four microneedling sessions, 1 month apart, could lead to a  400 percent  increase in collagen.  Dermarolling was originally used by dermatologists as a way of boosting collagen production for treating facial scars and skin rejuvenation.  It is now also used as a way to deliver therapeutic drugs and vaccines through the skin.  In addition, it has gained popularity as a home treatment to improve the appearance of the skin. Many people use it to try to combat the signs of aging, such as:  Some people also use it to try to reduce pore size or reduce the production of an oil called sebum if their skin is oily. Others try dermarollers to try to improve the appearance of stretch marks.  If using a dermaroller at home, a person should follow the steps described here:  When using the dermaroller on the face, a person should treat five sections of the face in turn. These sections are:  After using the dermaroller, a person can apply serums or moisturizers to their skin. The treatment is often used as a delivery system to maximize the effects of these lotions.  It is thought that these applications are absorbed much more easily and deeply by skin treated by a dermaroller than untreated skin.  People should avoid a dermaroller if they have a history of blood-clotting problems, or are using accutane or other medical treatments.  Dermarollers should not be used on areas of skin that have  eczema ,  sunburn , or  cold sores . Anywhere there are moles, skin  inflammation , or  rosacea  should also be avoided.  Trying the following tips and best practices may help to improve a person's dermarolling results:  As dermarolling involves needles that pierce the skin, using equipment that is not well made is a health risk.  When  selecting a dermaroller online  or in the store, it is essential to buy from a trusted retailer.  There are different medical dermarollers available for other uses by dermatologists. These have varying needle lengths. These devices are not available to the public, however, and may be dangerous to use a home.  Home care dermarollers have a needle length of less than 0.15 millimeters.  The following products offer a similar sort of treatment to dermarollers:  Dermarolling is also known as microneedling. Home dermarollers are very similar to the ones that dermatologists use but have slightly smaller needles.  Using a dermaroller at home may be a safe, simple, and cheap treatment for:  Although dermarolling can be done at home, it is a good idea to speak with a dermatologist or doctor about any ongoing skin concerns.  If a person wants to try dermarolling, they should purchase a dermaroller from a trusted retailer.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Doddaballapur, S. (2009, July–December). Microneedling with dermaroller.  Journal of Cutaneous and Aesthetic Surgery ,  2 (2), 110–111.  Doddaballapur, S. (2009, July–December). Microneedling with dermaroller.  Journal of Cutaneous and Aesthetic Surgery ,  2 (2), 110–111.  Fernandes, D. (2005, February). Minimally invasive percutaneous collagen induction [Abstract].  Oral &amp; Maxillofacial Surgery Clinics of North America ,  17 (1), 51–63.  Harris, A. G., Naidoo, C., &amp; Murrell, D. F. (2015, June). Skin needling as a treatment for acne and scarring: An up-to-date review of the literature.  International Journal of Women's Dermatology ,  1 (2), 77–81.  Singh, A., &amp; Yadav, S. (2016, July–August). Microneedling: Advances and widening horizons.  Indian Dermatology Online Journal ,  7 (4), 244–254.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "How do dermarollers work?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320776.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, January 30). "How do dermarollers work?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  