 Seborrheic keratosis is a noncancerous condition that can look a lot like  melanoma . About  83 million Americans  have seborrheic keratosis.  About  5 percent  of all new  cancer  cases in the United States are melanoma, a potentially deadly form of  skin cancer . With prompt treatment, more than 91 percent of melanoma patients will survive 5 years or more after their first diagnosis.  Seborrheic keratoses are harmless skin growths that often appear as the skin ages. Some people have just one, but it is common to develop several. Seborrheic keratosis  is not a risk factor  for skin cancer or a form of precancer.  Seborrheic keratoses are often brown and patchy and can appear anywhere on the body. The growths may look waxy as if they are painted onto the body. Some people initially mistake them for unusual-looking scabs.  Seborrheic keratoses do not typically cause symptoms, but some people dislike the way they look.  Occasionally, they become inflamed or irritated, causing pain and itching. An injury to a seborrheic keratosis can cause an infection.  Melanoma is a type of skin cancer that can begin as a mole or wart. It  kills more people than any other form of skin cancer  and can spread to other areas of the body.  On some people, a melanoma may look like seborrheic keratosis. People with a history of seborrheic keratosis might not notice melanoma in its early stages if they are accustomed to unusual skin growths.  Melanoma and seborrheic keratoses are not easy to distinguish, but a dermatologist may be able to tell the difference based on a physical examination. In some cases, however, it is necessary to take a biopsy of the growth to check for cancer under a microscope.  Doctors do not know what causes seborrheic keratosis, or whether it is possible to reduce the risk of developing these skin growths.  The growths are not contagious and do not spread from contact with others. Some people notice that the growths tend to spread on their skin over time.  The primary risk factor appears to be age.  Some research  suggests that exposure to sunlight may increase the chances of developing seborrheic keratosis.  Other risk factors include:  Over time, ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun or tanning beds can change the way the skin behaves. This can lead to cancer, including melanoma.  While sun exposure is  one of the most significant risk factors for melanoma , other factors also play a role.  Risk factors for melanoma include:  A doctor may be able to distinguish melanoma from seborrheic keratosis with a visual examination. When a doctor is uncertain of the diagnosis, or if a person has a range of risk factors for melanoma, it may be necessary to take a biopsy of the growth.  Seborrheic keratoses are typically:  Melanoma tends to change and grow over time, so anyone who has a growth that looks like seborrheic keratosis but that changes in shape or color should see a doctor.  People should watch for following signs:  Seborrheic keratoses do not usually cause symptoms and do not necessarily require treatment. However, some people prefer to have them removed because they find the growths unattractive.  If a seborrheic keratosis is damaged or infected, it may need to be removed.  Doctors can remove a seborrheic keratosis using one of a range of minor surgical procedures. The most popular method is to freeze the growth off. A doctor may choose to cut the growth out of the skin or use a process called electrodesiccation, which involves using an electrical current to remove the growth.  Treatment for melanoma depends on a range of factors, including the stage of the cancer and whether it has spread to other areas of the body.  However, treatment almost always requires removing the cancer, as well as any lymph nodes to which it has spread.  Early-stage melanomas may be successfully treated by removal alone. More advanced melanomas sometimes require other treatments, including:  Both seborrheic keratosis and melanoma can appear in many forms. People concerned about skin growths should not try to self-diagnose their condition and should not assume that a new skin growth is benign.  People should see a doctor if they develop any new skin growths, particularly if the growth changes over time or there is a family history of skin cancer.  People with seborrheic keratosis should get regular skin checks. This reduces the likelihood of mistaking melanoma for just another seborrheic keratosis growth. Seeing the doctor annually for a skin and mole check should help reduce the risk of having advanced cancer.    
 Cancer stat facts: Melanoma of the skin. (n.d.).  Cancer stat facts: Melanoma of the skin. (n.d.).  Jackson, J. M., Alexis, A., Berman, B., Berson, D. S., Taylor, S., &amp; Weiss, J. S. (2015, October). Current understanding of seborrheic keratosis: Prevalence, etiology, clinical presentation, diagnosis, and management [Abstract].  Journal of Drugs in Dermatology ,  14 (10), 1119–1125.  Kwon, O. S., Hwang, E. J., Bae, J. H., Park, H. E., Lee, J. C., Youn, J. I., &amp; Chung, J. H. (2003, April 24). Seborrheic keratosis in the Korean males: Causative role of sunlight [Abstract].  Photodermatology, Photoimmunology and Photomedicine ,  19 (2), 73–80.  Melanoma causes and risk factors. (n.d.).  Melanoma. What is melanoma? (n.d.).  Oakley, A. (2016, January). Seborrhoeic keratosis.  Risk factors for melanoma skin cancer. (2016, May 20).  Seborrheic keratoses. (n.d.).  Seborrheic keratoses. (n.d.).  Treatment of melanoma skin cancer, by stage. (2018, January 4).  What does melanoma look like? (2011, October 13).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Is it seborrheic keratosis or skin cancer?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320742.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, January 27). "Is it seborrheic keratosis or skin cancer?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  