 Read on to learn more about teas that may be best for  irritable bowel syndrome  or IBS, and how they may help with IBS symptoms.  There are many types of tea that may be beneficial for easing the symptoms of IBS. These include:   One review  found that peppermint reduced the severity of pain for people with IBS compared to a  placebo .  Peppermint is not recommended for use by people with hiatal  hernias , gastroesophageal reflux disease, or gallbladder problems.  Heartburn  is not an uncommon side effect.  Peppermint essential oil has also been studied as a treatment for IBS. Essential oils are meant to be inhaled through a diffuser or applied to the skin only after being diluted by carrier oil.  People should always speak to a doctor or aromatherapist before considering taking an essential oil by mouth. An article in   American Family Physician   reports that very high doses of peppermint oil can be extremely dangerous and even result in death.  The risks of drinking peppermint tea, however, are low and the benefits may be significant. Some studies show that peppermint tea can  reduce bowel spasms  and help the liver  detoxify the body .  Turmeric is another herb that has been studied in people with IBS.  In a  study  published in 2005, researchers examined the effect of turmeric extract tablets on IBS symptoms in adults. Participants took either 1 or 2 tablets each day for 8 weeks.  At the end of the study, researchers found that the turmeric extract decreased abdominal pain. Overall, about two-thirds of those who received the turmeric extract had an improvement in their symptoms.  Since then, there has been  more research  on the effect of turmeric on  inflammation  in bowel diseases. While not yet tested on humans, this research produced positive results for IBS symptoms.  Eating turmeric has relatively little risk and is known to decrease inflammation and act as an anti-oxidant, both of which are health benefits for someone with IBS.  Turmeric tea is sold in pre-packaged tea bags or can be made at home using ground turmeric or a piece of turmeric root.  Turmeric can also be mixed with lemongrass and  cinnamon  to make a flavorful mixture, as in the recipe given  here .  Some  scientists  report that curcumin, the active constituent in turmeric, could have an impact on blood sugar levels, so it is especially important for people with  diabetes  to discuss this with a doctor.  People with gallbladder problems should also speak with a doctor before consuming turmeric. The spice has the potential to worsen  acid reflux  and cause stomach discomfort. Another concern is turmeric's impact on blood clotting.  People frequently consume  ginger  for symptoms associated with an upset digestive system, according to the  International Foundation for Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders . It is also commonly used in traditional Chinese medicine.  Scientific studies on the effectiveness of ginger for IBS are lacking, however. It is believed that the extract may help decrease inflammation, make the stomach lining stronger, and promote movement in the intestines.  Ginger tea can be made using  pre-packaged tea bags . Recipes using fresh ginger or dried ginger are also available, such as this for  ginger honey tea , and this one for  turmeric-ginger tea .  Fennel may be helpful for people with IBS since it can help relax the intestinal muscle and relieve gas. It has a sweet flavor similar to aniseed.  Scientists  studied  the combined impact of curcumin and fennel essential oil on IBS symptoms in 121 people. After 30 days, those who took the curcumin and fennel combination had reduced symptom severity and a significantly higher score on a quality-of-life measurement than those who received a placebo.  More research is needed to know if fennel tea can also help relieve symptoms. Fennel tea can be  purchased in pre-packaged tea bags  or brewed at home using the recipe given  here .   Researchers  report that fennel may not be recommended for pregnant women, and that it may interact with certain medications.  Chamomile tea is a popular type of herbal tea. Some people believe it is helpful for relaxation but not many studies have confirmed this.  Some people choose chamomile tea for relieving an  upset stomach . It could offer benefits for people with IBS since digestive symptoms can be related to  stress .  IBS is a condition that affects the digestive system. It involves miscommunication between the brain and the gut. Symptoms can include abdominal pain, bloating,  constipation ,  diarrhea , or alternating types of bowel movements.  IBS is classified into three types:  Between  7 and 21 percent  of people are affected by IBS. The condition is more common in women and younger people than in other groups.  IBS can have a significant impact on a person's quality of life. Some teas may help manage certain symptoms, but more research is needed on the extent of their efficacy. Treatment for IBS often includes multiple approaches, so some tea types may contribute to the easing of a person's symptoms.  It is also important to remember that many studies are done on different ways of using the same herb. The herb, the tea, and the essential oil all have different potencies.  Tea preparations of herbs will likely have fewer side effects than extracts or supplements, and they are often a good addition to a healthful diet.  A doctor or registered dietitian can help a person develop an individualized plan to manage their IBS symptoms.  All herbal products should be discussed with a doctor prior to use, as they are not regulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA). There may be concerns about quality, purity, and strength, and some herbs may react with other medications.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Amato, A., Liotta, R., &amp; Mulè, F. (2014, October 5). Effects of menthol on circular smooth muscle of human colon: Analysis of the mechanism of action [Abstract].  European Journal of Pharmacology ,  740 , 295–301.  Amato, A., Liotta, R., &amp; Mulè, F. (2014, October 5). Effects of menthol on circular smooth muscle of human colon: Analysis of the mechanism of action [Abstract].  European Journal of Pharmacology ,  740 , 295–301.  Bastaki, S. M. A., Al Ahmed, M. M., Al Zaabi, A., Amir, N., &amp; Adeghate, E. (2016, February 23). Effect of turmeric on colon histology, body weight, ulcer, IL-23, MPO and glutathione in acetic-acid-induced inflammatory bowel disease in rats.  BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  16 , 72.  Begas, E., Tsioutsiouliti, A., Kouvaras, E., Haroutounian, S. A., Kasiotis, K. M., Kouretas, D., &amp; Asprodini, E. (2017, February). Effects of peppermint tea consumption on the activities of CYP1A2, CYP2A6, Xanthine Oxidase, N-acetyltranferase-2 and UDP-glucuronosyltransferases-1A1/1A6 in healthy volunteers[Abstract].   Food and Chemical Toxicology ,  100 , 80–89.  Bundy, R., Walker, A. F., Middleton, R. W., &amp; Booth, J. (2005, March 9). Turmeric extract may improve irritable bowel syndrome symptomology in otherwise healthy adults: A pilot study [Abstract].  The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine ,  10 (6), 1015–1018.  Chey, W. D., Kurlander, J., &amp; Eswaran, S. (2015, March 3). Irritable bowel syndrome: A clinical review [Abstract].  Journal of the American Medical Association ,  313 (9), 949–958.  Collins, S. C. (2014, February). Natural remedies for digestive disorders.  Today's Dietitian ,  16 (2), 30.  Complementary and alternative treatments. (2016, December 24).  Definition &amp; facts for irritable bowel syndrome. (2017, November).  Khanna, R., MacDonald, J. K., &amp; Levesque, B. G. (2014, July). Peppermint oil for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  Journal of Clinical Gastroenterology ,  48 (6), 505–512.  Kligler, B., &amp; Chaudhary, S. (2007, April 1). Peppermint oil.  American Family Physician ,  75 (7), 1027–1030.  McCulloch, M. (2016, December). Medicinal herbal teas.  Today's Dietitian ,  18 (12), 36.  McKay, D. L., &amp; Blumberg, J. B. (2006, August). A review of the bioactivity and potential health benefits of peppermint tea (Mentha piperita L.) [Abstract].  Phytotherapy Research ,  20 (8), 619–633.  Nabavi, S. F., Thiagarajan, R., Rastrelli, L., Daglia, M., Sobarzo-Sánchez, E., Alinezhad, H., &amp; Nabavi, S. M. (2015). Curcumin: A natural product for diabetes and its complications [Abstract].  Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry ,  15 (23), 2445–2455.  Our approach to irritable bowel syndrome in adults. (n.d.).  Portincasa, P., Bonfrate, L., Scribano, M. L., Kohn, A., Caporaso, N., Festi, D., . . . Gasbarrini, A. (2016, June). Curcumin and fennel essential oil improve symptoms and quality of life in patients with irritable bowel syndrome.  Journal of Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases ,  25 (2), 151–157.  Rahimi, R., &amp; Ardekani, M. R. S. (2013, January). Medicinal properties of  Foeniculum vulgare  Mill. in traditional Iranian medicine and modern phytotherapy [Abstract].  Chinese Journal of Integrative Medicine ,  19 (1), 73–79.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Ware, Megan. "Best teas to drink for IBS."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320705.php&gt;    APA  Ware, M. (2018, January 23). "Best teas to drink for IBS."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  