 The condition, also known as TTS, is usually caused by continual overuse of the foot and ankle, such as occurs with strenuous or prolonged walking, running, standing, or exercising.  But TTS can also occur suddenly after traumatic injury, or spontaneously, for no clear reason.  A doctor should always assess and treat symptoms of TTS early.  The first line of treatment for TTS is RICE, which stands for rest, ice, compression, and elevation.  Over-the-counter non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications, or  NSAIDs , such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen, can also help make symptoms more manageable.  For more severe or chronic cases, more aggressive treatment options exist, such as corrective devices, therapies, and in some cases, surgery.  Common ways to manage and treat TTS include:  Other types of  physical therapy  used for TTS include:  Ultimately, surgery may be performed for very severe or chronic cases of TTS that do not respond to any other form of medical or physical therapy.  As symptoms become less painful or easily irritated, strengthening exercises should be done to help prevent problems, including pronation or rolling of the foot, which can worsen symptoms.  Common exercises recommended for the treatment of TTS include:  A doctor will typically diagnose and assess TTS by performing a physical exam of the entire foot and lower leg area and asking questions about symptoms.  Diagnostic tests used to confirm and evaluate TTS include:  Though anyone can develop TTS at any age, some factors greatly increase the risk of developing the condition.  Common risk factors for TTS include:  TTS tends to cause pain on the inside of the ankle and bottom of the feet, though it can also impact the toes and lower legs. TTS is similar to  carpal tunnel syndrome , involving a nerve being squeezed in a narrow, confined, tunnel-like joint space.  Common symptoms of TTS include:  Minor cases of TTS can improve significantly with 48 hours of RICE and over-the-counter medications. But left untreated, chronic TTS may become disabling and cause permanent nerve damage.  A person should consult with a doctor anytime TTS symptoms occur. If caught early enough, a wide range of therapies, medications, and corrective devices exist to help treat most TTS symptoms.    
 Kennedy, G., &amp; Smyth, N. (2015). Tarsal tunnel syndrome.  Kennedy, G., &amp; Smyth, N. (2015). Tarsal tunnel syndrome.  Ratra, A., &amp; Grimes, J. (2016, April 19). Acute tarsal tunnel syndrome in a pregnant woman following surgical repair of bimalleolar fracture: A case report and review of the literature.  Journal of Orthopaedics &amp; Allied Sciences ,  4 (1), 49–51.  Tarsal tunnel syndrome. (n.d.).  Tarsal tunnel syndrome. (2013, July 15).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What to know about tarsal tunnel syndrome."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320754.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, January 28). "What to know about tarsal tunnel syndrome."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  