 Drug resistance, also referred to as antimicrobial resistance, occurs when infection-causing bacteria, viruses, parasites, or fungi evolve to resist a drug that once destroyed them.  Sadly, such a scenario is becoming increasingly common. In the United States alone, there are at least  2 million drug-resistant infections  every year, and more than 23,000 people die from these infections.  Drug-resistant  tuberculosis  (TB) is deemed a "serious" threat by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Worldwide, multidrug-resistant TB — which is TB that is resistant to the two strongest anti-TB drugs — affects more than  480,000 people  annually.  Needless to say, winning the fight against drug-resistant TB would represent a huge leap forward in the fight against drug resistance as a whole.  Dr. Sanjib Bhakta — of the Institute of Structural and Molecular Biology at Birkbeck, University of London, United Kingdom — and colleagues believe their new study could make a big contribution; the team has identified a number of onion-derived compounds that can kill TB bacteria.  The compounds come from  Allium stipitatum , also referred to as the Persian shallot, which is a type of  onion  commonly used in Iranian cooking. It is also  known for its antibacterial properties , a feature that caught the attention of Dr. Bhakta and team.  For their study, the researchers enhanced these antibacterial properties by synthesizing various compounds present in the bulb of the Persian shallot.  They then tested the effects of these synthesized compounds on various drug-resistant bacteria, including  Mycobacterium tuberculosis , which is the bacterial species that causes TB.  The team found that the compounds showed inhibitory effects against  Escherichia coli , multidrug-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus ,  Klebsiella pneumoniae,  and  Proteus mirabilis .   The most promising synthesized compound, however, was found to inhibit the growth of  M. tuberculosis  by 99.9 percent.   Based on these results, Dr. Bhakta — who co-led the study — and colleagues suggest that onion-derived compounds may help to combat drug-resistant infections.   " In searching for new antibacterials, we tend to focus on molecules that are potent enough to be developed commercially as new drug entities by themselves. However, in this study we show that by inhibiting the key intrinsic resistance properties of the TB, one could increase the effects of existing  antibiotic  treatment and reverse the tide of already existing drug resistance."  Dr. Sanjib Bhakta  "Natural products from plants and microbes have enormous potential as a source of new antibiotics," adds study co-leader Prof. Simon Gibbons, of University College London in the United Kingdom. "Nature is an amazingly creative chemist and it is likely that plants such as the Persian shallot produce these chemicals as a defense against microbes in their environment."  In future research, the team hopes to identify more natural compounds that could help tackle drug-resistant bacteria.  