 The forearms are composed of the radius and ulna bones, which span the length of the forearm to intersect at the wrist joint. The location means that the forearm is intrinsically involved in a range of everyday arm or hand movements.  As a result of this, injury or discomfort in the forearm can have a wide-ranging impact on mobility and interfere with daily functioning. For example, forearm pain can make it difficult to type on a keyboard or grip an item with the hand.  The forearm contains several superficial, immediate, and deep muscles.  Like most body parts, its structures are connected by tendons and ligaments.  Forearm pain can occur for a variety of reasons including:  The type of pain can vary depending on the cause. For example, nerve entrapment can cause shooting pains whereas  arthritis  of the elbow can cause a dull ache in the forearm. Overuse injuries, such as RSI, can induce both types of pain.  The type of treatment will depend on the cause of the forearm pain and its severity.  In the case of an injury such as tendon damage, nerve entrapment, or overuse, a person can usually administer treatment at home using the following techniques:  Treatment is often accompanied by exercises and stretches designed to rehabilitate and strengthen the forearm slowly. However, a person should only start doing exercises or stretches after consulting with a doctor to avoid aggravating the injury.  This exercise helps to stretch the forearm muscles:  Stretching the pronator muscle can help to improve flexibility and reduce pain in the forearm:  This exercise can help to improve blood circulation through the forearm and flexes the wrists:  During later stages of rehabilitation, it can be beneficial to go to a gym and use equipment such as cable machines, light dumbbells, or exercise bands. Strength building exercises, such as wrist curls or reverse curls, can help to build forearm strength, helping to prevent forearm pain from reoccurring.  Exercise is not always sufficient, and some people may require anti-inflammatory medications to reduce the pain. Sometimes, where the pain is caused by trapped nerves or other injuries, surgery may be required.  A person can take basic precautions to help prevent forearm pain from occurring, such as:  Forearm pain can be disruptive to daily functioning, but most people can manage it through a careful balance of rest and structured activity. It is also relatively easy to prevent forearm pain from occurring by making some simple adaptations, such as using an ergonomic keyboard at work and taking regular breaks from typing.  However, persistent cases of forearm pain may indicate arthritis or an underlying condition that requires further medical attention.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Elbow and arm pain. (2017, December 18).  Elbow and arm pain. (2017, December 18).  Ellenbecker, T. S., Nirschl, R., &amp; Renstrom, P. (2013, March). Current concepts in examination and treatment of elbow tendon injury.  Sports Health ,  5 (2), 186–194.  Helliwell, P. S., &amp; Taylor, W. J. (2004). Repetitive strain injury.  Postgraduate Medical Journal ,  80 (946), 438-443.  Shamsoddini, A., &amp; Hollisaz, M. T. (2013, September). Effects of taping on pain, grip strength and wrist extension force in patients with tennis elbow.  Trauma Monthly ,  18 (2), 71–74.  Tendonitis. (2017, November 9).  Tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis). (n.d.).     Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What are the causes of forearm pain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320782.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, January 30). "What are the causes of forearm pain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  