  Clostridium  is found naturally in the environment and the gastrointestinal tract of animals. Usually, the bacterium only produces toxins when it overgrows and causes infection.  The American Society of Plastic Surgeons estimate that  6.6 million  women underwent Botox injections in 2016, making it the most popular form of minimally invasive cosmetic surgery performed in the United States.  There are medical conditions that may benefit from Botox therapy. These include:  According to the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), whether Botox injections are safe during pregnancy or breast-feeding is not currently known.  The neurotoxic proteins in Botox injections affect nerve impulses by blocking the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, which temporarily prevents muscle cell contraction and glandular cell activity.  When used cosmetically, Botox is injected into specific facial or neck muscles, forcing them to relax and reducing the appearance of wrinkles, fine lines, crow's feet, and forehead and frown lines.  Botox toxins may also be injected directly into overactive muscles or glands to limit their activity, such as the sweat glands under the armpits, neck muscles, or hand muscles.  Normally, Botox injections begin working within a few days of an injection. They tend to have only a localized, not systemic or whole body effect.  Botox toxins are thought to remain active in the body or target area for 4 to 6 months before being metabolized and excreted from the body.  Botox injections are recognized as safe and, as yet, they have not been reported to transfer from mother to child.  But, Botox injections contain neurotoxins that can be dangerous in large doses or for people allergic to these chemicals.  Disease or infection caused by botulinum toxins is called botulism. Botulism can be life-threatening, especially in pregnant women, infants, those who are immune compromised or with gastrointestinal conditions.  Though some research has found that botulinum toxins may be too large to cross the placenta during pregnancy, pregnant and nursing women are encouraged to avoid potential sources of the toxin, including certain foods.  All infants should not be allowed to consume foods that are considered common sources of botulinum.  Common causes of botulism include:  Though the research is still limited, Botox injections may also be able to spread to other nerves or cells in the body, causing unintended symptoms.  A  2016 study  found evidence that botulinum toxin injected into one area can travel through connected nerve cells or neurons, paralyzing non-target muscles and glands.  Anytime side effects accompany or follow Botox injections, a person should seek immediate medical attention.  Though considered very rare, Botox injections can cause severe symptoms, predominantly respiratory distress, which can be fatal if untreated.  Rare complications associated with Botox injections include:  It is unclear how cosmetic fillers impact unborn babies and nursing infants.  So in most cases, pregnant and nursing women should avoid getting cosmetic procedures that involve filling or plumping agents.  Though the research is very limited, a few different supplements, creams, therapies, and lifestyle habits may help reduce the appearance of fine lines and wrinkles and may be appropriate for nursing and pregnant women.  Potential medical alternatives to Botox injections include the following, although not all should be used by breast-feeding women:  Home remedies that may help prevent or reduce the appearance of fine lines and wrinkles include:  Nutrients and supplements to consume or use to help prevent or reduce fine lines and wrinkles include:  Because it is still unclear whether or not Botox toxins can spread to a nursing child through breast milk or impact unborn babies during pregnancy, most doctors recommend avoiding Botox therapy during pregnancy and breast-feeding.  As botulinum toxins can stay active in the body for 6 months or more, it is sensible for women trying to become pregnant or planning on nursing, to avoid Botox injections.  The company that manufactures Botox, Allergan Inc., states that, although the complications remain unknown, pregnant and breast-feeding women should always tell their doctor if they are thinking of using Botox.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Badell, M. L., Rimawi, B. H., Rao, A. K., Jamieson, D. J., Rasmussen, S., &amp; Meaney-Delman, D. (2017, December 27). Botulism during pregnancy and the postpartum period: A systematic review.  Clinical Infectious Diseases ,  66 (Suppl 1), S30–S37.  Badell, M. L., Rimawi, B. H., Rao, A. K., Jamieson, D. J., Rasmussen, S., &amp; Meaney-Delman, D. (2017, December 27). Botulism during pregnancy and the postpartum period: A systematic review.  Clinical Infectious Diseases ,  66 (Suppl 1), S30–S37.  Bomba-Warczak, E., Vevea, J. D., Brittain, J. M., Figueroa-Bernier, A., Tepp, W. H., Johnson, E. A., ... Chapman, E. R. (2016, August 4). Interneuronal transfer and distal action of tetanus toxin and botulinum neurotoxins A and D in central neurons.  Cell reports ,  16 (7), 1974–1987.  Botulism. (n.d.).  Medication guide: Botox. (2016, January).  Plastic Surgery Statistics Report 2016. (n.d.).  Tam, C., Erebara, A., &amp; Einarson, A. (2010, April). Food-borne illnesses during pregnancy: Prevention and treatment.  Canadian Family Physician ,  56 (4), 341–343.  The facts on "How do Botox® injections work?" (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Is it safe to get Botox while breast-feeding?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320735.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, January 26). "Is it safe to get Botox while breast-feeding?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  