 Typically, the type of yeast causing the infection is the fungus,  Candida albicans , yet other types of candida can lead to an  oral thrush  infection. In addition to the mouth, an oral candida infection can also be present in other mucous membranes of the esophagus and throat.  While typically speaking oral thrush is not something to be concerned about in healthy people, in some cases, oral thrush can become severe and problematic. This is especially seen in people who are immunocompromised, have certain health conditions that may make them more susceptible to infection, or those taking certain types of medications.  It is not contagious in adults who are not otherwise at risk.  Certain individuals may be at a higher risk of developing thrush:  Oral thrush in infants is common, especially within the first months of life. Infants at an even higher risk for developing thrush may include those who:  In children who develop more chronic yeast infections or oral thrush, immunodeficiency may be the cause.  An example would be a child with human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) infection or another condition, which causes their immune system to not work to its fullest capacity and makes them more susceptible to infection.  Other risk factors for developing oral thrush in all age groups include:  While oral thrush in adults is not considered contagious, thrush can be passed back and forth from mother to infant during breast-feeding.  Mothers can have yeast on the nipple that is spread to the infant, or the infant passes thrush to the nipples during breast-feeding. Both may need to be treated.  Even though oral thrush in adults is not considered contagious, the yeast fungus can be spread through kissing. However, a yeast infection in itself may or may not occur.  Whether the uninfected person develops a yeast infection will depend on their current health status, medication use and other risk factors, which would place the person at risk for developing thrush.  Symptoms of oral thrush may include:  Some infants may also have a simultaneous yeast diaper rash. Nursing mothers may show symptoms of a breast yeast infection with symptoms like:  Thrush is typically treated with an oral antifungal medication, which is either applied directly to the affected area or swished in the mouth. In some cases, oral tablets, or, rarely, intravenous antifungals may be required in more severe cases of thrush.  Breast-feeding mothers may require treatment for a fungal infection to decrease repeated transmission of  Candida  during feedings.  There are some measures that can be taken to decrease the risk for oral thrush including:  Nursing mothers should consider cleaning nipples, wearing nursing pads, wearing a clean bra each day and appropriately cleaning breast pump parts.  After nursing, letting the skin around the nipples dry completely before putting a bra back on can help minimize risk.  It is recommended that a person sees a doctor if there are symptoms present for evaluation and possible treatment.  Typically speaking, thrush is not a concerning infection but can recur often. At times, the infection can spread into the esophagus or bloodstream of certain people including those with weakened immune systems.  However, if it is persistent or recurs outside of infancy it may be a sign of another underlying medical problem.    
  Candida  infections of the mouth, throat, and esophagus. (2017, August 4)   Candida  infections of the mouth, throat, and esophagus. (2017, August 4)  Do I have thrush? Can I give it to my lover? (n.d.)  Oral thrush: Diagnosis and treatment. (2017, July 22)  Oral thrush (mouth thrush). (2017, July 4)  Oral thrush: Overview (2017, July 22)  Thrush and other  Candida  infections. (2015, November 21)  Thrush or candidiasis. (n.d.)  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. "Is it possible to catch thrush?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Jan. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320716.php&gt;    APA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. (2018, January 24). "Is it possible to catch thrush?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  