 Digestive enzymes are proteins that regulate the chemical reactions the body uses to digest food; the enzymes break down the food into nutrient pieces until they are small enough to be absorbed into the bloodstream and carried throughout the body.  Because digestive enzymes help the body break down fats,  carbohydrates , and proteins, the theory is that supplementing the body's supply of these enzymes will promote healthy digestion and relieve symptoms of  irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS).  Unfortunately, for many of the  1 in 5 Americans  who have IBS, frequently used medications do not always provide relief.  As a result, doctors often recommend lifestyle changes as the first form of treatment. Lifestyle changes include exercising regularly, reducing  stress , and modifying the diet to remove trigger foods. Sometimes, a doctor will prescribe medications for  diarrhea ,  constipation , and stomach pain to treat the symptoms of IBS.  Sometimes, none of these treatments work. As a result, doctors may try other treatment options.  Specific digestive enzymes take their name from what they break down. For example, the enzyme lactase helps the body break down lactose, a sugar found in milk and other dairy products.  There are different classes of enzymes that are grouped according to the chemical process they use. For example, all digestive enzymes are considered hydrolases, because they use water molecules to break food down into its basic building blocks.  Although more research is needed, promising results have been reported.   One study  found that when individuals who frequently suffered from diarrhea after meals took the enzyme pancrelipase (PEZ) before eating, they reported a reduction in their symptoms.   Another study  found that when people with IBS took Biointol, a combination of digestive enzymes and soluble fibers, they noticed a significant reduction in stomach discomfort, gas, and bloating.  However, it did not seem to have any impact on other IBS symptoms, such as constipation or diarrhea, and may have prompted an uptick in the urgency of bowel movements.  For example, since 1 out of every 3 people with IBS also has problems digesting specific foods, it is possible that taking digestive enzyme supplements known to help the body digest these foods might reduce symptoms of IBS.   Studies  have shown that when people with IBS whose symptoms are triggered by dairy products take the digestive enzyme lactase before consuming dairy products, they are much more able to tolerate these foods.  Pancrelipase (PEZ) can help the body digest fats, sugars, and proteins.  Some  studies  have found it to be effective in reducing IBS symptoms if taken before eating.  Sold under the commercial name Creon, PEZ is a combination of lipase, protease, and amylase, which are three enzymes produced by the pancreas. Doctors may prescribe PEZ for individuals who have a poorly functioning or damaged pancreas.  Many forms of digestive enzyme supplements are widely available over the counter, and they are mostly considered to be safe when taken as recommended.  Some  studies  have suggested that bromelain, a digestive enzyme supplement made from pineapples, interferes with platelets in the bloodstream. This means that individuals taking blood thinners should limit their use of bromelain, to avoid excessive blood thinning.  Some  research  suggests that it is important to note whether digestive enzyme supplements are made from animal or microbial sources because that can significantly affect the potency of the medication.  The body's ability to manufacture enzymes decreases as part of the aging process. Also, genetics, stomach viruses, and stress can all wear away at the body's store of digestive enzymes.  It is always best to take digestive enzymes, or any supplement, only after consultation with a doctor. It is possible a doctor may prescribe a prescription strength enzyme.  Prescription strength enzymes are very different from over-the-counter supplements. It is essential that individuals who choose to take an over-the-counter supplement read the labels before purchasing them. It is also a good idea to talk to a doctor first.  Digestive enzymes for IBS, or general health purposes, can contain blends of different enzymes, such as amylase, lipase, lactase, bromelain, and more.  Before buying or taking any supplements, make sure to check for any additional ingredients in each capsule, especially if food sensitivities are an issue. Unless a supplement says that it does not contain soy, dairy, or gluten, there is a chance that it does.  Note that the price and quality of digestive enzymes can vary significantly. It is best to review desired dosages and measurement units with a trained health professional to make sure that the product is worth the price and will deliver the desired level of enzymes.  People should always take these supplements with food. When taking digestive enzymes for IBS, it is best to do so when first sitting down to eat, or slightly before.  Potential side effects of using digestive enzymes for IBS symptoms can range from the rare and more serious to the more common and less serious.  The more common side effects include:  More severe side effects include:  The consensus is that there is not, as yet, any clear scientific evidence that taking digestive enzymes for IBS is effective.  However, after talking with a doctor, many people may benefit from their inclusion in part of a larger treatment plan for IBS.    
 Ash, M. (2017, March 23). Understanding irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) can lead to solutions!  Ash, M. (2017, March 23). Understanding irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) can lead to solutions!  Ciacci, C., Franceschi, F., Purchiaroni, F., Capone, P., Buccelletti, F., Iacomini, P. … Gasbarrin, G. (2011). Effect of beta-Glucan, Inositol and digestive enzymes in GI symptoms of patients with IBS.  European Review for Medical and Pharmacological Services ,  15 (6), 637–643.  Creon side effects center. (2016, October 18).  Digestive enzymes. (2011, July 13).  Grumbling guts? (2012, February).  Halland, M. &amp; Talley, N. J. (2012, November 13). New treatments for IBS.  Nature Reviews Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  10 , 13–23.  How bromelain interacts with anti-platelet medications. (n.d.).  Ianiro, G., Pecere, S., Giorgio, V., Gasbarrini, A., &amp; Cammarota, G. (2016 February). Digestive enzyme supplementation in gastrointestinal diseases.  Current Drug Metabolism ,  17 (2), 187–193.  Irritable bowel syndrome. (IBS). (n.d.).  Money, M. E., Walkowiak, J., Virgilio, C., &amp; Talley, N. J. (2011, January 1). Pilot study: A randomised, double blind, placebo controlled trial of pancrealipase for the treatment of postprandial irritable bowel syndrome-diarrhoea [Abstract].  Frontline Gastroenterology ,  2 (1), 48-56.  Roxas, M. (2008). The role of enzyme supplementation in digestive disorders [Abstract].  Alternative Medicine Review ,  13 (4), 307–314.  Sayuk, G. S. &amp; Gyawali, C. P. (2015 August). Irritable bowel syndrome: Modern concepts &amp; management options.  The American Journal of Medicine ,  128 (8 ) , 817-827.  Treatment for irritable bowel syndrome. (2017, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "Will digestive enzymes help IBS?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320823.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, February 5). "Will digestive enzymes help IBS?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  