 The body requires 20 essential and nonessential amino acids that work to create various proteins. Being able to get adequate protein is critical for people's health.  Usually, a person produces enough L-glutamine themselves to meet all of the body's needs. However, sometimes there is a shortfall of L-glutamine, leading to a deficiency, or there may be benefits to increasing intake of L-glutamine for health reasons.  A person needs sufficient proteins to function optimally, and amino acids are the basic building blocks of proteins.  L-glutamine is the most plentiful amino acid in the body and supports intestinal health. L-glutamine may work for those with IBS because of this role.  The tissues found in the intestine use L-glutamine as a fuel source to function at their best. L-glutamine is also thought to help maintain proper barriers within the intestine.  IBS or  irritable bowel syndrome  affects a person's digestive system and can cause the following symptoms:  It is possible that some cases of IBS occur due to an L-glutamine deficiency, and those who increase their intake of L-glutamine may notice a reduction or disappearance of their symptoms.  Some of the reasons a person might experience L-glutamine deficiency are:  L-glutamine helps people with IBS by working to protect the mucous membrane of the esophagus and intestines. The mucous membrane blocks bacterial infiltration during digestion.  L-glutamine can also boost immune cell activity in the gut, helping prevent infection and  inflammation , as well as soothing the intestinal tissue.  Because L-glutamine is used for energy production, it can support the reduction of intestinal spasms.  People with stress-related IBS may also find that increasing their intake of L-glutamine reduces symptoms.  This benefit is due to the body releasing cortisol when it is stressed, which can lower the levels of L-glutamine stored in the muscle tissue.  While L-glutamine supplementation is usually considered safe for most people, there are some who should avoid it.  People with kidney disease, liver disease or Reye's syndrome, a severe condition that can cause swelling of the liver and brain, should avoid taking L-glutamine supplements.  There have also been some studies showing that certain types of  tumor  cells feed off L-glutamine and multiply.  Hence, people with  cancer , or those who have a high risk of cancer, may be advised to avoid L-glutamine supplements.  Some people have an allergic reaction to L-glutamine. If an allergic reaction occurs they may experience:  Immediate medical attention is needed if any of the above reactions occur after someone has taken L-glutamine supplements.  A person can change their diet to increase their L-glutamine as well.  Good sources of L-glutamine can be found in certain foods, including:  Making sure that the recommended dosage guidelines are followed is crucial. Taking too much L-glutamine in supplement form may also result in adverse side effects.  Other supplements that might be beneficial for people with IBS include digestive enzymes. These can help the body to break down food into smaller molecules so that they can be absorbed more easily.  Examples of digestive enzymes a person with IBS might take include:  At present, there is not enough scientific research to prove that L-glutamine improves the symptoms of IBS.  However, a  recent review  emphasizes the theory that L-glutamine is beneficial to intestinal or gut permeability and may help to prevent unwanted toxins entering the digestive system.  This could point towards supporting the idea that L-glutamine might help to improve IBS, as the condition is sometimes thought to occur due to compromised intestinal permeability.  More research is needed to prove that L-glutamine can help people with IBS.  L-glutamine is considered a safe supplement and is  available to buy online . By consulting a doctor and ensuring dosage guidelines are followed, a person can avoid any adverse side effects, and positive benefits, such as a reduction in symptoms of IBS, may be experienced.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Chemistry of amino acids and protein structure. (n.d.).  Chemistry of amino acids and protein structure. (n.d.).  Ciacci, C., Franceschi, F., Purchiaroni, F., Capone, P., Buccelletti, F., Iacomini, P., ... Gasbarrini, G. (2011). Effect of beta-glucan, inositol and digestive enzymes in GI symptoms of patients with IBS.  European Review for Medical and Pharmacological Sciences ,  15 (6), 637–643.  FDA approved L-glutamine powder for the treatment of sickle cell disease. (2017, August 18).  Irritable bowel syndrome. (2017, October 9).  L-glutamine (by mouth). (2018, January 1).  L-glutamine. (2018, February 3).  Money, M. E., Walkowiak, J., Virgilio, C., &amp; Talley, N. J. (2011). Pilot study: A randomised, double blind, placebo controlled trial of pancrealipase for the treatment of postprandial irritable bowel syndrome-diarrhoea [Abstract].  Frontline Gastroenterology ,  2 (1), 48–56.  Pancreatic enzymes. (n.d.).  Rao, R., &amp; Samak, G. (2012, January). Role of glutamine in protection of intestinal epithelial tight junctions.  Journal of Epithelial Biology &amp; Pharmacology ,  5 (Suppl 1-m7), 47.  Short bowel syndrome and Crohn's disease. (2013, July).  Spanier, J. A., Howden, C. W., &amp; Jones, M. P. (2003). A systematic review of alternative therapies in the irritable bowel syndrome.  Archives of Internal Medicine ,  163 (3), 265–274.  Symptoms &amp; causes of irritable bowel syndrome. (2017, November).  Wise, D. R., &amp; Thompson, C. B. (2010, August). Glutamine addiction: A new therapeutic target in cancer [Abstract].  Trends in Biochemical Sciences ,  35 (8), 427–433. Reference  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0968000410000915   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Does L-glutamine work for IBS?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320850.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, February 7). "Does L-glutamine work for IBS?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  