 However, it is possible to get a  sexually transmitted infection  (STI) from oral sex; in fact, some STIs, such as genital  herpes  and  gonorrhea , are  more commonly spread through oral sex  than other STIs, such as  HIV .  Worldwide, about  1 million new STIs  are acquired each day, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). It is essential that sexually active people understand how STIs are transmitted and how they can reduce the risk of spreading infections.  It is possible to contract many STIs through oral sex, as oral sex involves close contact and often an exchange of bodily fluids.  STIs spread through contact with bodily fluids or skin that is infected with the STI. Different STIs spread at different rates and through various bodily fluids. The chances of getting an STI depend on a variety of factors.  The STIs most frequently spread through oral sex include:  Genital herpes is a virus that is transmitted through vaginal, oral, or anal contact with someone who has herpes. It is highly contagious and  tends to be more contagious  during an active outbreak.  The primary symptom of herpes is the appearance of blister-like sores on or around the genitals. The sores may spread to the thighs, buttocks, or other nearby regions. They may also affect the mouth, tongue, and lips, depending on the type of herpes.  Even condoms and other barrier protection methods may not prevent the virus from spreading. This is particularly so if someone has a sore or a blister that is not completely covered by a condom or dental dam.  People who have oral herpes may also spread the herpes infection to the genitals of their sexual partners through oral sex.  It is possible for a person to have herpes for many years without having an outbreak of sores. Even people who have only ever had one outbreak, or who have no symptoms but have never been tested, may have herpes.  Herpes is not curable, but medications can manage symptoms.   Gonorrhea  is  a highly contagious bacterial infection  that spreads through sexual contact with the vagina, penis, anus, or mouth of a person with the disease.  Many people who have gonorrhea do not have any symptoms at all. When symptoms do appear, they may include:  Gonorrhea is treatable, but it can cause serious complications if left untreated. In women, untreated gonorrhea can cause a condition called  pelvic inflammatory disease . This syndrome may lead to  infertility . Less frequently, gonorrhea may also cause infertility in men.   Syphilis  is a bacterial infection that spreads through vaginal, oral, penile, anal, or skin contact with syphilis sores. The sores may be small or unnoticeable, so the only way for a person to know for sure whether they have syphilis is to get tested.  Syphilis is treatable, but if it is left untreated, it can cause organ failure,  dementia , and other serious health problems.  In its earliest stage, syphilis presents as many small, blister-like sores. The sores appear where syphilis entered the body, so people who get syphilis from oral sex may have sores on their genitals or near their mouth.  As syphilis develops, it causes rashes and harms the mucous membranes. In later stages, it can cause serious problems in many organs, including the heart and brain.  Other infections are less likely to spread through oral sex, though infection is still possible.  These include:  HIV is present in blood, breast milk, vaginal fluids, rectal fluids, semen, and pre-seminal fluid. To contract the disease, an infected person's bodily fluids must come into contact with another person's bloodstream.  This can happen in three ways:  Oral sex does not provide direct contact with the bloodstream. To get HIV from oral sex, the bodily fluids of the infected person would need to come into contact with a torn mucous membrane or wound on their partner.  It is also possible to transmit the virus when the person giving oral sex has an open wound in their mouth or another area of the body that comes into contact with the recipient's mucous membranes or an open wound.   AIDS , or acquired immune deficiency syndrome, is the name given to a condition in which a person's immune function is absent due to a chronic HIV infection. AIDS can lead to a range of unusual infections and illnesses, but AIDS cannot be directly transmitted — a person will contract HIV first before developing AIDS.  How contagious a virus is may change over time or with treatment. In the case of HIV, for example,  higher viral loads  or higher quantities of the virus in the blood make the virus more contagious.  The only strategy that can eliminate the risk of transmitting oral STIs is avoiding all sexual activity, including oral, anal, and vaginal sex.  To reduce the risk while remaining sexually active, a person can:  Sexually active people should talk to a doctor about the risk of oral sex with an infected person. In some cases, there are precautions a person can take against getting infected.  In all cases, open communication with a partner and keeping up to date with reliable medical information can help people make wise decisions.    
 Chlamydia – CDC fact sheet. (2017, October 4).  Chlamydia – CDC fact sheet. (2017, October 4).  Genital herpes – CDC fact sheet. (2017, September 1).  Genital warts. (2017, August 21).  Gonorrhea – CDC fact sheet (detailed version). (2017, September 26).  Herpes simplex virus. (2017, January).  Mishori, R., McClaskey, E. L., &amp; WinklerPrins, V. J. (2012, December 15). Chlamydia trachomatis infections: Screening, diagnosis, and management.  American Family Physician ,  86 (12), 1127–1132.  Pubic lice. (2016, January 15).  Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) [Fact sheet]. (2016, August).  Sexually transmitted infections. (2017, June 12).  Syphilis — CDC fact sheet. (2017, June 13).  The basics of HIV prevention. (2017, May 19).  Viral load and sexual transmission risk. (2013, August 12.).  What infections can I catch through oral sex? (2015, May 30).  What is hepatitis? (2016, July).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What STIs can you get from oral sex?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320807.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, February 2). "What STIs can you get from oral sex?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  