 Hepatitis C is a virus that damages the liver. If left untreated, it can lead to liver disease and other serious long-term health problems.  Many people do not realize that they have  hepatitis C . There are specific risk factors for contracting the virus, such as age and exposure to blood or bodily fluids.  The antibody test is a blood test to check for infection with the hepatitis C virus.  An antibody is a protein made by the body to protect against bacteria and disease. Antibodies can detect substances that could cause harm to health.  The medical term for these harmful substances is an antigen. When an antibody recognizes an antigen, it will destroy it or stop it traveling further into the body.  Antibodies are specific to a particular bacteria or disease, and they stay in the body after someone has been infected. This means that the antibodies should be able to fight off the same disease in future.  The hepatitis C antibody test checks for antibodies to the hepatitis C virus. If there are antibodies in the body, it means that a person has been infected with the virus at some point. However, it does not always mean that they still have the virus.  A medical professional will take a small sample of blood to be sent away for testing. The results may take a few days or weeks to come back.  There are two results from a hepatitis C antibody test.  Once diagnosed with hepatitis C, a person will need to undergo a series of different tests to see how the virus has affected their body.  These tests will check for any liver damage, identify how well the liver is working, and help a healthcare professional to decide on treatment.  Hepatitis C is treated with medication known as an antiviral. It gets this name because it aims to clear the virus out of the body.  Another aim of the medication is to slow down damage to the liver. It may also reduce the chance of a person getting  liver cancer  or developing serious liver scarring, known as  cirrhosis .  A person with hepatitis C will require regular testing during treatment to see how well the medication is working. Keeping healthy, getting enough sleep, and avoiding drugs and alcohol can help treatment to work.  Finding out about a diagnosis of hepatitis C may be complicated or confusing. The  American Liver Foundation  offer information, support, and advice for people who have the virus.  After an individual has received a reactive or positive result from a hepatitis C antibody test, they will need to have two follow-up tests.  The first test checks to see whether a person still has the virus; the other measures the amount of the virus in the blood.  The first test is the hep C RNA qualitative test, also known as the PCR test. A positive result means that a person has the hepatitis C virus. A negative result means that the body has cleared the virus without treatment.  The second test is the hep C RNA quantitative test. The result of this test is given as a number rather than a positive or negative. This is because the test compares the amount of the virus in the body before, during, and after treatment.  The number given as a result of this test is known as the viral load. The lower amount of the hepatitis C virus in the blood, the better the chances that a person can eliminate the virus from their body.  After hepatitis C virus is diagnosed, other tests may be needed:  Certain behaviors, experiences, and medical procedures increase the risk of getting the hepatitis C virus, which is transmitted by contact with blood.  The following are risk factors for contracting the virus:  The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  advise all baby boomers get tested for hepatitis C. Baby boomers are people born between 1945 and 1965. They are five times more likely to have the virus than other adults.  It is not clear why baby boomers have higher rates of hepatitis C infection than the rest of the population. At present, researchers think that it could be due to the  standard of medical practice  in the past, before the introduction of screening and infection control measures.  Hepatitis C is a serious virus that can cause significant damage to the body. The earlier the virus is found, the better the chances of treating it.  People who have had exposure to risk factors or are in a high-risk group should seek testing.  Understanding what a positive or negative result means is important. A person should ask a medical professional for a clear explanation and advice if they are unsure.    
 Additional tests you might need. (2015, September).  Additional tests you might need. (2015, September).  After treatment ends. (2015, April).  Hepatitis C and baby boomers (1945-1965). (2015, January 27).  Hepatitis C medications. (2015, April).  Hepatitis C: Why people born from 1945–1965 should get tested. (2016).  Support. (2016, October).  Tests to diagnose hepatitis C. (n.d.).  Who should get tested for hepatitis C? (2016, October).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "Diagnosing hepatitis C with the hepatitis C antibody test."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320849.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2018, February 7). "Diagnosing hepatitis C with the hepatitis C antibody test."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  