 People can have periorbital  edema  in one or both eyes. When a person has periorbital edema,  inflammation  around the eye causes fluid to build up. It is this buildup of fluid that gives the eye orbit a puffy appearance.  Treatments for periorbital edema are dependent on the cause. This article explores the various causes and treatments for periorbital edema.  Periorbital edema is not the same as having bags under the eyes, which is a natural part of aging. Instead, it is a health condition and is normally temporary.  Numerous different causes may lead to inflammation around the eyes, and they all result in a fluid buildup. It is the fluid buildup that gives the eye orbit a swollen appearance.  For some people, periorbital edema may come on slowly. This type of periorbital edema is described as chronic. For others, it may come on quickly and it is then referred to as acute.  Whatever the cause of periorbital edema, the following treatments may help to reduce swelling:  Other treatments available for periorbital edema are specific to the cause. These include:  The symptoms of periorbital edema include:  If swelling around the eye is accompanied by other facial swelling or difficulty breathing, this may be anaphylactic shock.  Anaphylactic shock is an extreme allergic reaction and is a medical emergency. A person experiencing anaphylactic shock needs emergency medical treatment.  If a person thinks this may be the case, they should call emergency services without delay.  Periorbital edema may be caused by an acute infection. If a person has an acute infection, they may experience additional symptoms. These include:  Causes can be grouped into the following types:  Medical causes of periorbital edema include:  Some things that are a natural part of life may cause swelling around the eyes. These include:  Lifestyle causes of periorbital edema include:  If a person thinks they may have periorbital edema, they should speak to a doctor. A doctor can help to diagnose the underlying cause.  Tests that a doctor may carry out include:  First, the doctor will examine the affected area. Then, they may ask general health and lifestyle questions to establish a cause. Depending on the suspected cause, the doctor may then carry out a series of tests.  Often, home remedies or over-the-counter treatments help to reduce symptoms of periorbital edema.  Sometimes periorbital edema has a more serious underlying cause. A doctor can help to diagnose this and recommend appropriate treatment.  If a person suspects swelling around the eyes is caused by an anaphylactic shock, they should seek emergency medical treatment.    
 Goodyear, P. W. A., Firth, A. L., Strachan, D. R., &amp; Dudley, M. (2004, March). Periorbital swelling: The important distinction between allergy and infection.  Emergency Medicine Journal ,  21 (2), 240–242.  Goodyear, P. W. A., Firth, A. L., Strachan, D. R., &amp; Dudley, M. (2004, March). Periorbital swelling: The important distinction between allergy and infection.  Emergency Medicine Journal ,  21 (2), 240–242.  Sobel, R. K., Carter, K. D., &amp; Allen, R. C. (2012, March). The differential diagnosis and classification of periorbital edema [Abstract].  Investigative Ophthalmology &amp; Visual Science ,  53 (14), 1023.  Sobel, R. K., Carter, K. D., &amp; Allen, R. C. (2012, September). Periorbital edema: A puzzle no more? [Abstract].  Current Opinion in Ophthalmology ,  23 (5), 405–414.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "How do you get rid of puffy eyes?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320896.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, February 12). "How do you get rid of puffy eyes?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  