 It is a widespread and unpleasant experience, which can have many different causes ranging from overeating to a  migraine .  This article will offer some tips that may help to relieve the feeling of nausea.  Nausea can have many different causes and can be difficult to avoid entirely. However, feelings of nausea can be eased using some of the following methods:  These are anti-nausea drugs that can help to reduce feelings of nausea or vomiting. They are often used to treat nausea or vomiting symptoms caused by motion sickness or infection.  Common side effects can include:  There are many different types of antiemetic drugs, and each can have different side effects.   Ginger  is widely used for reducing nausea. Studies have shown ginger to be effective in treating symptoms of nausea and vomiting caused by  pregnancy  and by  chemotherapy . It has relatively few side effects and could be as effective as antiemetic drugs. Fresh ginger can be used in cooking or eaten on its own. Ginger can also be consumed as a tea.  A  recent study  has shown peppermint to reduce nausea caused by  chemotherapy . It can be consumed in a capsule, tea, or oil.  Salty liquids, such as those found in electrolyte replacement sports drinks may help to reduce nausea, according to  research .  Meals that are primarily made up of protein-rich foods, rather than  carbohydrates , have been  suggested by researchers  to reduce nausea.  A  study in 2015  found that  cinnamon  can help to reduce nausea caused by menstrual pain. Cinnamon is commonly used in cooking as a flavoring.  Carbonated drinks, such as cola, can cause bloating and worsen nausea.  If nausea is accompanied by vomiting, it is essential to stay hydrated by taking small sips of water on a regular basis. Eating salty foods or drinking a non-carbonated, sugary drink can be helpful to restore the sugars and salts lost through vomiting.  Sticking to a bland diet will help to reduce nausea. Any foods with strong flavors might unsettle the stomach further.  For example,  the BRAT diet  is often used to relieve symptoms of  food poisoning  or infection.  It consists of  bananas , rice, applesauce, and toast.  Some everyday activities and postures such as this can also increase nausea. Avoiding bending forward can reduce pressure on the stomach and may improve symptoms.  Keeping the body upright can support digestion and may help nausea to pass.  Too much movement can worsen nausea, particularly if it is sudden or intense.   Research  has shown that deep breaths taken at a slow and steady pace can help to ease feelings of nausea. It may help to engage in mindfulness meditation, which focusses on controlled breathing techniques.  A well-designed  review of evidence in 2009  found that wrist  acupuncture  could help to reduce nausea after operations. However, a more recent  updated version of the review  suggested the evidence was of low-quality, and further research is required to determine whether wrist acupuncture could effectively reduce nausea.  Vomiting can help to reduce nausea in some cases, such as when the nausea is caused by food poisoning or alcohol. However, this will usually only provide short-term relief and can also worsen nausea.  Many people believe that aromatherapy can help with nausea and recommend a variety of different oils including lemon, lavender, chamomile, and cloves. Some  studies  have found that peppermint aromatherapy, in particular, can help to relieve nausea.  However, a well-designed  review in 2012  found that isopropyl alcohol based aromatherapy was effective in reducing nausea, but found no evidence for peppermint oil. The authors concluded aromatherapy was helpful but less effective than antiemetic medication.  Opening a window or going outside can help to reduce feelings of nausea.  Nausea can be an unpleasant and often unavoidable experience. However, symptoms can be managed using some of the methods mentioned in this article.  It is a good idea to experiment with different methods as the causes and experience of nausea can vary from person to person.    
 Briggs, P., Hawrylack, H., &amp; Mooney, R. (2016, July). Inhaled peppermint oil for postop nausea in patients undergoing cardiac surgery [Abstract].  Nursing ,  46 (7), 61–67.  Briggs, P., Hawrylack, H., &amp; Mooney, R. (2016, July). Inhaled peppermint oil for postop nausea in patients undergoing cardiac surgery [Abstract].  Nursing ,  46 (7), 61–67.  Diet for nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea (BRAT diet). (n.d.).  Hines, S., Steels, E., Chang, A.,&amp; Gibbons, K. (2009, April 18). Aromatherapy for treatment of postoperative nausea and vomiting.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  4 .  Jaafarpour, M., Hatefi, M., Najafi, F., Khajavikhan, J., &amp; Khani, A. (2015, April). The effect of cinnamon on menstrual bleeding and systemic symptoms with primary dysmenorrhea.  Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal ,  17 (4), e27032.  Jueckstock, J. K., Kaestner, R., &amp; Mylonas, I. (2010, July 15). Managing hyperemesis gravidarum: a multimodal challenge.  BMC Medicine , 8(46), 1741-7015.  Lee, A., &amp; Fan, L. T. (2009, April 15). Stimulation of the wrist acupuncture point P6 for preventing postoperative nausea and vomiting.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  2 .  Lee, A., Chan, S. K., &amp; Fan, L. T. (2016, November 2). Stimulation of the wrist acupuncture point PC6 for preventing postoperative nausea and vomiting.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  11 .  Lee, N. M., &amp; Saha, S. (2013, June 9). Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy.  Gastroenterology Clinics of North America ,  40 (2), 309–334.  Marx, W., Ried, K., McCarthy, A. L., Vitetta, L., Sali, A., McKavanagh, D.,… Isenring, E (2017, July 4). Ginger— mechanism of action in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: A review.  Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition ,  57 (1), 141-146.  Sites, D. S., Johnson, N. T., Miller, J. A., Torbush, P. H., Hardin, J. S., Knowles, S. S., … Tart, R. C. (2014, February). Controlled breathing with or without peppermint aromatherapy for postoperative nausea and/or vomiting symptom relief: A randomized controlled trial [Abstract].  Journal of PeriAnesthesia Nursing ,  29 (1), 12–19.  Tayarani-Najaran, Z., Talasaz-Firoozi, E., Nasiri, R., Jalali, N., &amp; Hassanzadeh, M. K. (2013, January 31). Antiemetic activity of volatile oil from  Mentha spicata  and  Mentha× piperita  in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.  Ecancermedicalscience ,  7 , 290.  Viljoen, E., Visser, J., Koen, N., &amp; Musekiwa, A. (2014, March 19). A systematic review and meta-analysis of the effect and safety of ginger in the treatment of pregnancy-associated nausea and vomiting.  Nutrition Journal ,  13 (1), 20.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What are the best ways to get rid of nausea?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320877.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, February 10). "What are the best ways to get rid of nausea?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  