 This article provides a guide to the six best sleeping positions for lower  back pain , as well as offering advice on pillows and mattresses, sleep hygiene, and when to see a doctor.  Not only can lower back pain get in the way of a good night's rest, but poor sleeping posture may make the existing pain worse.  A poor sleeping position may even be the underlying cause of lower back pain. This is because certain positions can place unnecessary pressure on the neck, hips, and back.  It is important to maintain the natural curve of the spine when lying in bed. A person can do this by ensuring the head, shoulders, and hips are in alignment, and that the back is properly supported. The best way to do this is usually by sleeping on the back.  However, many people are uncomfortable sleeping on their back or find it causes them to snore. Everyone sleeps differently, so there is a variety of options for people who want to sleep better and reduce their back pain.  For people experiencing lower back pain at night, trying out the following postures and tips may provide relief.  Lying on the back is usually considered to be the best sleeping position for a healthy back.  This position evenly distributes weight the full length of the body's largest surface. It also minimizes pressure points and ensures good alignment of the head, neck, and spine.  Placing a small pillow under the knees can provide additional support and help maintain the natural curve of the spine.  To adopt this sleeping position, a person should:  Although lying on the side is a popular and comfortable sleeping position, it can pull the spine out of position. This can strain the lower back.  Correcting this is easy. Anyone who sleeps on their side can simply place a firm pillow between their knees. This raises the upper leg, which restores the natural alignment of the hips, pelvis, and spine.  To adopt this sleeping position, a person should:  People who habitually turn to sleep on their front may also want to try hugging a large pillow against their chest and stomach to aid sleep and keep their back aligned.  For people with a  herniated disc , adopting a curled-up fetal position may bring relief during the night. This is because lying on the side with the knees tucked into the chest reduces bending of the spine and helps open up the joints.  To adopt this sleeping position, a person should:  Lying on the front of the body is usually considered the worst sleeping posture. However, for those who struggle to sleep in another position, placing a slim pillow underneath the stomach and hips can help improve spinal alignment.  Sleeping on the front may also benefit people with a herniated disc or a degenerative disc disease.  To adopt this sleeping position, a person should:  Another reason sleeping on the front is considered bad is because the head is usually turned to one side. This twists the spine and places additional  stress  on the neck, shoulders, and back.  To avoid this, try lying face down. A small but firm pillow or tightly rolled-up towel can be used to prop up the forehead, allowing room to breathe. This should be done in addition to placing a pillow under the stomach.  To adopt this sleeping position, a person should:  Sleeping in a reclined position may benefit lower back pain, particularly in people with isthmic spondylolisthesis.  If significant relief is found from resting in a reclined chair, it may be worth investing in an adjustable bed that can be positioned accordingly.  A head pillow should maintain the natural posture of the neck and help support the spine. Ideally, it should be comfortable, adaptable to different positions, and keep its overall shape after use.  Pillows should be changed every 12–18 months.  Someone who sleeps on their back may be better suited to a thinner pillow. Raising the head too much can place a strain on the neck and back.  There are also thin pillows specifically designed to help the neck, such as  those available here . These pillows are also ideal for placing under the hips if a person sleeps on their front.  Memory foam is a good option as it is firm but also molds to the shape of the head and neck.  People who prefer to sleep on their sides may want to consider a thicker pillow. For best support, it should fill space between the neck and mattress completely. A gusseted pillow is an excellent choice for this, and  there are many options available to purchase here .  People who sleep on their stomach should use a thin pillow or no pillow at all. Pushing the head backward can put pressure on the neck.  Alternatively, they may wish to try sleeping face down with a small but firm pillow propping up only the forehead. This leaves enough room to breathe but allows a person to keep their neck straight.  A mattress should be well made, fully supportive, and comfortable. Firm mattresses are often recommended, but  there is some evidence  to suggest that medium-firm may be better for people with long-term lower back pain.  Body shape, size, and proportions can help determine how much support is needed. Wide hips may be better suited to a softer mattress and slim hips to a firmer one to keep the spine properly aligned.  Although they can seem more comfortable, softer mattresses provide less support. Sinking too deep can cause joints to twist and the spine to come out of its natural alignment.  A foam mattress topper can be used to provide additional support to a spring mattress. Alternatively, a plywood board can be placed underneath the mattress to increase firmness. A range of mattress toppers is available for  purchase online .  Ideally, mattresses should be replaced every 10 years.  Back pain can significantly disrupt sleep. People should avoid sleeping in late to compensate for lost sleep overnight. Instead, they should try to maintain a regular schedule with consistent bedtime and wake times. Most adults need  between 7 and 9 hours  every day.  General sleep hygiene tips include:  Anyone with severe or worsening back pain, particularly after a fall or injury, should speak to a doctor. People should also speak to a doctor if they experience pain that gets worse after resting or at night.  People should seek immediate medical advice for back pain if it is accompanied by any of the following:  If back pain is causing long-term lack of sleep, a person should speak to a doctor about treatment options and lifestyle changes to improve their symptoms and help them feel better rested.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 10 things you need to know about your back. (2017, May).  10 things you need to know about your back. (2017, May).  Back pain. (2017, January 23).  Brain basics: Understanding sleep. (2017, May 22).  Good sleeping posture helps your back. (n.d.).  How to get to sleep. (2016, July 14).  Kovacs, F. M., Abraira, V., Peña, A., Martín-Rodríguez, J. G., Sánchez-Vera, M., Ferrer, E., … Mufraggi, N. (2003, November 15). Effect of firmness of mattress on chronic non-specific low-back pain: Randomised, double-blind, controlled, multicentre trial [Abstract].  Lancet ,  362 (9396), 1599–1604.  Prevent back pain while you sleep. (n.d.).  Sleeping with lower back pain. (n.d.).  Slide show: Sleeping positions that reduce back pain. (2014, May 21).  The best sleep position for your body. (n.d.).  What pillow is best for you? (n.d.).  What type of mattress is best for people with low back pain? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gill, Stephen. "How should you sleep if you have lower back pain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320870.php&gt;    APA  Gill, S. (2018, February 10). "How should you sleep if you have lower back pain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  