 Most  urinary tract infections  (UTIs) affect the bladder and the urethra, which is the tube that drains urine from the bladder to outside the body.  Although a UTI is one of the most common infections in women, it is rare in men. UTIs are estimated to affect around  3 percent  of men worldwide each year. This means that most men will have never had a UTI, especially if they are young.  When a UTI develops in men, it is usually considered complicated and more likely to spread to the kidneys and upper urinary tract. Some cases may even require surgery. We learn more about this condition, including its symptoms and treatment options, in this article.  Men with UTIs may have no signs or symptoms of the infection. However, when symptoms do occur, they can include:  Men with complicated UTIs can also experience one or more of the following symptoms:  These symptoms are signs that the disease has spread to the kidneys or the upper urinary tract. An infection that has spread here is a more serious problem that requires prompt treatment.  UTIs are caused by bacteria. Older men have a higher risk of having a UTI, especially if they are after the  age of 50 . Most cases in older men are caused by the bacterium known as  Escherichia coli , which is naturally present in the body.  Cases similar to UTIs in younger men are typically caused by  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs).  A UTI develops when the bacterium gets into the urinary tract through the urethra and starts multiplying.  As men have longer urethras than women, they are less prone to UTIs because bacteria need to travel a longer distance to reach the bladder.  UTIs are  four times more common  in women than in men.  A person's risk of developing a UTI increases if they have:  Examples of these procedures include the insertion of a tube to drain the bladder, or a small camera, known as a cystoscopy, to examine the bladder and urethra.  Men can get UTIs from women during sex, by getting the bacteria from a woman with the infection. However, this is unlikely.  Typically, the infection arises from bacteria that are already present in the man's body.  A doctor can diagnose a UTI by carrying out a physical examination, taking a medical history, and through laboratory tests.   Physical examination   The doctor may perform a physical examination that includes:   Medical history   The doctor may ask if the person has had other UTIs in the past, or a family history of UTIs.  They may also question the person about their symptoms.   Laboratory tests   Laboratory tests are required to diagnose the infection as the symptoms of a UTI can be common to other diseases.  A urine sample is usually needed to look for the presence of  pus  and the bacteria causing the infection.  Men may be asked to give a urine sample. A man will need to start the urine stream to clean the urethra, and then collect a midstream sample in a cup. As bacteria multiply quickly at room temperature, this urine sample is either sent to the laboratory immediately or kept refrigerated until later.  The doctor may also ask for a urine test strip, also known as a urine dipstick test. This is a quick test in which a plastic or paper ribbon is dipped into the urine sample and then removed. If the person has a UTI, the ribbon will turn a particular color.  To obtain the best results for this test, the doctor will probably request that a person does it first thing in the morning.   Other medical exams   For people with a history of kidney stones, diabetes, polycystic kidneys, or  tuberculosis , the doctor may also require imaging exams.  UTIs in men are usually complicated and require treatment.  The goal of treatment is to prevent the infection from spreading to the kidneys or the upper urinary tract.  The type of treatment used depends on the cause of the infection. Treatment plans usually include  antibiotic  medications to kill the bacteria and drugs to reduce the person's symptoms, including those of pain and burning while urinating.  The duration of treatment can vary between  3 days and 6 weeks , depending on complicating factors, though a minimum of  7 days  is usually warranted.  Medication prescribed by a doctor may include:  Those with more complicated infections may require surgery. This can involve either draining areas of the urinary tract that are causing the infection, or removing inflamed areas of tissue.  In addition to treatment from doctors, the following home remedies may help with treating an infection:  Men can take a series of actions to reduce the risk of getting a UTI, such as:  UTIs are rare in adult men. This is mainly due to the longer length of the male urethra, and because the antibacterial properties of prostatic fluid prevent bacteria from growing. The incidence of the infection increases with age.  The clinical symptoms of UTIs in men are similar to women and include painful, urgent, and frequent urination.  UTIs in men are usually complicated and warrant at least 7 days of antibiotic treatment to prevent complications.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bono, M. J., &amp; Reygaert, W. C. (2017, December 12). Urinary tract infection.  StatPearls .  Bono, M. J., &amp; Reygaert, W. C. (2017, December 12). Urinary tract infection.  StatPearls .  Cortes-Penfield, N. W., Trautner, B. W., &amp; Jump, R. L. P. (2017, December). Urinary tract infection and asymptomatic bacteriuria in older adults [Abstract].  Infectious Disease Clinics of North America ,  31 (4), 673–688.  Geerlings, S. E. (2016, October). Clinical presentations and epidemiology of urinary tract infections [Abstract].  Microbiology Spectrum ,  4 (5).  Gupta, K., Grigoryan, L., &amp; Trautner, B. (2017, October 3). Urinary tract Infection [Abstract].  Annals of Internal Medicine ,  167 (7), ITC49–ITC64.  Hisano, M., Bruschini, H., Nicodemo, A. C., &amp; Srougi, M. (2012, June). Cranberries and lower urinary tract prevention.  Clinics ,  67 (6), 661–667.  Jhang, J.-F., &amp; Kuo, H.-C. (2017, July-September). Recent advances in recurrent urinary tract infection from pathogenesis and biomarkers to prevention.  Tzu Chi Medical Journal ,  29 (3), 131–137.  Majeed, A., Alarfaj, S., Darouiche, R., &amp; Mohajer, M. (2017, March). An update on emerging therapies for urinary tract infections [Abstract].  Expert Opinion on Emerging Drugs ,  22 (1), 53–62.  Masereijan, N. N., Wager, C. G., Giovannucci, E. L., Curto, T. M., McVary, K. T., &amp; McKinlay, J. B. (2013, June 15). Intake of caffeinated, carbonated, or citrus beverage types and development of lower urinary tract symptoms in men and women.  American Journal of Epidemiology ,  177 (12), 1399–1410.  Sabih, A., &amp; Leslie, S. W. (2017, June 27). Urinary tract infections, complicated.  StatPearls .  Seminerio, J. L., Aggarwal, G., &amp; Sweetser, S. (2011, June). 26-year-old man with recurrent urinary tract infections.  Mayo Clinic Proceedings ,  86 (6), 557–560.  Yamamoto, S., Ishikawa, K., Hayami, H., Nakamura, T., Miyairi, I., Hoshino, T., … Arakawa. S. (2017, November). JAID/JSC guidelines for clinical management of infectious disease 2015: Urinary tract infection/male genital infection.  Journal of Infection and Chemotherapy ,  23 (11), 733–751.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "All you need to know about UTIs in men."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320872.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, February 10). "All you need to know about UTIs in men."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  