  Pneumonia  infections can be critical and may even be life-threatening in some cases. It is essential to visit a doctor for a diagnosis, as well as to monitor symptoms and avoid any complications.  Using a blend of medical treatments and home remedies may help many people manage their symptoms more easily.  People often contract pneumonia from someone else or through a lingering infection, such as that caused by the  flu  virus.  Most of the time, the body fights off these infections. But if there are enough of the germs around, they can take over and cause a worse illness.  The most common symptoms of pneumonia include:  Sometimes, additional symptoms can occur, such as a persistent cough that causes a  headache .  Every pneumonia treatment plan will involve some antiviral,  antibiotic , or antifungal medication to treat the infection. Also, there are two rules to remember when recovering from pneumonia:  Also, there are some home treatments that may help clear up the annoying symptoms of pneumonia.  A cough may develop early on in the lifespan of pneumonia when the body is trying to expel fluid from the lungs to get rid of the infection. So, using a cough suppressant is not the best idea.  But it is still possible to reduce the severity of a cough, and there are a few simple ways to do this.  Many warm herbal teas may help soothe a scratchy throat, but herbs, such as peppermint or eucalyptus, may be more beneficial.  A study posted to   Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine   found that herbs, including peppermint and eucalyptus, had a soothing effect on the throat of people with upper respiratory tract infections. These herbs may help break up mucus and ease the pain and  inflammation  caused by pneumonia.  A separate review posted to the   Journal of the Saudi Society of Agricultural Sciences   noted that fenugreek seeds might help break down mucus. A tea made from ground fenugreek seeds may ease a persistent cough.   Peppermint ,  eucalyptus , and  fenugreek  tea are all available to buy in grocery stores, pharmacies, and online.  Mucus sitting in the throat and chest can lead to more coughing and irritation. A warm saltwater gargle may help eliminate mucus or germs in the throat, which may provide some relief.  Having shortness of breath is a symptom of respiratory infections, as in the case of pneumonia.  Drinking a small amount of caffeine, such as a cup of  coffee  or black or  green tea , may help with certain pneumonia symptoms. Caffeine may work to open up the airways in the lungs, which could help a person feel better satisfied by their breathing.  Inhaling warm, damp air may also help each breath feel less restrictive and keep the throat from tightening. Breathing the steam from a shower or breathing over a warm cup of tea may help in these cases.  Rest is vital for cellular repair in the body, but it may be especially beneficial for shortness of breath. Physical exertion should be kept to an absolute minimum with pneumonia.  Again, chest discomfort usually occurs when a person has pneumonia.  Chest pain may be caused when someone has a persistent cough. Dealing with a cough itself may help, but drinking a warm tea made with fresh  ginger  or turmeric root may also reduce this pain.  The roots of both of these plants can have a natural anti-inflammatory effect in the body.  Chopping up a thumb-sized piece of either root and boiling it in a few cups of water may provide enough tea to last throughout the day.   Ginger  and  turmeric  tea are available to buy in grocery stores, health stores, and online.  A high fever is another risk in people with pneumonia, and keeping a fever down is vital to avoiding complications.  When a person has a fever, keeping the body full of liquids and electrolytes is essential to prevent  dehydration . Drinking iced beverages or eating homemade ice popsicles may help hydrate the body and cool it down.  As the study posted to the   Journal of the Saudi Society of Agricultural Sciences   notes, making tea from fenugreek seeds may encourage a person to sweat, which could reduce their temperature.  Some OTC drugs like ibuprofen (Advil) may help reduce symptoms, including fever and pain. It is important to take the medications with food and not exceed the recommended dosage.  Soaking the body in lukewarm water may help to cool it down. If taking a bath is not possible, towels or washcloths dunked in lukewarm water and rung out can be applied to the body to help it cool. Once the towels warm up, they can be dipped in the water and reapplied.  Chills are often a secondary symptom caused by a fever. When the fever breaks or ends, the chills may subside on their own.  Drinking warm liquids may help warm the body up and prevent chills. This includes warm water, herbal teas, or a bowl of soup for added electrolytes and nutrients.  Additional natural compounds may help the body deal with the overall effects of pneumonia.  These at-home products contain compounds that help fight off bacteria, viruses, or fungi and can include the following:  Anyone who suspects they have pneumonia should see their doctor for a diagnosis and treatment. Once a doctor prescribes a treatment plan, it is essential to stick to it and finish the course of medication to give pneumonia the best chance of healing.  Also, taking all of the medication is essential to help keep the infection away for good.  Anyone who does not see an improvement in their symptoms after 3 or 4 days of treatment should visit their doctor again.  People who experience pneumonia once may be more likely to contract it again. It is advisable to talk to a doctor once treatment is complete to find ways to minimize the chance of pneumonia recurring.  These should not be seen as a guaranteed prevention method, but more as giving the body the tools it needs to fight off invaders.  As a study posted to   Gut Microbes   points out, gut health is tied to immune health in humans. Taking good care of the gut by feeding it a varied diet and avoiding inflammatory foods may help keep the immune system strong and avoid infections.  Exercising, managing  stress  levels, and getting enough rest are also necessary for a person to stay healthy, and may give the body the best chance to avoid infections, including pneumonia.  Pneumonia can be serious, and should not be taken lightly. Most people notice their symptoms improve within the first few days of treatment, but it can take months to recover fully from the respiratory condition.  Giving the body plenty of rest, fluids and a healthy diet that is rich in nutrients is crucial to allow it to heal. Natural home treatments for pneumonia may help alleviate symptoms as well.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Ali, B., Al-Wabel, N. A., Shams, S., Ahamad, A., Khan, S. A., &amp; Anwar, F. (2015, August). Essential oils used in aromatherapy: A systemic review.  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  5 (8), 601–611.  Ali, B., Al-Wabel, N. A., Shams, S., Ahamad, A., Khan, S. A., &amp; Anwar, F. (2015, August). Essential oils used in aromatherapy: A systemic review.  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  5 (8), 601–611.  Ben-Arye, E., Dudai, N., Eini, A., Torem, M., Schiff, E., Rakover, Y. (2011). Treatment of upper respiratory tract infections in primary care: A randomized study using aromatic herbs.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2011 , 690346.  Hewlings, S. J., &amp; Kalman, D. S. (2017, October). Curcumin: A review of its' effects on human health.  Foods ,  6 (10), 92.  Mashhadi, N. S., Ghiasvand, R., Askari, G., Hariri, M., Darvishi, L., &amp; Mofid, M. R. (2013, April). Anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory effects of ginger in health and physical activity: review of current evidence.  International Journal of Preventive Medicine ,  4 (suppl 1), S36–S42.  Pneumonia. (2017, August 21–22).  Wani, S. A., &amp; Kumar, P. (2016, January 27). Fenugreek: A review on its nutraceutical properties and utilization in various food products.  Journal of the Saudi Society of Agricultural Sciences .  Wu, H.-J., &amp; Wu, E. (2012, January 1). The role of gut microbiota in immune homeostasis and autoimmunity.  Gut Microbes ,  3 (1), 4–14.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Are there any home remedies for pneumonia?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320881.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, February 11). "Are there any home remedies for pneumonia?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  