 While doctors do not know what the exact cause of the condition is, they do know that it is a disorder that affects how the brain and gut interact.  When a person has IBS, they may notice that certain foods seem to trigger or worsen their condition.  Although these foods can be different for each person, doctors have identified some common "trigger" foods that tend to cause digestive symptoms over other ones.  If a person is hoping to control their IBS better, they may wish to eliminate some or all of these foods, then re-introduce them, one at a time, to identify which ones may be worsening their symptoms.  Many doctors recommend what is called a low FODMAP diet to avoid triggering IBS symptoms. FODMAP is an acronym that stands for fermentable, oligo-, di-, and monosaccharides and polyols.  These names represent different  carbohydrates  known to worsen IBS symptoms by causing gas, stomach pain, and make  constipation  worse too. If a person has IBS, they may wish to talk to their doctor or work with a dietitian to determine if a low-FODMAP diet could benefit them and improve their symptoms.  Listed below are 16 foods to avoid on a low-FODMAP diet:  These are examples of the most common foods known to cause  stomach upset  when a person has IBS. A person may wish to keep a food and symptom diary.  In a diary, they can write down all the foods they eat and if they have any symptoms after eating them. By looking back over several days of food journaling, a person may be able to identify trigger foods that made their symptoms worse.  Having IBS does not mean a person cannot eat vegetables or fruit. However, they can cook low-FODMAP foods and try to order these when they are out.  Examples of some swaps to make when a person has IBS can include:  While a person may not be able to eliminate all of a trigger food in a recipe, using the smallest amount possible may help to reduce symptoms.  Going to a restaurant can be a stressful experience for a person with IBS. They want to enjoy themselves and have a nice dinner or lunch but may be afraid of hidden triggers added to dishes.  In addition to reading the menu carefully to avoid ingredients known to worsen IBS symptoms, a person may have to ask several questions or request substitutions to have a more enjoyable experience.  Some tips for ordering in restaurants include:  Some people may choose to bring salad dressing from home in a small travel container, to avoid potential sauce or salad dressing additives. For example, a gluten-free balsamic dressing can be delicious over grilled chicken or steak, as well as low-FODMAP veggies.  A person may also have to research a restaurant's menu before going there. If there are little to no foods they could comfortably eat, they may need to suggest an alternate establishment that is more suitable.  According to an article in   The American Journal of Gastroenterology  , an estimated 10 to 15 percent of people in the industrialized world with a gastrointestinal disorder suffer from IBS. While diet is not the only triggering factor, it can play a role in a person's symptoms.  By identifying food triggers and avoiding foods known to worsen IBS, a person can enjoy a night out without fear that they will have to run to the bathroom or experience stomach discomfort all night.    
 5 foods to avoid if you have IBS. (n.d.).  5 foods to avoid if you have IBS. (n.d.).  Altobelli, E., Del Negro, V., Angeletti, P. M., Latella, G. (2017, June 15). Low-FODMAP diet improves irritable bowel syndrome symptoms: A meta-analysis.  Nutrients ,  9 (9), 940.  Definition &amp; facts for irritable bowel syndrome. (2017, November).  Eating, diet &amp; nutrition for irritable bowel syndrome. (2017, November).  Guo, Y.-B., Zhuang, K.-M., Kuang, L., Zhan, Q., Wang, X.-F., &amp; Liu, S.-D. (2015, September). Association between diet and lifestyle habits and irritable bowel syndrome: A case-control study.  Gut and Liver ,  9 (5), 649–656.  Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). (2017, February).  Rajilić-Stojanović, M., Jonkers, D. M., Salonen, A., Hanevik, K., Raes, J., Jalanka, J., … Penders, J. (2015, January 27). Intestinal microbiota and diet in IBS: Causes, consequences, or epiphenomena?  The American Journal of Gastroenterology ,  110 , 278–287.  Ross, E., Lam, M., Andrews, C., &amp; Raman, M. (2016, April 8). The low FODMAPS diet and IBS: A winning strategy.  Journal of Clinical Nutrition &amp; Dietetics ,  2 (6).  Sambrook, J. (n.d.). IBS diet sheet.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What should you not eat for IBS?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320876.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, February 10). "What should you not eat for IBS?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  