 Spongiotic dermatitis is closely associated with atopic dermatitis or  eczema . It is a widespread condition involving  inflammation  of the skin and is caused by allergies.  This article will give an overview of spongiotic dermatitis, looking at the symptoms, causes, and treatments of this condition.  Symptoms of spongiotic dermatitis include:  Atopic dermatitis is the  most prevalent  clinical cause of spongiotic dermatitis. The exact cause is unknown, but it seems to be related to a combination of genetic and environmental factors.  A  recent study  in the  Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology  suggests that people with this condition may have a mutation of the gene responsible for creating a protein called filaggrin. This protein helps maintain a protective barrier on the top layer of the skin.  Without enough filaggrin, the skin barrier is weakened, allowing moisture to escape and letting in more allergens and bacteria.  Atopic dermatitis tends to run in families and can occur alongside other conditions, such as  asthma  and  hay fever .  Possible triggers include:  Risk factors for spongiotic dermatitis include:  A doctor or dermatologist can diagnose spongiotic dermatitis by examining the person's skin. They may also ask about specific symptoms, family history, diet, and lifestyle.  Sometimes, a doctor may recommend a biopsy to help with diagnosis. A biopsy involves taking a small sample of skin tissue and sending it to a laboratory for testing.  The doctor may also carry out a patch test. This test involves placing patches that contain common allergens on a person's back to see if they cause an allergic reaction on the skin.  During severe flare-ups, scratching an itchy rash may cause dry skin to crack, or blisters to weep, which can lead to skin infections.  Repeated scratching can also lead to a thickening of the skin, which is a process called lichenification. The thickened skin may be itchy all the time, even when the condition is not active.  While there is no specific cure for spongiotic dermatitis, people can treat flare-ups with medications, skin care, and lifestyle changes.  Below is a list of possible treatments for spongiotic dermatitis:  Some people also report that taking  vitamin A or fish oil  can relieve symptoms.  Ways to ease the discomfort of spongiotic dermatitis and to reduce the likelihood of future flare-ups include:  Living with spongiotic dermatitis can be a continuing challenge for those who have the condition. Over  30 million people  in the United States alone have some form of atopic dermatitis.  Symptoms may clear up very quickly, or it may be a long-term condition.  This condition is not contagious, so there is no risk of catching it from someone else.  Though challenging, spongiotic dermatitis is also manageable. A treatment plan including medication, skincare, and lifestyle changes can do a lot to relieve the symptoms and to reduce the risk of future flare-ups.    
 Abreu Velez, A. M., Loebel, A. M., &amp; Howard, M. S. (2011). Spongiotic dermatitis with a mixed inflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes, antigen presenting cells, immunoglobulins and complement.  Our Dermatology Online ,  2 (2), 52–57.  Abreu Velez, A. M., Loebel, A. M., &amp; Howard, M. S. (2011). Spongiotic dermatitis with a mixed inflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes, antigen presenting cells, immunoglobulins and complement.  Our Dermatology Online ,  2 (2), 52–57.  Antihistamines. (2017, March 7).  Atopic dermatitis. Overview. (n.d.).  Atopic dermatitis: Tips for managing. (n.d.).  Atopic dermatitis: Who gets and causes. (n.d.).  Atopic eczema. (2017, February).  Atopic eczema. (2016, December 2).  Biopsy. (2015, June 17).  Calcineurin inhibitors. (2016, July).  Colmenero, I., Torrelo, A., &amp; Reyes-Múgica, M. (2014). Skin.  Essentials of Surgical Pediatric Pathology .  Contact dermatitis. (2017, May).  Controlling eczema by moisturizing. (n.d.).  Elias, M. S., Long, H. A., Newman, C. F., Wilson, P. A., West, A., McGill, P. J., ... &amp; Reynolds, N. J. (2017, November). Proteomic analysis of filaggrin deficiency identifies molecular signatures characteristic of atopic eczema.  Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology ,  140 (5), 1299–1309.  Patch testing. (2016, October).  Prednisolone. (n.d.).  Siegfried, E. C., &amp; Hebert, A. A. (2015, May 6). Diagnosis of atopic dermatitis: Mimics, overlaps and complications.  Journal of Clinical Medicine ,  4 (5), 884–917.  What is eczema? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Ponsford, Soccy. "What is spongiotic dermatitis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320845.php&gt;    APA  Ponsford, S. (2018, February 7). "What is spongiotic dermatitis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  