 Do you often ask yourself, "Why am I so tired all the time?" If so, this article may be the perfect read for you; we have compiled a list of some of the most common reasons for tiredness and what you can do to bounce back into action.  According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), around   15.3 percent   of women and 10.1 percent of men regularly feel very tired or exhausted in the United States.   Tiredness  can cause an array of problems. For example, around   1 in 25 adult drivers   report falling asleep at the wheel each month.  About 72,000 crashes and 44,000 injuries each year are a result of drowsy driving, and that's not to mention the estimated 6,000 fatal crashes caused by drowsy drivers.  Everyone feels tired at some point in their lives — whether it's due to a late night out, staying up to watch your favorite TV show, or putting in some extra hours at work.  Often, you can put your finger on the reason you're not feeling your best, but what about those times when you can't pinpoint the cause of your tiredness? What makes you feel tired then?   Medical News Today  have researched the possible explanations for why you could be feeling so drained and the steps that you can take to feel re-energized.  A lack of sleep may seem an obvious reason for feeling tired, yet   1 in 3 U.S. adults   are consistently not getting enough of it.  People aged between 18 and 60 years need  7 or more hours of sleep  every day to promote optimal health, according to The American Academy of Sleep Medicine and the Sleep Research Society.  Getting under the recommended hours of sleep each night is not only associated with fatigue, impaired performance, and a greater risk of accidents, but it also has adverse health outcomes.  These include  obesity ,  high blood pressure ,  depression ,  heart disease ,  stroke , and an increased risk of death.  If you struggle to fit in 7 hours of sleep, here are some tips to help you achieve a full dose of much-needed slumber:   Maintain a consistent sleep routine.  Try to go to bed at the same time every night and get up at the same time each morning — even on the weekends.   Avoid naps.  We need a certain amount of sleep within a 24-hour period and no more than that. Napping reduces the amount of sleep that we require the following night, which might lead to difficulty getting to sleep and fragmented sleep.   Limit time awake in bed to 5–10 minutes.  If you find that you are lying awake in bed worrying or with your mind racing, get out of bed and sit in the dark until you are feeling sleepy, then go back to bed.   Ensure that your bedroom is quiet, dark, and a comfortable temperature.  Any light that enters your room could disturb your sleep. Ensure that your room is dark and that light emitted from digital devices is out of sight. Cooler room temperatures are considered better to promote sleep than warmer temperatures.   Limit caffeinated drinks.  Try not to consume caffeinated beverages after noon. The stimulating effects of caffeine can last for many hours after intake and cause issues with initiating sleep.   Avoid tobacco and alcohol before bed.  Smoking cigarettes and drinking alcohol before going to bed may cause fragmented sleep.  If you practice all the sleeping habits listed above and still wake up tired, it might be a good idea to contact your healthcare provider and discuss whether you have a sleep-related medical problem such as  insomnia ,  obstructive sleep apnea , or  restless legs syndrome .  The easiest way to banish tiredness is to make adjustments to your diet. Eating a healthful and balanced diet can make the world of difference to how you feel.  To improve your health and get all the nutrients you need — as well as eliminate fatigue — it is vital to choose a healthful mix of food from the five food groups, which are: fruits, vegetables, grains, protein, and dairy.  You can switch up your eating style today by implementing some of these small changes:  When tiredness sets in, sitting on the couch and relaxing could seem to be the only answer. But getting up and moving may be the best thing you can do to re-energize and eradicate fatigue.   Research  by the University of Georgia (UGA) in Athens discovered that compared with sitting quietly, one single bout of moderate-intensity exercise lasting for at least 20 minutes helped to boost energy.  An earlier  study  by UGA also found that when sedentary individuals completed an exercise program regularly, their fatigue improved compared with those who did not.  The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans   suggest   that all adults need 2 hours and 30 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise per week and muscle-strengthening activities that work all the major muscle groups on 2 or more days per week.  This may seem to be a lot of time spent exercising, but you can spread out your activity across the week and, in total, it is just the amount of time that you might otherwise spend watching a movie.  If you have not exercised for a while, start slowly. Begin with a brisk 10-minute walk each day and build up to walking fast for 30 minutes on 5 days per week.  Brisk walking, water aerobics, riding a bike, playing tennis, and even pushing a lawnmower can all count toward your time spent doing moderate-intensity exercise.  Many situations can cause  stress . Work, financial problems, relationship issues, major life events, and upheavals such as moving house, unemployment, and bereavement — the list of potential stressors is never-ending.  A little stress can be healthy and may actually make us more alert and able to perform better in tasks such as interviews, but stress is only a positive thing if it is short-lived.  Excessive, prolonged stress can cause physical and emotional exhaustion and lead to illness.  Stress makes your body generate more of the "fight-or-flight" chemicals that are designed to prepare your body for an emergency.  In situations such as an office environment where you can't run away or fight, the chemicals that your body has produced to protect you can't be used up and, over time, can damage your health.  If the pressures that you face are making you feel overtired or giving you  headaches ,  migraines , or tense muscles, don't ignore these signals. Take some time out until you feel calmer, or try some of these tips.  Physical activity is a significant stress reliever and releases feel-good endorphins. If you are feeling stress build up, go for a walk, take your dog out, or even put on some music and dance around the room.  If you have made lifestyle changes to do with your physical activity, diet, stress levels, and sleep but still feel tired all the time, there could be an underlying medical condition.  Some of the most common conditions that report fatigue as a key symptom include:  If you are concerned that you have a medical condition that is causing you to feel tired, arrange an appointment with your healthcare provider to discuss your worries as soon as possible.   Researchers used 800 million Twitter messages to determine the connection between daily and seasonal, and positive and negative mood changes.    When it comes to symptoms of seasonal depression, a new study finds that women are more vulnerable than men, particularly in the winter months.    A study monitoring levels of molecules involved in immune response in CFS/ME patients suggests that the condition is essentially an inflammatory…    A new study examines the biological evidence for chronic fatigue syndrome and finds two different subgroups of the condition: atypical and classical…    Nerve and muscle strain may prompt symptoms of chronic fatigue syndrome, find researchers, suggesting such symptoms could be eased with physical…    Young adults who feel lonely may be at greater risk of poor sleep quality, daytime tiredness, and concentration problems, new study finds.  