 Endorphins are primarily made in the hypothalamus and pituitary glands, though they may come from other parts of the body as well. The well-known "runner's high" that is felt after lengthy, vigorous exercise is due to an increase in endorphin levels.  The level of endorphins in the human body varies from person to person. People who have lower levels may be more likely to have  depression  or  fibromyalgia , but more research is needed in this area.  Endorphins are chemicals produced by the body to relieve  stress  and pain. They work similarly to a class of drugs called opioids.  Opioids relieve pain and can produce a feeling of euphoria. They are sometimes prescribed for short-term use after surgery or for pain-relief.  In the 1980s, scientists were studying how and why opioids worked. They found that the body has special receptors that bind to opioids to block pain signals.  The scientists then realized that some chemicals in the body acted similarly to natural opioid medications, binding to these same receptors. These chemicals were endorphins.  The name endorphin comes from the words "endogenous," which means "from the body," and "morphine," which is an opioid pain reliever.  Some of the more common opioid drugs include:  Some illegal drugs, such as heroin, are also opioids. Both legal and illegal opioid medications have a high risk of causing  addiction , overdose, and death.  The  National Institute on Drug Abuse  state that 90 people die each day in the United States from an opioid overdose. Many of these are a result of overdosing or misusing prescription opioids.  Opioid abuse and overdose have become such a serious problem that the  National Institutes of Health  have declared it a crisis. Medical experts are now looking into safe and effective pain relievers without opioids.  Natural endorphins work similarly to opioid pain relievers, but their results may not be as dramatic. However, endorphins can produce a "high" that is both healthy and safe, without the risk of addiction and overdose.  The following activities show promise as ways to naturally increase endorphins. However, endorphin levels vary between individuals, so results will also vary.  For years, researchers suspected that endorphins caused the so-called "runner's high," a feeling of euphoria that happens after lengthy, vigorous physical activity.  However, measuring endorphins in humans was not possible until 2008, when new imaging technology became available.  Researchers used positron emission tomography (PET) scans to view athlete's brains both before and after exercise. They found an increase in the release of endorphins after exercise.  As exercise boosts mood and increases endorphins, some medical professionals prescribe regular exercise as a treatment for mild to moderate depression and  anxiety .  Exercise can be used safely in conjunction with other treatments, such as medications or therapy, and can also be used alone.  One study  states that exercise can improve some symptoms of depression, similarly to  antidepressants .  Volunteering, donating, and helping others may also make a person feel good. Researchers at the  National Institutes of Health  found that people who gave money to a charity activated pleasure centers in their brain. This may lead to improved endorphin levels.  Meditation and  yoga  are known for their stress-relieving and relaxing effects. This may be partially due to an endorphin release.   Some research suggests  that yoga and meditation can decrease stress markers and increase endorphins.  People who enjoy spicy foods may find that they can get an additional boost from their favorite dishes.   Some research suggests  that the spicy components in hot peppers and similar foods may trigger a pain sensation in the mouth, which prompts an increase in endorphins.   Research from 2013  suggests that eating dark chocolate could boost endorphin levels. Cocoa powder and chocolate contain chemicals called flavonoids that appear to be beneficial to the brain.   A 2017 review  found that eating chocolate may help boost endorphins. However, many commercial chocolate products contain only small amounts of real cocoa and often contain generous amounts of added sugar and fat.  People looking to use chocolate to improve endorphin levels and mood should look for products that contain at least 70 percent cocoa and eat chocolate in moderation due to its high calorie and fat content.  Plenty of research has been written about the health benefits of laughter, and studies suggest that laughing increases endorphins.   A 2017 study  found that social laughter releases endorphins in the brain.  When endorphin levels are too low, a person's health may be negatively affected. Research into the link between endorphins and health conditions is ongoing.  Some studies have shown a possible link between the following health problems and low endorphin levels:   Depression   Without enough endorphins, a person may be more likely to have depression. An article in the   American Journal of Psychiatry   discusses the long-standing use of opioid treatments for depression, particularly in cases where other treatments have not worked.   Another article  suggests that higher endorphin levels have an effect on depression symptoms because of their association with reward.   Fibromyalgia   Common symptoms of fibromyalgia include:  People with fibromyalgia may have lower than normal endorphin levels.  One study  found that people with fibromyalgia had lower levels of endorphins than those without the condition. They measured endorphins both before and after exercise.   Another study  found that increases in the body's endorphins were correlated with pain relief in people with fibromyalgia.  People with fibromyalgia may be advised to do certain activities to boost endorphins, such as exercise, connecting with others, and stress-relieving activities, such as yoga. They may also be prescribed medications to help with symptoms.   Chronic headaches   One possible cause of ongoing  headaches  is abnormal endorphin levels.  Some research  suggests that the same endorphin imbalance that contributes to depression is also present in people who have chronic headaches.  The science of human endorphin levels is still evolving, as researchers continue to study this chemical and how it affects overall health.  People who have symptoms of depression, fibromyalgia, or chronic headaches may wish to talk to a doctor about endorphin levels and ways they can increase them, in addition to their regular treatment options.  While endorphins are not a "cure-all" or a guarantee of good health, boosting endorphins may be an effective way to increase overall well-being.  Regular exercise, stress reduction, and giving to others are well-known "feel-good" activities that can help a person live a healthier and happier life.  The endorphin "high" is a pleasant bonus that may help a person stick to these good habits.    
 Bidari, A., Ghavidel-Parsa, B., Rajabi, S., Sanaei, O., &amp; Toutounchi, M. (2016, October). The acute effect of maximal exercise on plasma beta-endorphin levels in fibromyalgia patients.  The Korean Journal of Pain ,  29 (4), 249–254.  Bidari, A., Ghavidel-Parsa, B., Rajabi, S., Sanaei, O., &amp; Toutounchi, M. (2016, October). The acute effect of maximal exercise on plasma beta-endorphin levels in fibromyalgia patients.  The Korean Journal of Pain ,  29 (4), 249–254.  Bosland, P. W. (2016, January–March). Hot stuff — do people living in hot climates like their food spicy hot or not?  Temperature ,  3 (1), 41–42.  Contie, V. (2007, June 22). Brain imaging reveals joys of giving.  Dada, R., Kumar, S. B., Tolahunase, M., Mishra, S., Mohanty, K., &amp; Mukesh, T. (2015, November 11). Yoga and meditation as a therapeutic intervention in oxidative stress and oxidative DNA damage to paternal genome.  Journal of Yoga &amp; Physical Therapy ,  5 (4), 217.  Dalayeun, J. F., Norès, J. M., &amp; Bergal, S. (1993). Physiology of beta-endorphins. A close-up view and a review of the literature [Abstract].  Biomedicine &amp; Pharmacotherapy ,  47 (8), 311–320.  Dinas, P. C., Koutedakis, Y., &amp; Flouris, A. D. (2011, June). Effects of exercise and physical activity on depression [Abstract].  Irish Journal of Medical Science ,  180 (2), 319–325.  Khedr, E. M., Omran, E. A. H., Ismail, N. M., El-Hammady, D. H., Goma, S. H., Kotb, H., ... Ahmed, G. A. (2017, September–October). Effects of transcranial direct current stimulation on pain, mood and serum endorphin level in the treatment of fibromyalgia: A double blinded, randomized clinical trial.  Brain Stimulation: Basic, Translational, and Clinical Research in Neuromodulation ,  10 (5), 893–901.  Kosten, T. R. (2016, May 1). An opioid for depression?  The American Journal of Psychiatry ,  173 (5), 446–447.  Kumar, S. B., Yadav, R., Yadav, R. K., Tolahunase, M., &amp; Dada, R. (2015, June 2). Telomerase activity and cellular aging might be positively modified by a yoga-based lifestyle intervention [Abstract].  The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine ,  21 (6), 370–372.  Magrone, T., Russo, M. A., &amp; Jirillo, E. (2017, June 9). Cocoa and dark chocolate polyphenols: From biology to clinical applications.  Frontiers in Immunology ,  8 , 677.  Merenlender-Wagner, A., Dikshtein, Y., &amp; Yadid, G. (2009). The β-endorphin role in stress-related psychiatric disorders [Abstract].  Current Drug Targets ,  10 (11), 1096–1108.  Nehlig, A. (2013, March). The neuroprotective effects of cocoa flavanol and its influence on cognitive performance.  British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology ,  75 (3), 716–727.  Opioids. (n.d.).  Runners' high demonstrated: Brain imaging shows release of endorphins in brain. (2008, March 6).  Sharma, N., Gupta, A., Puri, P., &amp; Mohan, M. (2016, January). Anxiety and depression in chronic headache patients: Major concern for community mental health [Preview].  Indian Journal of Health and Wellbeing ,  7 (1), 45–47.  Social laughter releases endorphins in the brain. (2017, June 1).  Sprouse-Blum, A. S., Smith, G., Sugai, D., &amp; Parsa, F. D. (2010, March). Understanding endorphins and their importance in pain management.  Hawaii Medical Journal ,  69 (3), 70–71.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "Endorphins: Effects and how to increase levels."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320839.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, February 6). "Endorphins: Effects and how to increase levels."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  