 The condition is one of the most common forms of a rare inflammatory problem called panniculitis that affects subcutaneous fat under the skin.  A majority of erythema nodosum (EN) cases occur in people between the ages of 20 and 45 years old. Women are five times more likely than men to develop EN.  The condition is usually relatively harmless, but it can be a sign of an underlying infection, other inflammatory conditions, or an abnormal response to an allergen or medication.   Up to 55 percent  of EN cases are idiopathic, meaning they have no known cause.  In some cases, EN is the result of an abnormal immune response, most often triggered by infection, medications, or conditions that cause chronic  inflammation .  Researchers are not entirely sure how EN develops. One theory is that it may be caused by the buildup of immune complexes in tiny blood vessels and connections in the subcutaneous fat. These buildups lead to inflammation.  Around  1.2 percent  of people with leprosy develop a type of EN called erythema nodosum leprosum or  type 2 lepra reaction .  Possible causes of EN include:  EN can develop suddenly without any warning signs. Some people experience non-specific symptoms before EN lesions develop.  Many of the early signs of EN, especially joint pain, continue once the sores develop and may last for weeks to months after they have gone.  Common early signs and symptoms of EN include:  The symptoms vary between individuals, but once EN lesions have developed, they normally have a few common characteristics.  Most EN sores are usually:  Rarely, the spots may bond together to form a crescent-shaped ring that spreads for a few days before fading.  With proper rest, most cases of EN resolve on their own within 1 to 2 months, with new sores continuing to develop or spread throughout the first few weeks.  However, some people experience EN symptoms for 6 months or more. This is more likely if it is caused by an underlying medical condition or untreated infection. Chronic or long-term EN will also cause joint pain.  Doctors will usually diagnose EN by taking a biopsy, or small tissue sample, from the sores.  The treatment recommended for each case of EN depends on the cause. Underlying infections or medical conditions will also require treatment.  Common forms of treatment for EN include:  Hormonal changes are also known to cause EN. About  2 to 5 percent  of cases are linked to pregnancy.  EN that develops during pregnancy usually clears after childbirth but may return if the woman becomes pregnant again.  Some people who take oral contraceptives, or hormone control medications develop EN, usually within the first few months on the medication.  Despite its uncomfortable symptoms, EN is usually harmless. Sometimes it can be a sign of infection or medical condition that requires treatment, so should always be seen by a doctor.  Cases of EN usually resolve with proper rest and basic care within a few months. But for some people, EN can become chronic and cause joint pain and sores for 6 months to 2 years.  If signs or symptoms of EN occur, a person should seek medical attention to rule out the risk of more serious underlying conditions. People should also talk with a doctor if their EN does not clear up with rest and home care.    
 Blake, T., Manahan, M., &amp; Rodins, K. (2014, April). Erythema nodosum—a review of an uncommon panniculitis.  Dermatology Online Journal ,  20 (4).  Blake, T., Manahan, M., &amp; Rodins, K. (2014, April). Erythema nodosum—a review of an uncommon panniculitis.  Dermatology Online Journal ,  20 (4).  Erythema nodosum. (2017, September 15).  Negera, E., Walker, S. L., Girma, S., Doni, S. N., Tsegaye, D., Lambert, S. M., ... Lockwood, D. N. (2013, October 13). Clinico-pathological features of erythema nodosum leprosum: A case-control study at ALERT hospital, Ethiopia.  PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases ,  11 (10), e0006011.  Schwartz, R. A., &amp; Nervi, S. J. (2007, March 1). Erythema nodosum: A sign of systemic disease.  American Family Physician ,  75 (5), 695–700.  Voorend, C. G. N., &amp; Post, E. B. (2013, October 3). A systemic review on the epidemiological data of erythema nodosum leprosum, a type 2 leprosy reaction.  PloS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 7 (10), e2440.  Weizman, A., Huang, B., Berel, D., Targan, S. R., Dubinsky, M., Fleshner, P., … McGovern, D. P. B. (2015, March 1). Clinical, serologic, and genetic factors associated with pyoderma gangrenosum and erythema nodosum in inflammatory bowel disease patients.  Inflammatory Bowel Diseases ,  20 (3), 525–533.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "How do you treat erythema nodosum?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320829.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, February 5). "How do you treat erythema nodosum?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  