 Raw water is unfiltered, unprocessed, or untreated water that is bottled directly from a natural spring.  Some manufacturers are selling this water and marketing it as a safer alternative to chemically treated water, maintaining that their water has natural probiotics that help promote digestion and good health.  However, scientists and government officials have expressed concerns over untreated water. Raw water may be an instance where "natural" is not necessarily better. It may also be true that raw water does not offer distinct health benefits over a healthful diet that includes drinking tap or bottled water.  Sanitation officials and water manufacturers add chemicals to drinking water that comes from the tap or bottles to kill any bacteria and parasites that can naturally occur in water. Examples of these include salmonella,  E.Coli,  and  Giardia .  These pathogens can cause  stomach upset ,  diarrhea , and vomiting. The oldest and youngest people are especially at risk for developing illnesses related to these contaminants because their immune system may not be strong enough to fight off the pathogens.  Because it is untreated, raw water may contain some of these pathogens. While raw water retailers are not bottling contaminated water, it is possible for bacteria, parasites, chemicals, and other pathogens to be in the water.  It is essential for people to choose products that have the reputation of following the FDA's regulations.  Supporters of raw water believe that sterilizing and purifying water with chemicals destroys the natural minerals and probiotics present in water.  They believe that by drinking raw water, a person can live a healthier life with improved digestion.  Those who advocate the use of raw water believe that it contains more electrolytes and minerals than bottled water, including:  Supporters also claim that raw water is "alkaline water." According to its proponents, alkaline water acts as an  antioxidant  and reduces inflammatory cell damage from oxidation.  However, according to the  Cleveland Clinic , no current studies exist that support the health and wellness benefits of alkaline water over more acidic water.  Some people who drink raw water may prefer the taste or the way drinking raw water makes them feel. However, taste is very personal, and there are no studies available to prove whether raw water tastes better or worse than treated water.  There is, however, plenty of research on the dangers of drinking untreated water, which may offer more reasons not to drink it than to drink it.  Before the development of public water systems and water treatment centers, people living in cities and towns were much more likely to experience water-borne illnesses, such as  typhoid  and  cholera , than they are today. These illnesses spread via untreated drinking water.  According to   Time   magazine, most community tap water is treated to remove as many as 91 contaminants.  Many people are concerned about the methods used to treat water.  For example, the mineral fluoride has been added to public water supplies for decades as a way to promote dental health. Some people believe excess fluoride levels can cause people to develop conditions, such as thyroid problems and impaired brain functioning.  However, there is no evidence that fluoride is harmful if delivered at the low levels that public systems currently deliver it.  Some people prefer to drink only bottled water to avoid potential chemicals and because they may think the water is safer than tap water. According to the International Bottled Water Association (ABWA),  12.8 billion gallons  of bottled water were sold in the United States in 2016; and American people consume more bottled water than milk,  coffee , or tea.  The FDA regulate bottled water, including raw water, to an extent. According to the  CDC , the FDA set out the following considerations for bottled water:  It can be difficult for consumers to determine whether tap, bottled, or even raw water is safe for them to drink as most of it looks the same, yet it can contain potentially infectious microorganisms.  Although there have been instances where bottled water has led to an outbreak of bacteria-causing illness, the incidences of contaminated drinking water supplies have been few since water treatment began.  Raw water is a fairly new phenomenon and, as such, there is not enough research to determine whether it can offer any long-term health benefits.  So far, raw water has been a controversial addition to the water market. Not only is raw water a questionable commodity, but it is also expensive, with some 2.5-gallon glass jugs selling for up to $60.99, according to  NBC News .  Ultimately, it is up to an individual to decide what sort of water they want to drink. If a person does choose to drink raw water, it is essential they understand the potential dangers that the water may contain, such as infectious microorganisms.  For those who are choosing to move away from all chemical consumption, it is important to choose products from reputable companies. Short-term use of raw water, to see if it works, is unlikely to cause any harm.  More research is needed to examine the health benefits of drinking water.    
 Alkaline water: Don't believe the marketing hype. (2013, October 29).  Alkaline water: Don't believe the marketing hype. (2013, October 29).  A guide to drinking water treatment technologies for household use. (2014, March 14).  Bever, L. (2018, January 4). 'Raw water' is the latest health craze. Here's why drinking it may be a bad idea.  Bottled water market. (n.d.).  Caulfield, T. (2018, January 13). Raw water is a dangerous 'natural food' fad that promises health but gives diarrhea.  Commercially bottled water. (2014, April 7).  Drinking water contaminants — standards and regulations. (n.d.).  Ducharme, J. (2018, January 3). Raw water is a new health trend. But is it safe?  Feldscher, K. (2016, August 9). Unsafe levels of toxic chemicals found in drinking water of 33 states.  Is fluoridated drinking water safe? (2016).  Proctor, C. (2018, January 30). WA state dept. of health warns against drinking 'raw water.'  The water in you. (2016, December 2).  Viscusi, W. K., Huber, J., Bell, J. (2015, July). The private rationality of bottled water drinking [Abstract].  Contemporary Economic Policy ,  33 (3), 450–467.  What is the 'raw water' trend? It could kill you, experts say. (2018, January 3).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Is it safe to drink raw water?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320892.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, February 12). "Is it safe to drink raw water?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  