 Any  hernia  can become strangulated. A strangulated hernia is a hernia that is cutting off the blood supply to the intestines and tissues in the abdomen.  Symptoms of a strangulated hernia include pain near a hernia that gets worse very quickly and may be associated with other symptoms.  Anyone who suspects they have a strangulated hernia should seek emergency medical care.  One common indication of a strangulated hernia is an easily visible bulge in the areas of the abdomen or pelvis.  Other symptoms that may accompany the bulge include:  Anyone who experiences pain near the hernia should see a doctor as soon as possible.  Strangulated hernias are often diagnosed in the emergency room, and may be easy to see from visual inspection and the description of symptoms. Doctors may use an imaging test, such as an  ultrasound , to check if the hernia is blocking a person's bowels.  A strangulated hernia should be surgically treated immediately, as this may prevent serious harm to the body and permanent damage to the tissues.  Surgery for a strangulated hernia occurs in two stages.  First, the surgeon will need to reduce the size of the hernia. The surgeon gently applies pressure to the hernia in an attempt to push the trapped tissues back into the abdominal cavity. They must work quickly to prevent the tissue from being permanently damaged.  After this, the surgeon will remove any damaged tissues.  Once this is complete, the surgeon will repair the weak area of muscle where the hernia pushed through. If the hernia is small, the surgeon may be able to do this with stitches. With large hernias, a surgeon may need to add flexible surgical mesh or tissue for added support to help keep the hernia from recurring.  A hernia is the result of a weakness in the abdominal muscles that hold the organs in place. When these muscles become too weak, organ tissue might push through the muscle, creating this noticeable bulge in the skin. This bulge may disappear or become smaller when a person lies down.  Hernias may also be tender to the touch and can cause discomfort in the upper or lower abdomen or groin, especially when lifting, coughing, or bending over.  Hernias may not cause symptoms in some cases, but it may still be better to treat them early to avoid complications.  A strangulated hernia is not a type of hernia, but rather a complication. Some of the more common types of hernias that can become strangulated are:  Hernias may become incarcerated when the herniated tissue gets trapped and cannot move back into place, but the blood supply to the tissues has not been cut off. However, incarcerated hernias can easily lead to strangulated hernias.  Incarcerated hernias are not a medical emergency, but should still be treated quickly to prevent them becoming strangulated.  If the hernia does not easily go back into the abdominal cavity, it may be incarcerated. Anyone with an incarcerated hernia should see a doctor, as these hernias can easily become strangulated.  Anyone who suspects they have a strangulated hernia should skip the doctor and seek emergency medical care immediately.  Strangulated hernias can occur at any point in a person's life. It is even possible for babies to be born with hernias that may or may not strangulate.  The cause of a strangulated hernia is the same as other hernias. The muscle tissue in the abdomen becomes weak, which makes it easier for tissues from the intestines to push through the muscle tissue.  When this happens, the abdominal lining can trap the intestines, which pinches off a bit of organ tissue and causes strangulation.  While strangulated hernias can occur in just about everyone, there are some risk factors to look out for. Risk factors for hernias can include:  People who have had a hernia repaired in the past may also be more likely to get a hernia in the same area later on in life.  Most complications with strangulated hernias occur because of lack of treatment.  The tissue that has been cut off from the blood supply can quickly die off. This leads to a potentially life-threatening situation, as this dead tissue releases toxins and bacteria into the bloodstream that can cause blood infections,  sepsis , and death.  Surgery also carries some risk of complications. Doctors will discuss each person's options with them, including any risks associated with surgery.  Recovering from surgery for a strangulated hernia can take time. Many people will need to spend some time recovering in the hospital.  Many people find they can return to their usual lives within a couple of weeks. If there has been severe tissue damage, recovery may take longer. After surgery, a person will need to limit their physical activity for a period of time that is determined by their doctor.  Complete recovery can vary from a few weeks to several months.  When a strangulated hernia is caught early and treated quickly, the outlook is good. People who suspect they have a hernia should see a doctor as soon as possible for diagnosis and treatment. Taking action early on may help avoid potentially dangerous issues.  Anyone who notices the signs of a strangulated hernia should seek emergency medical attention.    
 Berger, D. (2016, March). Evidence-based hernia treatment in adults.  Deutsches Ärzteblatt International ,  113 (9), 150–158.  Berger, D. (2016, March). Evidence-based hernia treatment in adults.  Deutsches Ärzteblatt International ,  113 (9), 150–158.  Hermann, J., Kościński, T., Malinger, S., Szmeja, J., Monkiewicz, M., &amp; Drews, M. (2012, December). Strangulation of the stomach and the transverse colon following laparoscopic esophageal hiatal hernia repair.  Videosurgery and Other Miniinvasive Techniques ,  7 (4), 311–314.  Köckerling, F., Koch, A., Lorenz, R., Schug-Pass, C., Stechemesser, B., &amp; Reinpold, W. (2015, June 16). How long do we need to follow-up our hernia patients to find the real recurrence rate?  Frontiers in Surgery ,  2 , 24.  Prakash, P., Bansal, V. K., Misra, M. C., Babu, D., Sagar, R., Krishna, A., ... Subramaniam, R. (2016, April-June). A prospective randomised controlled trial comparing chronic groin pain and quality of life in lightweight versus heavyweight polypropylene mesh in laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair.  Journal of Minimal Access Surgery ,  12 (2), 154–161.  Romain, B., Chemaly, R., Meyer, N., Brigand, C., Steinmetz, J. P., &amp; Rohr, S. (2012, August). Prognostic factors of postoperative morbidity and mortality in strangulated groin hernia [Abstract].  Hernia ,  16 (4), 405–410.  Sanders, D. L., &amp; Kingsnorth, A. N. (2012, May 12). The modern management of incisional hernias.  British Medical Journal ,  344 , e2843.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "What is a strangulated hernia?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320888.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, February 11). "What is a strangulated hernia?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  