 Here are some examples of catastrophizing:  Doctors also call catastrophizing "magnifying," because a person makes a situation seem much worse, dire, or severe than it is.  Catastrophizing can lead to  depression  in some individuals. Fortunately, there are several methods to address the condition and avoid catastrophizing.  While there are several potential causes and contributors to catastrophizing, most fall into one of three categories. These are:   Ambiguity   Ambiguity or being vague can open a person up to catastrophic thinking.  An example would be getting a text message from a friend or partner that reads, "We need to talk."  This vague message could be something positive or negative, but a person cannot know which of these it is with just the information they have. So they may start to imagine the very worst news.   Value   Relationships and situations that a person holds in high value can result in a tendency to catastrophize. When something is particularly significant to a person, the concept of loss or difficulty can be harder to deal with.  An example would be applying for a job that a person wants. They may start to imagine the great disappointment, anxiety, and depression they will experience if they do not get the job before the organization has even made any decisions.   Fear   Fear, especially irrational fear, plays a big part in catastrophizing. If a person is scared of going to the doctor, they could start to think about all the bad things a doctor could tell them, even if they are just going for a check-up.  A person may also experience catastrophizing related to a medical condition or past event in their life.  Anxiety is closely related to catastrophizing. Anxiety is a condition where a person experiences heightened fear and preoccupation with a circumstance. Examples could be worrying about a big test coming up or being fearful of walking alone at night.  The primary difference between anxiety and catastrophizing is that anxiety can play a useful role in a person's life. For example, anxiety can be a positive emotion because it can help a person to be protective of themselves. However, catastrophizing does not usually have any benefits.  Having these catastrophic thoughts can fill a person's mind with unnecessary emotions that take time and thought away from the reality of a situation. While both anxiety and catastrophizing can be harmful, anxiety can be beneficial in some circumstances.  Depression, or prolonged feelings of helplessness and sadness, is also connected to catastrophizing. When a person experiences prolonged feelings of hopelessness, they may tend to catastrophize and imagine the worst will happen.  In addition to mental health conditions, such as anxiety and depression, some people may catastrophize over feelings of pain. "Pain catastrophizing" is when a person obsesses and worries about pain, feels helpless when they experience pain, and is unable to put worries or thoughts of pain aside.  According to an article in the journal   Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics  , catastrophizing about pain is associated with increases in narcotic usage, post-surgical pain ratings, or depression after surgery. While no person looks forward to a post-surgical or post-injury pain, an irrational fear or approach can make a recovery especially difficult.  Most people experience fear and worry at some time.  However, if a person constantly fears the worst or hears from their friends and family that they are thinking in this way, they may need to address their catastrophic thinking.  If a person has an underlying medical condition, such as depression, a doctor may prescribe  antidepressant  medications to help.  Examples of these include:  Sometimes, a doctor may initially prescribe one type of medication that may not be effective in reducing both depression and catastrophizing. In this case, the doctor may prescribe another medication.  Mental health experts often use techniques known as cognitive-behavioral therapy ( CBT ) to help a person address their catastrophic thinking.  These techniques require the person to be aware that they are experiencing catastrophic thinking, to recognize their actions, and to try to stop and correct their irrational thinking.  Six tips to accomplish this include remembering and making use of the following techniques. These can help to manage the condition:  An article in the journal   Expert Reviews in Neurotherapeutics   defines catastrophizing as "an irrationally negative forecast of future events."  If a person finds themselves continually catastrophizing events in their life and at-home techniques do not help, they should seek help from a mental health expert.  Multiple ways exist to help a person overcome this way of thinking and live a life with less fear and anxiety.    
 Bernhard, T. (2017, November 21). How to put a stop to catastrophic thinking.  Bernhard, T. (2017, November 21). How to put a stop to catastrophic thinking.  Boyes, A. (2013, January 10). What is catastrophizing? Cognitive distortions.  Burns, L. C., Ritvo, S. E., Ferguson, M. K., Clarke, H., Seltzer, Z., &amp; Katz, J. (2015, January 5). Pain catastrophizing as a risk factor for chronic pain after total knee arthroplasty: A systematic review.  Journal of Pain Research ,  8 , 21–32.  Demonstration of several styles of catastrophizing. (n.d.).  Quartana, P., Campbell, C., Edwards, R. (2010, March 1). Pain catastrophizing: A critical review.  Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics ,  9 (5), 745–758.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How to stop catastrophizing."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320844.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, February 7). "How to stop catastrophizing."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  