 There are some things to consider when choosing whether to eat the salmon skin, such as the source and quality of the fish. Personal preference may also play a role when deciding whether to eat the salmon skin or not.  Salmon skin can make a delicious and healthful addition to the diet.  It contains more of the same protein and essential  omega-3  fatty acids contained in the fish.  The body cannot make omega-3 fatty acids, so people must get them through their diet.  Salmon also contains good levels of  vitamins  B and D, as well as essential minerals, such as  selenium .  The  U.S. Food and Drug Administration  (FDA) recommend that people, particularly women aged 16 to 49 and children over 2 years old, eat 2 to 3 servings of oily fish, such as salmon, each week.  Leaving the skin on may provide some additional nutrients for the body. Some people may not think the skin looks appetizing, but those who choose to leave it on find that their favorite recipes work just as well.  Salmon live in extremely cold ocean temperatures. Their skin contains a high concentration of omega-3 fatty acids to help keep the salmon warm in the ocean.  These fatty acids may also provide some health benefits to the human body.  Omega-3 fatty acids may help protect the heart against specific risk factors for  heart disease , such as  blood pressure . They may also help protect the brain from degeneration, help the skin stay supple and healthy, and protect the eyes from age-related  macular degeneration .  A study posted to the journal   Marine Drugs   also noted that salmon skin might help treat  type 2 diabetes . Salmon skin appeared to have a strong  antioxidant  ability when given to test subjects, and may even help with wounds caused by  diabetes .  Another study posted to   BMC Cancer   noted that omega-3 fatty acids seem to play a role in  cancer  prevention. Diets higher in omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids may help fight cancer cells.  Salmon skin also adds more healthful protein to the diet, which may help people looking for an alternative to red meat.  When salmon is boiled, smoked, or steamed, the skin can become soggy and rubbery, which is not very pleasing to eat. However, when grilled, seared, or fried salmon skin becomes crunchy and is full of flavor because of all the fats in the skin.  Some people prefer to cook salmon with the skin on. Cooking the salmon this way helps stop the delicate flesh from drying out. Crispy salmon skin can also add a different texture to the dish.  When cooking salmon on the grill, leaving the skin on can protect the meat underneath from burning.  One of the simplest ways to prepare salmon skin is to make "salmon bacon" or "salmon rinds," which are thin strips of salmon skin fried in oil.  There are a few important things to consider before adding salmon skin to the diet.  It is essential to know where the salmon comes from before eating the skin. Salmon that has lived in dirty, polluted, or contaminated waters may absorb toxins from their food and the water they swim in.  These toxins may put a person at risk of exposure to persistent organic pollutants (POPs), which could cause health problems.  A study posted to   PLoS One   suggested that a diet high in farmed salmon and POPs could be linked to metabolic disorders such as type 2 diabetes and  obesity  in test subjects.  Salmon may also be contaminated by chemicals called polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and methylmercury. Salmon may also absorb these substances from contaminated water and their food. The longer the salmon is exposed to these harmful chemicals, the more they will build up over time.  Because of potential risks such as these, many people prefer to eat wild-caught salmon. However, it may still be worth checking that the wild salmon also comes from clean water areas.  Eating a lot of omega-3 fatty acids may also interact with some medications, such as blood thinners or anticoagulant medications. While the occasional salmon dish may not be cause for concern, it is always helpful to check in with a doctor before making any drastic changes to the diet.  Eating salmon skin will also add more  calories  to the diet than salmon with no skin, and people who are watching their fat or calorie intake would want to factor this into their diet plans.  While eating salmon skin is usually regarded as safe, the source and quality of the salmon may become a factor.  People who could be more sensitive to potential contaminants, such as pregnant or nursing women, may want to avoid eating salmon skin altogether. For most other people, eating salmon skin from a good source may be a great way to add helpful fatty acids and nutrients to their diet.    
 Eating fish: What pregnant women and parents should know. (2017, November 29).  Eating fish: What pregnant women and parents should know. (2017, November 29).  Ibrahim, M. M., Fjære, E., Lock, E.-J., Naville, D., Amlund, H., Meugnier, E., ... Ruzzin, J. (2011, September 23). Chronic consumption of farmed salmon containing persistent organic pollutants causes insulin resistance and obesity in mice.  PloS One ,  6 (9), e25170.  Jeong, S., Jing, K., Kim, N., Shin, S., Kim, S., Song, K.-S., ... Lim, K. (2014, July 3). Docosahexaenoic acid-induced apoptosis is mediated by activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases in human cancer cells.  BMC Cancer, 14 , 481.  Katrin Schlag, A., &amp; Ystgaard, K. (2013). Europeans and aquaculture: Perceived differences between wild and farmed fish.  British Food Journal ,  115 (2), 209–222.  Lauritano, C., &amp; Ianora, A. (2016, December). Marine organisms with anti-diabetes properties.  Marine Drugs ,  14 (12), 220.  Midtbø, L. K., Ibrahim, M. M., Myrmel, L. S., Aune, U. L., Alvheim, A. R., Liland, N. S., ... Madsen, L. (2013, January 2). Intake of farmed Atlantic salmon fed soybean oil increases insulin resistance and hepatic lipid accumulation in mice.  PLoS One ,  8 (1), e53094.  Mori, T. A. (2014, July 14). Omega-3 fatty acids and cardiovascular disease: Epidemiology and effects on cardiometabolic risk factors [Abstract].  Food &amp; Function ,  5 (9), 2004–2019.  Querques, G., &amp; Souied, E. H. (2014, September–October). The role of omega-3 and micronutrients in age-related macular degeneration [Abstract].  Survey of Ophthalmology ,  59 (5), 532–539.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Can you eat salmon skin?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320838.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, February 6). "Can you eat salmon skin?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  