 When a person has strawberry tongue, their tongue is typically red. It may also be white and appear swollen. The color and the taste bud bumps on the surface may make it look like a strawberry or raspberry.  This article explores the symptoms and underlying conditions that may cause strawberry tongue. It also looks at how to treat the conditions that cause strawberry tongue.  If a person has a strawberry tongue, their tongue may look:  Their tongue may feel irritated or painful. A person with strawberry tongue may also be experiencing other symptoms.  These are related to the underlying condition that has caused it.  Some underlying conditions that may cause strawberry tongue are explored below.   Kawasaki disease  is a condition that usually affects children. It causes certain arteries to become inflamed.  As well as a strawberry tongue, Kawasaki disease may cause:   Scarlet fever  is a bacterial infection that may develop when a person has  strep throat . It most commonly affects children aged 5 to 15.  As well as a strawberry tongue, scarlet fever may cause:  Allergic reactions cause  inflammation , which is why a person's tongue may appear enlarged and bumpy.  Antihistamines help to reduce the symptoms of an allergic reaction.  Toxic shock syndrome (TSS) is a rare complication that has been associated with using tampons and nasal gauze packing.  Contrary to popular belief, simply leaving in a tampon for a long time does not cause TSS.  TSS is usually caused by infection with the bacterium  Staphylococcus aureus , but TSS also can be caused by the same bacterial species of group A  Streptococcus , which causes scarlet fever. The makeup of the tampon allows the bacterium to multiply.  A  2011 study  suggested synthetic, higher-absorbency tampons made it easier for the bacterial infection to spread.  As well as a strawberry tongue, TSS may cause the following symptoms to come on suddenly:  If a person suspects they may have TSS they should seek emergency treatment. This condition can be life-threatening if a person does not seek treatment.  A deficiency in  vitamin B12  may cause a strawberry tongue.  Other symptoms of this  vitamin  deficiency include:  If a person develops a strawberry tongue, it is a good idea for them to speak to a doctor. A doctor can diagnose the underlying condition.  Some conditions that cause a strawberry tongue are not always severe at first. For example, a strawberry tongue caused by a vitamin B12 deficiency can be dealt with fairly easily.  Other conditions that cause a strawberry tongue may be more serious. TSS and certain allergies can be life threating.  If a person thinks they may have TSS or a severe acute allergic reaction, they should seek emergency treatment.  A severe acute allergic reaction is called  anaphylaxis , which can progress to anaphylactic shock. Other symptoms include:  When a person has a swollen tongue, it may make it harder for them to eat. It may also make them more likely to bite their tongue.  If the conditions causing strawberry tongue are left untreated, complications may arise. These conditions include:  If left untreated Kawasaki, disease may cause a coronary artery  aneurysm  (CAA) and other problems within the heart.  CAA is a weakness with excessive dilation that causes bulging in an artery in the heart. This could increase one's risk of cardiovascular disease later in life, according to a  2016 study .  If left untreated, scarlet fever may lead to a person developing:  Left untreated, TSS causes the whole body to go into shock. This may cause vital organ damage and could be fatal.  If a person does not receive treatment, anaphylactic shock can be fatal. This is typically due to circulatory and breathing problems.  If a person has a strawberry tongue, a doctor will ask them when they first noticed it.  The doctor will then ask questions about any other symptoms. This helps the doctor to determine the underlying cause.  The doctor may order further tests if they need to reach a diagnosis.  Treatments for the underlying causes are explored below:  Sometimes strawberry tongue gets confused with glossitis. There are key differences between the two conditions.  Glossitis is an inflammatory process that affects the tongue. When a person has glossitis, their tongue appears red, glossy, and swollen.  A healthy tongue has tiny bumps on it called lingual papillae. If a person has glossitis, these bumps are no longer visible. This is because their tongue is inflamed, causing a thick and sore tongue that looks smooth on the surface.  Strawberry tongue looks like a strawberry, with swollen-looking taste buds on a tongue that has surface inflammation and redness.  Strawberry tongue and glossitis are not diseases. Both are symptoms of an underlying condition.  Although a vitamin B12 deficiency can cause both glossitis and strawberry tongue, they are both caused by a different set of conditions.  The outlook for a person with strawberry tongue depends on what underlying condition is causing it.  TSS and anaphylaxis can be immediately life-threatening, but both are very treatable. If a person suspects either, they should seek emergency medical treatment.    
 Dietz, S. M., Tacke, C. E., de Groot, E., Kuipers, I. M, Hutten, B. A., &amp; Kuijpers, T. W. (2016, July 5). Extracardial vasculopathy after Kawasaki disease: A long‐term follow‐up study.  Journal of the American Heart Association ,  5 .  Dietz, S. M., Tacke, C. E., de Groot, E., Kuipers, I. M, Hutten, B. A., &amp; Kuijpers, T. W. (2016, July 5). Extracardial vasculopathy after Kawasaki disease: A long‐term follow‐up study.  Journal of the American Heart Association ,  5 .  Sampson, H. A., Muñoz-Furlong, A., Campbell, R. L., Adkinson, N. F., Bock, S. A., Branum, A., ... Decker, W. W. (2006, February). Second symposium on the definition and management of anaphylaxis: Summary report — second national institute of allergy and infectious disease/food allergy and anaphylaxis network symposium.  Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology ,  117 (2), 391–397.  Scarlet fever: A group A Streptococcal infection. (2018, January 22).  Vostral, S. L. (2011, December). Rely and toxic shock syndrome: A technological health crisis.  Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine ,  84 (4), 447–459.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What you should know about strawberry tongue."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320894.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, February 12). "What you should know about strawberry tongue."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  