 Penis size varies amongst men, and in some cases, considerably.  A study shows  that neither race nor ethnicity has anything to do with penis size.  While many men may think they have above average size penises, most fall into the range experts consider normal size.  Research from   BJU International   finds average penis size falls within the following ranges:  Penis shrinkage is widespread as men age, but there are many other reasons why a penis may shrink:  As men age, fatty deposits build up in the arteries causing reduced blood flow to the penis. This results in the muscle cells in the erectile tubes inside the penis becoming weaker. The erectile tubes produce erections when they are engorged with blood, so less blood flow means smaller or fewer firm erections.  Another possible reason for penis shrinkage is a buildup of scar tissue caused by years of small injuries from sex and sports. This accumulation of scar tissue affects the spongy erectile tissues of the penis, causes penis shrinkage, and limits erection size.  The impact of weight gain, particularly around their stomachs, is a genuine concern for many men as they age.  Although a man's penis may appear smaller with weight gain, it has not shrunk. The reason it looks smaller is that the penis is attached to the abdominal wall, and when belly expands, it pulls the penis inward. If a man loses weight, his penis will regain its usual shape and size.  Research shows men who have had cancerous prostate gland removal surgery (radical prostatectomy) may experience some penis shrinkage. One report in the  International Journal of Impotence Research  found that  71 percent of men  who underwent a radical prostatectomy experienced some penis shrinkage.  But researchers do not quite know why shrinkage occurs after a radical prostatectomy. Some researchers think it might be related to the urethral tube, which connects to the urinary bladder, shortening during the prostatectomy.  In  Peyronie's disease , fibrous scar tissue develops inside the penis causing it to become curved during erection. Most of the time, a curved erection is not a reason for concern, but for some men, the bend might be significant or painful.  According to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), Peyronie's affects up to  23 percent of men ages 40 to 70 . It is possible that more men have this condition but have not reported it to their doctors due to embarrassment. While Peyronie's develops with age, it has been seen in men as young as 30, according to NIDDK.  Peyronie's can cause a reduction in length and circumference of a man's penis. Sometimes, Peyronie's goes away on its own; most of the time, however, it will either stay the same or get worse. Doctors will only consider treatment if the bend is painful or prevents sexual intercourse. Surgery can be done to remove scar tissue causing the shrinkage, bending, or pain.  Some medications can cause penis shrinkage. These medicines include Adderall, prescribed for attention deficit or hyperactivity, some  antidepressants  and antipsychotics, and some drugs prescribed to treat an enlarged prostate.  One 2012 study reported in the   Journal of Sexual Medicine   found that some of the male study subjects taking finasteride to treat enlarged prostate reported smaller penis size and reduced sensation.  One 2014 study reported in the journal   Urology   found that 41 percent of men taking dutasteride for the treatment of enlarged prostate experienced some form of sexual dysfunction.  Chemicals from cigarette smoking can injure the blood vessels in the penis, preventing the penis from filling with blood and stretching. Regardless of the stimuli and the effect on the brain, if the blood vessels are damaged, the penis will not achieve an erection.  A study carried out in 1998 by the Boston University of Medicine examined the erect penises of 200 men.  According to one report , the results of the study found smokers had shorter erect penises compared to men who did not smoke. Researchers believe this is because smoking inhibits blood flow, preventing the penis from stretching, which might reduce penis length.  Smoking is also associated with  erectile dysfunction  (ED), this according to a 2017 study reported in the   BJU International  . ED affects a man's ability to maintain an erection, and smoking may prevent erections.  Most causes of penis shrinkage, such as smoking and weight gain, can be addressed by making lifestyle changes. If medications are causing the penis to shrink, an adjustment in medication can reverse the shrinkage.  For some men who experience penis shrinkage after prostate removal, the condition may improve on its own within a few months to a year. Penile rehabilitation (a form of  physical therapy ) after surgery can help men regain erectile function, and medications, such as Viagra and Cialis, can boost blood flow to the penis.  Treatment for Peyronie's disease focuses on removing scar tissue from inside the penis, either with medication, surgery, or  ultrasound  technology. Penis shrinkage is irreversible but repairing the curvature can help improve sexual function and reduce pain.  Most of the time, penis shrinkage is related to age, medication, or lifestyle habits, such as smoking or weight gain, and rarely requires treatment. Adopting more healthful lifestyle habits or changing medication can often reverse shrinkage and reduce other sexual problems.  Any man who is experiencing penis shrinkage, pain, or other sexual problems, or has concerns about  cancer , should talk to their doctor. A doctor, or urologist, can answer questions, reassure male patients, and offer testing and treatment if necessary.    
 Antoniassi, M. P., Intasqui, P., Camargo, M., Zylbersztejn, D. S., Carvalho, V. M. Cardoso, K. H. M., &amp; Bertolla, R. P. (2016, November). Analysis of the functional aspects and seminal plasma proteomic profile of sperm from smokers [Abstract].  BJU International ,  118  (5), 814–822.  Antoniassi, M. P., Intasqui, P., Camargo, M., Zylbersztejn, D. S., Carvalho, V. M. Cardoso, K. H. M., &amp; Bertolla, R. P. (2016, November). Analysis of the functional aspects and seminal plasma proteomic profile of sperm from smokers [Abstract].  BJU International ,  118  (5), 814–822.  Dillon, B. E., Chama, N. B., &amp; Honig, S. C. (2008, November–December). Penile size and penile enlargement surgery: A review.  International Journal of Impotence Research ,  20 (6), 519–29.  Irwig, M. S. (2012, November). Persistent sexual side effects of finasteride: Could they be permanent? [Abstract].  The Journal of Sexual Medicine ,  9 (11), 2927–2932.  Penile curvature (Peyronie's disease). (2014, July).  Penis shock tactics 'could cut smoking. (1998, July 27).  Treating penis shrinkage due to age or surgery. (2016, December 10).  Veale, D., Miles, S., Bramley, S., Muir, G. &amp; Hodsoll, J. (2015, June). Am I normal? A systematic review and construction of nomograms for flaccid and erect penis length and circumference in up to 15,521 men.  BJU International ,  15 (6), 978–986.  Why men experience loss of penis length. (2012, October 20).  Wu, X. J., Zhi, Y., Zheng, J., He, P., Zhou, X. Z., Li, W. B., … Zhou, Z. S. (2014, March). Dutasteride on benign prostatic hyperplasia: A meta-analysis on randomized clinical trials in 6460 patients [Abstract].  Urology ,  83 (3), 539–43.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "What is penis shrinkage and why does it happen?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320883.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, February 11). "What is penis shrinkage and why does it happen?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  