 The abdomen is the area between the chest and the pelvis. It contains vital organs involved in digestion, such as the intestines and the liver. The lower right portion of the abdomen contains a part of the colon, and the right ovary in women.  This article will outline the potential causes of pain in the lower right abdomen, their symptoms, and whether someone should seek medical assistance for them.  Pain in the lower right abdomen can mean several different things. It can often be brief and not require any medical attention. These less serious causes include:   Indigestion   Pain can be felt in the lower abdomen region as a result of  indigestion , which can be accompanied by other symptoms, such as  heartburn  and  flatulence .  Indigestion is easily managed with over-the-counter medication but may require medical attention if symptoms last for  more than 2 weeks .   Intestinal gas   When food is not digested properly, gas can build up in the intestines. This can cause feelings of discomfort and bloating in the abdominal region.  Symptoms will usually pass in a matter of hours, but persistence for several weeks could indicate a more serious underlying condition, such as  lactose intolerance .   Menstrual cramps   Women can experience abdominal pain before or during their period. The pain can be described as dull and persistent. It may be accompanied by aches in the back and legs, feelings of nausea, and  headaches . Symptoms often occur in waves and continue for several days.  In some cases, a pain in the lower right abdomen can indicate a more serious condition that will require immediate medical assistance.   Appendicitis   When the pain is specific to the lower right abdomen,  appendicitis  is one of the most common causes. The appendix is a tube-like structure attached to the large intestines.  Appendicitis occurs when the appendix becomes inflamed. This causes a brief pain to develop in the middle of the abdomen, which spreads to the lower right abdomen where the pain becomes severe.  Other symptoms can include:  In some cases, it may be necessary to remove the appendix to relieve the pain. The function of the appendix remains unknown, and its removal does not pose any further health risks.   Kidney stones   Minerals and salts can build up in the kidney to form hard lumps, known as stones.  The size of  kidney stones  can vary considerably. The smaller stones can pass through the urinary system unnoticed, but larger stones can get stuck and cause severe pain around the lower back, side, abdomen, and the groin.  As the stones move throughout the urinary system, the pain will vary in its location and severity.  Other symptoms can include:   Kidney infection   It is possible for either one or both kidneys to become infected by bacteria in the urinary system. Pain typically occurs in the lower back, side, and groin. It can also be felt in the lower abdomen.  The pain is often less severe than from kidney stones, but medical attention is required to prevent permanent damage.  Other symptoms can include:  Kidney infections can be mistaken for  urinary tract infections , such as  cystitis , that have similar symptoms. These also include other symptoms, namely:   Hernia   A  hernia  is where an internal body part pushes through a weakening in a muscle or tissue wall and causes a small lump. They most commonly happen around the abdominal area.  Hernias are often harmless and occur with few other symptoms. However, some can cause soreness around the lump, which may intensify when strained, such as when coughing or lifting a heavy object.   Irritable bowel syndrome    Irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS) is a chronic condition of the digestive system. Its cause is unknown, and there is currently no cure for IBS.  IBS can cause pain in the abdominal area along with other symptoms, including:   Inflammatory bowel disease   Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) refers to a group of conditions that affect the digestive system.  Ulcerative colitis and  Crohn's disease  both cause an  inflammation  of the gut and make up most cases of IBD. They can cause pain in the lower abdomen plus:  There are significant anatomical differences between the abdomens of males and females. These differences mean that pain in the lower right abdomen can have gender-specific causes.  These conditions also require immediate medical attention.   Ovarian cyst    Cysts  are sacs that can develop on the ovaries. They are often harmless, but larger ones can cause a dull or sharp pain in the abdomen. Other symptoms can include:   Endometriosis    Endometriosis  is where the tissue that typically lines the womb is found in other areas, such as the ovaries or the stomach. It is a chronic condition and can cause pain in the lower abdomen or back.  The severity of symptoms varies and can include:   Pelvic inflammatory disease    Pelvic inflammatory disease  is an infection of the genital tract. It can cause abdominal pain, but symptoms are often mild and infrequent. They can include:   Ectopic pregnancy   An ectopic pregnancy can occur when a fertilized egg is present outside the womb, such as in one of the fallopian tubes. It can cause pain in the abdomen and other symptoms, including:  Many of these symptoms can also occur because of a stomach bug.   Ovarian torsion   The ovaries can become twisted with surrounding tissues, restricting blood flow. This causes severe pain in the lower abdomen. Other symptoms can include:   Inguinal hernia    Inguinal hernias typically occur when fatty tissue or a part of the bowel pushes through passages located in the lower abdomen. This is the  most common type  of hernia and typically occur in males.  An inguinal hernia causes a small lump to develop at the top of the thigh and can cause abdominal pain.   Testicular torsion   The spermatic cords that attach to the testicles can become twisted and restrict blood flow. This can cause pain in the abdomen and other symptoms including:  As lower left abdominal pain might be due to problems with the digestive system, urinary system, or reproductive organs, a range of approaches might be necessary to reach a diagnosis.  These  include :  A primary care physician may refer a person with pain in the lower right abdomen to a specialist, including:  Treatment will depend on the cause of the pain.  OTC pain management is often sufficient to treat the less serious causes of pain in the lower-right abdomen. Some, such as abdominal gas, will pass without the need for treatment.  A person with a  kidney infection  would require  antibiotic  medications.  Surgery may be necessary for some people with severe abdominal pain. Appendicitis requires a removal of the appendix, known as an appendectomy, and kidney stones often require intravenous (IV) pain management while a stone passes.  Some conditions that cause this pain, such as endometriosis and IBD, are chronic, and only the management of symptoms is possible. A person cannot fully get rid of either condition.  Whatever the treatment, seeking care for persistent or severe pain in the lower-right abdomen can help an individual resume a good quality of life.  In the majority of cases, a pain in the lower right abdomen is not a cause for concern. Gas, indigestion, and menstrual cramps do not typically require a visit to the doctor.  However, medical attention should be sought if any of the other conditions mentioned here are suspected, or if the pain lasts for more than 2 days.   Article last updated on Wed 21 November 2018.  Visit our  Pain / Anesthetics  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Pain / Anesthetics.   
 Appendicitis. (2016, March 1).  Appendicitis. (2016, March 1).  Chronic kidney disease. (2016, August 15).  Ectopic pregnancy. (2016, February 3).  Endometriosis. (2015, November 9).  Hernia. (2016, June 27).  Inflammatory bowel disease. (2017, April 25).  Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). (2017, October 9).  Kidney stones. (2016, June 15).  Ovarian cyst. (2016, December 23).  Pelvic inflammatory disease. (2015, September 3).  Symptoms &amp; causes of indigestion. (2016, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What is this pain in my lower right abdomen?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Nov. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320858.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, November 21). "What is this pain in my lower right abdomen?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  