 This type of  eczema  is also called vesicular eczema, dyshidrosis, foot-and-hand eczema, and palmoplantar eczema.  In this article, we will look at the symptoms of dyshidrotic eczema, along with its causes and treatment.  Dyshidrotic eczema causes small blisters to appear on a person's hands or feet. These blisters are often itchy and can be painful.  Symptoms of dyshidrotic eczema include:  The blisters caused by dyshidrotic eczema tend to go away within 2 to 3 weeks. After this, the skin may become red, cracked, tight, or dry.  Because the blisters can result in open areas of skin, a person with dyshidrotic eczema is at greater risk for skin infections, such as staph infections. Symptoms of a staph infection include:  A person should always see their doctor if they think they have an infection in their skin.  Dyshidrotic eczema may be caused by:  The blisters can also be caused by an allergic reaction to certain metals, including nickel and cobalt. These metals are found in everyday objects, such as jewelry and mobile phones, and also in certain foods.  Women are twice as likely as men to experience dyshidrotic eczema, according to the  National Eczema Association . Those aged 20 to 40 are also more likely to have this condition.  Known risk factors for dyshidrotic eczema include:  A person receiving  intravenous immunoglobulin therapy  is also at a greater risk of developing dyshidrotic eczema. This therapy involves injecting specific antibodies into the veins to help a person fight a particular virus or bacteria.  To diagnose dyshidrotic eczema, a doctor will perform a physical examination of the skin. They may also ask questions about a person's family history of eczema, their occupation, diet, and medications the person is taking.  Allergy testing may be recommended to determine if specific allergens are causing the eczema. This involves pricking the skin using needles that contain common allergens, including certain foods, pet dander, molds, and pollen.  By identifying potential triggers, a doctor may be able to make recommendations to help a person reduce the incidence of their eczema flare-ups.  There is currently no single cure for dyshidrotic eczema, but there are many treatments that can help a person manage this condition.  Medical treatments for dyshidrotic eczema include:  Injections of Botox (botulinum toxin) can also be used to reduce excessive sweating, which can worsen dyshidrotic eczema. It is important to note that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  have not specifically approved  Botox for this use.  Examples of home remedies for dyshidrotic eczema include:  Washing the skin frequently keeps the skin clean, reducing the likelihood of skin infections. Limiting showers to 10 minutes, avoiding very hot water, and applying moisturizer or cream after bathing will help to prevent the skin from drying out.  If this condition does not respond well to usual treatments, a doctor may recommend reducing or eliminating foods that contain cobalt or nickel. These are trace metals that can cause or worsen dyshidrotic eczema.  Examples of these foods include:  Dyshidrotic eczema can, in some cases, cause skin infections. These may require treatment using  antibiotics .  When this type of eczema is recurring, a person may notice thickened, tough skin on the areas where the blisters had occurred.  While there is no sure way of preventing an eczema outbreak, a good skincare routine can help to protect the skin from future flare-ups.  Ways to prevent dyshidrotic eczema include:  Dyshidrotic eczema symptoms can range from mild to severe. Some people have flare-ups every few years, while others experience severe, recurring bouts that can make it hard to use the hands or to walk.  A person with dyshidrotic eczema should talk to their doctor about the many treatment options available. Using treatment and prevention methods should help to keep this condition under control, and to reduce the risk of skin infection.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Al-Ghamdi, A. S., Alghanemy, N., Joharji, H., Al-Qahtani, D., &amp; Alghamdi, H. (2015). Botulinum toxin: Non cosmetic and off-label dermatological uses.  Journal of Dermatology &amp; Dermatologic Surgery, 19 (1), 1–8.  Al-Ghamdi, A. S., Alghanemy, N., Joharji, H., Al-Qahtani, D., &amp; Alghamdi, H. (2015). Botulinum toxin: Non cosmetic and off-label dermatological uses.  Journal of Dermatology &amp; Dermatologic Surgery, 19 (1), 1–8.  Bershow, A. (2018, February). Dyshidrotic dermatitis.  Dyshidrotic eczema. (n.d.).  Dyshidrotic eczema. What is dyshidrotic eczema? (n.d.).  Lee, K. C., &amp; Ladizinski, B. (2013, August 6). Dyshidrotic eczema following intravenous immunoglobulin treatment.  CMAJ, 185 (11), E530.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What is dyshidrotic eczema?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320831.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, February 5). "What is dyshidrotic eczema?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  