 Loose stools often occur after eating, but can also happen at other points in the day. When loose stools occur consecutively on multiple occasions throughout a day, this is described as  diarrhea .  However, loose stools can occur chronically and may require treatment. This article will outline potential causes and treatments for loose stools.  Most people will experience loose stools occasionally. These bouts of diarrhea can be caused by:  Certain foods, drinks, or supplements can increase the likelihood of loose stools or diarrhea occurring.  Sometimes, the body can have problems digesting certain types of sugars, such as sugar alcohols and lactose.  Sugar alcohols are found in a wide range of fruits, vegetables, and artificial flavorings. The small intestine cannot digest large amounts of sugar alcohols efficiently, which can cause diarrhea.  Diets high in lactose, a sugar found in milk-based products, can also cause loose stools. People with lactose intolerances may experience diarrhea following the consumption of any milk-based products.  Loose stools can also be caused by diets high in:  Viruses, bacteria or parasites can cause  inflammation  in the stomach and intestines. This can cause loose stools and diarrhea, along with other symptoms including:  Chronic conditions that can cause diarrhea include:   Irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS) is a chronic condition affecting the digestive system. Diarrhea and loose stools are a common symptom of IBS. Other symptoms can include:  Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic condition causing inflammation in the colon and rectum. People with UC often experience loose stools and diarrhea. Other symptoms of UC include:   Crohn's disease  is a long-term condition where the lining of the digestive system becomes inflamed. It can cause diarrhea and loose stools. Other symptoms can include:   Celiac disease  is a common condition in which the consumption of gluten causes an inflammation of the small intestine. People who have consumed gluten may experience loose stools and diarrhea. Other symptoms include:  Several disorders of the liver and gallbladder can impair the action of bile, preventing the proper breakdown of fats in the intestine. For example, this can occur in people with  gallstones  or liver  cirrhosis . Bile acid malabsorption can cause diarrhea or loose stools.  An overactive thyroid is where the thyroid gland produces too many hormones, interfering with its normal functioning. This can cause loose stools or diarrhea. Other symptoms can include:   Chronic pancreatitis  is a condition where the inflammation occurs in the pancreas. It can impair the proper breakdown of fats, starches, and proteins. This can cause loose stools or diarrhea.  Other symptoms include:   Cystic fibrosis  is a long-term condition where mucus builds up in the lungs and digestive system. This can interfere with digestion and cause loose stools or diarrhea. Other symptoms include:  Dumping syndrome is a condition where food moves from the stomach to the bowel too quickly. It often occurs after weight-loss surgery. It can cause loose stools and diarrhea. Other symptoms include:  Infrequent cases of loose stools do not typically require medical treatment. However, multiple cases of loose stools can cause  dehydration  and  malnutrition . Some home remedies that may help to prevent or reduce diarrhea include:  With the help of these home remedies, diarrhea caused by dietary trends, infections or  food poisoning  should return to normal after a few days.  Loose stools or diarrhea that does not improve after 1 week should be given immediate medical attention. This can be a sign of a more serious medical condition and may worsen without treatment.  Some conditions may be treated with prescription medications or  antibiotics , but more serious conditions, such as  pancreatitis  may require hospital treatment. In some cases, there are no available cures for the underlying condition, but symptoms can be managed.  These conditions include Crohn's disease, cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, and IBS. Symptoms are often managed using a combination of lifestyle changes and medication.  In most cases, diarrhea will often subside within a few days without treatment, or with the help of some home remedies.  It is important to distinguish between loose stools that occur infrequently and those that are chronic. Experiencing loose stools that persist for over 1 week may indicate a more serious underlying condition that will require immediate medical attention.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.   Article last updated by Phil Riches on Fri  9 November 2018.  Visit our  GastroIntestinal / Gastroenterology  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on GastroIntestinal / Gastroenterology.   
 Bliss, D. Z., Savik, K., Jung, H.-J. G., Whitebird, R., Lowry, A., &amp; Sheng, X. (2015, October 1). Dietary fiber supplementation for fecal incontinence: A randomized clinical trial.  Research in Nursing &amp; Health ,  37 (5), 367–378.  Bliss, D. Z., Savik, K., Jung, H.-J. G., Whitebird, R., Lowry, A., &amp; Sheng, X. (2015, October 1). Dietary fiber supplementation for fecal incontinence: A randomized clinical trial.  Research in Nursing &amp; Health ,  37 (5), 367–378.  Chronic pancreatitis. (2015, March 5).  Crohn's disease. (2015, April 17).  Coeliac disease. (2016, December 4).  Cystic fibrosis. (2016, March 21).  Food poisoning. (2017, August 9).  Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). (2017, October 9).  Norton, C., Thomas, L., &amp; Hill, J. (2007, June 30). Management of faecal incontinence in adults: Summary of NICE guidance.  BMJ ,  334 (7608), 1370.  Overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism). (2016, September 22).  Ritchie, M. L., &amp; Romanuk, T. N. (2012, April 18). A meta-analysis of probiotic efficacy for gastrointestinal diseases.  PLoS One ,  7 (4), e34938.  Ulcerative colitis. (2016, March 17).  Vandeputte, D., Falony, G., Vieira-Silva, S., Tito, R. Y., Joossens, M., &amp; Raes, J. (2015, June 11). Stool consistency is strongly associated with gut microbiota richness and composition, enterotypes and bacterial growth rates.  Gut ,  65 (1).  Westergaard, H. (2008, March 19). Bile acid malabsorption [Abstract].  Current Treatment Options in Gastroenterology ,  10 (1), 28–33.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What are the causes of loose stools?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Nov. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320869.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, November 9). "What are the causes of loose stools?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  