 This article looks at different types of milia, their causes, and possible ways to get rid of them.  Milia are small, bump-like  cysts  found under the skin. They are usually  1 to 2 millimeters  (mm) in size.  They form when skin flakes or keratin, a protein, become trapped under the skin.  Milia  most often  appear on the face, commonly around the eyelids and cheeks, though they can occur anywhere.  In most cases, milia will disappear on their own within a few months.  A number of home remedies may help get rid of milia. While no specific remedy has been proven to remove milia quickly, these treatments are mostly low-risk.  For example:  Some research suggests that extracts of  rose ,  cinnamon, and honey  have antibacterial properties that can tackle some skin problems. However, there has been no research on their effectiveness with milia.  Avoid poking or picking milia. While it may be tempting, this interference increases the risk of infection and can lead to scarring.  If milia are causing concern, certain clinical treatments have been used to try and remove them. These include:  All of these treatments carry a risk of scarring, except for minocycline, which has other risks. Since milia themselves do not cause scarring, think carefully before undergoing these treatments.  It is not always possible to prevent milia, for example, when they occur in newborns.  However, when milia are associated with other skin conditions or injuries, swift treatment may keep them from appearing.  Tips for preventing milia include:  Milia can sometimes arise following a chemical peel. It may be possible to  prevent their occurrence  by applying a topical retinoid before the procedure. However, retinoids can cause dark spots or excessive irritation when used in combination with chemical peels.  Milia affect up to  50 percent  of all newborns. They usually disappear on their own within a few weeks.  Neonatal milia are often found on the nose, but may appear on the scalp, face, upper trunk, and inside the mouth.  These bumps can be confused with neonatal acne. The white bumps of neonatal acne vary in size, and are often surrounded by redness, while milia are generally uniform in size, with no redness.  Milia may be present from birth, while neonatal acne usually does not appear until  2 weeks  after birth.  Primary milia occur in children and adults. While they may disappear without treatment in a few weeks, they can also last for several months.  Primary milia often appear on the following body parts:  They may also appear along the nasal crease in young children.  In this condition, multiple milia are clumped together in a broad, flat patch raised above the surrounding skin. This patch or plaque often has a clear and defined border.  Milia en plaque can affect children and adults, particularly middle-aged women. It is usually found on the eyelids, behind the ears, and on the cheek or jaw.  This condition is rare and occasionally associated with other skin issues, including:  This rare type of milia involves numerous bumps appearing in the same area over several weeks or months. This is often the only symptom, though the area may also feel itchy.  Multiple eruptive milia tend to appear on the face, upper arms, and upper trunk.  Also known as secondary milia, this condition follows injury to the skin, which may involve:  Certain topical medications, including some steroid creams, may cause milia to appear.  Milia carry very few risks.  When milia are associated with another condition or injury, that condition should be treated separately.  It is important that milia are correctly diagnosed. They can be confused with other types of skin conditions, including comedones, miliaria, and other types of cysts.  When milia are a concern, discuss treatment with a doctor.  Milia tend not to cause long-term problems. The outlook is very good, and most cases will resolve without treatment in several weeks.  The bumps may disappear faster in newborns than in children and adults.  If milia do not disappear within a few weeks, a doctor may be able to recommend treatment options.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Avhad, G., Ghate, S., &amp; Dhurat, R. (2014, October–December). Milia en plaque.  Indian Dermatology Online Journal ,  5 (4), 550–551.  Avhad, G., Ghate, S., &amp; Dhurat, R. (2014, October–December). Milia en plaque.  Indian Dermatology Online Journal ,  5 (4), 550–551.  Boskabady, M. H., Shafei, M. N., Saberi, Z., &amp; Amini, S. (2011, July–August). Pharmacological effects of  Rosa damascena .  Iranian Journal of Basic Medical Sciences ,  14 (4). 295–307.  Deprez, P. (2016).  Textbook of chemical peels: Superficial, medium, and deep peels in cosmetic practice  (2nd ed.). Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press.  Gupta, M., &amp; Oakley, A. (2009). Milium.  Julianti, E., Rajah, K. K., &amp; Fidrianny, I. (2017, April 11). Antibacterial activity of ethanolic extract of cinnamon bark, honey, and their combination effects against acne-causing bacteria.  Scientia Pharmaceutica ,  85 (2), 19.  O'Connor, N. R., &amp; McLaughlin, M. R. (2008, January 1). Newborn skin: Part I. Common rashes.  American Family Physician ,  77 (1), 47–52.  Skin. (n.d.).  Topical retinoids. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "How can I get rid of milia?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320953.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2018, February 16). "How can I get rid of milia?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  