 Regularly exercising and stretching the feet and ankles can help to ensure that muscles are providing the best support. These exercises may also increase the range of motion in the feet, keeping a person active for as long as possible.  Most foot exercises are simple and require no complicated equipment. They can be done at home or in the gym as part of a regular exercise routine.  The following exercises have been developed to improve flexibility and mobility in the feet.  This exercise has three stages and will help to strengthen all parts of the feet and toes.  To do this exercise:  Keeping a wide range of motion in the big toe is important. The following exercise also has three stages, and it was designed to stretch and relieve pain in toes that have been squashed in shoes.  To do this exercise:  The following exercises can help to enhance the strength of the feet.  The toe splay was developed to improve control over the toe muscles. It can be done on both feet at once, or on alternate feet, depending on comfort.  To do this exercise:  Toe curls build up the flexor muscles of the toes and feet, improving overall strength.  To do this exercise:  The marble pickup was designed to increase strength in the muscles on the underside of the feet and toes.  To do this exercise:  Walking barefoot on sand is a great way to stretch and strengthen the feet and calves. This is a good exercise in general because sand's soft texture makes walking more physically demanding.  To do this exercise:  The following exercises can provide pain relief.  The toe extension is useful in preventing or treating plantar fasciitis — a condition that causes pain in the heel when walking, as well as difficulty in raising the toes.  To do this exercise:  Rolling a golf ball under the feet can help to relieve discomfort in the arches and ease pain associated with plantar fasciitis.  To do this exercise:  The Achilles tendon is a cord connecting the heel to the calf muscles. It can strain easily, and keeping it strong may help with foot, ankle, or leg pains.  To do this exercise:  To keep feet strong and healthy:  Keeping the feet and ankles healthy is always a good idea. The exercises above can help to ease existing pain, prevent discomfort, and reduce chances of injury.    
 Best ways you can treat, prevent hammertoe. (2015, April 3).  Best ways you can treat, prevent hammertoe. (2015, April 3).  Exercises for healthy feet. (n.d.).  Foot and ankle conditioning program. (2012, October).  Heel pain. (2017, August 3).  How to keep your feet flexible. (n.d.).  Plantar fasciitis exercises. (n.d.).  Preventing foot problems. (n.d.).  Strengthening foot muscles to reduce pain and improve mobility. (2016, July).  The Journal of Orthopaedic &amp; Sports Physical Therapy ,  46 (7), 606.  Tips for preventing foot and ankle injuries.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What are the best foot exercises for healthy feet?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320964.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, February 19). "What are the best foot exercises for healthy feet?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  