 BPH can cause problems with urination, and some treatments can lead to sexual problems and other side effects.  An enlarged prostate directly affects a man's ability to urinate. These effects include:  Prostate issues can also cause sexual problems. The extent of any sexual problem varies according to the condition of the prostate. Some common sexual side effects  include :  These conditions may also vary according to:  BPH and ED are separate conditions that are connected. ED usually means that a man is not able to achieve or maintain an erection.  Although ED may be caused by a variety of health problems, such as  heart disease ,  diabetes , low  testosterone  levels, or psychological issues, it can also be made worse by BPH.  Some medications used to treat an enlarged prostate can cause ED. However, some medications used to treat ED can help improve symptoms of BPH.  Although no medication prescribed for ED has been approved to treat an enlarged prostate, early studies suggest that men who take ED medications may experience some relief from their prostate symptoms.  Several ED medications have shown some success in treating enlarged prostates. These include:  For example, one  study  showed that men who took 10 milligrams (mg) of vardenafil twice a day for 8 weeks experienced marked improvements in their prostate symptoms, compared to a similar group who took a  placebo .  Another  study  found that men who took up to 5 mg of tadalafil daily saw significant improvements in both their prostate and ED symptoms.  However, before taking ED medication to treat symptoms of an enlarged prostate, speak to a doctor. ED medications have potential side effects that can make them unsafe for some men, particularly those with a history of the following conditions:  The  American Cancer Society  recommend that the following men get their prostates screened regularly, after discussing the risks and benefits with their doctors:  A prostate screening can help rule out  cancer  as the cause of a person's symptoms.  In general, a man should seek medical attention if he experiences any symptom of an enlarged prostate.  Several treatment options may help reduce the severity of enlarged prostate symptoms. A man experiencing symptoms should explore the choices available with his doctor. Treatments may include medications, surgical options, and home remedies or lifestyle changes.  Some medications available to treat an enlarged prostate include:  However, these medications  can lead  to sexual side effects, including:  If medication does not alleviate the symptoms, a doctor may recommend surgery. Surgical options include:  The TURP procedure is a well-established treatment for an enlarged prostate, but it is the most invasive option. Compared with the other procedures, TURP also results in more sexual side effects, such as ED and ejaculation problems.  Men who have undergone TURP have also reported dry ejaculation, which means that the semen enters the bladder rather than coming out of the penis during an orgasm.  According to  Prostate Cancer UK , lifestyle changes can alleviate symptoms of an enlarged prostate. Some include:   Exercise   Every person can benefit from regular, moderate exercise. Regular exercise can help improve cardiovascular health and blood flow. Some, such as  Kegel exercises , can specifically improve symptoms associated with an enlarged prostate.  Many men will develop an enlarged prostate as they age, because the gland does not stop growing throughout their lifetime. As men age they should get regular prostate screenings to check for prostate cancer.  Several medications, lifestyle changes, and surgical options are available to help reduce the effects of living with an enlarged prostate. With proper treatment, men can usually maintain a regular sex life.    
 American Cancer Society recommendations for prostate cancer early detection. (2016, April 14).  American Cancer Society recommendations for prostate cancer early detection. (2016, April 14).  Bruskewitz, R. C. (2003). Quality of life and sexual function in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia.  Reviews in Urology ,  5 (2), 72–80.  Egerdie, R. B., Auerbach, S., Roehrborn, C. G., Costa, P., Garza, M. S., Esler, A. L., ... Secrest, R. J. (2012, January). Tadalafil 2.5 or 5 mg administered once daily for 12 weeks in men with both erectile dysfunction and signs and symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia: Results of a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study.  The Journal of Sexual Medicine ,  9 (1), 271–281.  Gandhi, J., Weissbart, S. J., Smith, N. L., Kaplan, S. A., Dagur, G., Zumbo, A., … Khan, S. A. (2017, April). The impact and management of sexual dysfunction secondary to pharmacological therapy of benign prostatic hyperplasia.  Translational Andrology and Urology ,  6 (2), 295–304.  How is an enlarged prostate treated? (2017, December).  Reacher, J. (2013, September 11). Are Kegel exercises good for prostatitis.  Sex and the prostate: Overcoming erectile dysfunction when you have prostate disease. (2011, April 22).  Stief, C. G., Porst, H., Neuser, D., Beneke, M., &amp; Ulbrich, E. (2008, June). A randomised, placebo-controlled study to assess the efficacy of twice-daily vardenafil in the treatment of lower urinary tract symptoms secondary to benign prostatic hyperplasia.  European urology ,  53 (6), 1236–1244.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What are the effects of an enlarged prostate on sex?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320954.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, February 19). "What are the effects of an enlarged prostate on sex?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  