 The esophagus runs from the mouth to the stomach and is part of a person's digestive system. It moves food from the throat to the stomach by contracting in a coordinated manner.  The esophagus is the tube that carries the food and drink a person ingests into their stomach. It is around 10 inches in length and has muscular walls lined with mucous membranes.  For some, esophageal spasms happen frequently and interfere with the ability to eat and drink normally. When this is the case, treatment is usually required.  There is no definitive reason why esophageal spasms occur. It is thought that a problem with the nerves controlling the esophageal muscles may be one cause.  Many people find that there are specific triggers that prompt esophageal spasms. These include:  Esophageal spasms are divided into two categories:   Diffuse esophageal spasms : These usually make a person regurgitate food or drink. They happen only occasionally and can be painful.   Nutcracker esophagus : Where painful spasms occur, but no food or liquid is regurgitated. They can make it hard for a person to swallow.  While esophageal spasms are rare, there are certain risk factors which may make a person more susceptible to them.  Risk factors include:  People between the ages of 60 and 80 are more likely to experience esophageal spasms.  People who experience esophageal spasms may have the following symptoms:  It is essential to seek advice from a doctor if the above symptoms occur or a person believes they are experiencing an esophageal spasm. This is because it is vital for a doctor to rule out any severe or life-threatening conditions with similar systems, such as  angina  or heart attack.  A doctor can diagnose esophageal spasm by performing several tests. Initially, they are likely to rule out any more serious conditions, such as angina, by performing a cardiac test, for example, an EKG.  Other tests include:  It is essential to find out which type of esophageal spasm a person has to be able to treat them correctly.  Diffuse esophageal spasms can be treated by assessing what foods and drinks are triggers and eliminating these from a person's diet.  Keeping a food diary of what is consumed, as well as the temperature and portion size, will help decipher where changes to diet should be made.  Other diet and lifestyle changes which could help ease esophageal spasms include:  Natural remedies can also be effective treatments for esophageal spasms.  Standardized deglycyrrhizinated licorice (DGL) extract, which is available in powder or chewable tablet forms, can be taken before and after meals to reduce spasms.  Peppermint oil can also be beneficial to people who experience esophageal spasms. Making a solution of peppermint oil and water or sucking on a peppermint lozenge can help to reduce symptoms.  A doctor may also prescribe medication to help when someone has these digestion spasms.  People with GERD may be given a proton pump inhibitor or an H2 blocker. However, these are not without side effects, and some research suggests proton pump inhibitors, used over an extended period, could cause kidney disease.  If anxiety or depression is a trigger for esophageal spasms,  antidepressants  may be prescribed.   Botox  injections and  calcium  blockers can also work by relaxing swallowing muscles, which may help to reduce the instances of esophageal spasms.  Surgery is another option for more severe cases where medication has not helped.  Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) is a procedure where the surgeon inserts an endoscope through a person's mouth, cutting the muscle at the bottom of the esophagus, which should result in contractions becoming less severe.  Alternatively, Heller myotomy is a different surgery, which may help people with esophageal spasms.  In this laparoscopic surgery, the esophageal sphincter muscle is cut, allowing food and drink to pass to the stomach more easily.  Eliminating the foods that trigger esophageal spasms may reduce how often a person experiences them. Taking prescribed medication and making dietary and lifestyle changes can also be beneficial.  An underlying condition, such as GERD or depression, may be the cause of esophageal spasms, in which case these should be treated to relieve symptoms.  Seeing a doctor if esophageal spasms occur, helps someone to determine the cause and receive the best treatment.    
 Achalasia. (2017, November 20).  Achalasia. (2017, November 20).  Castell, D. O. (2017, March 2). Esophageal motility disorders: Clinical manifestations, diagnosis and management.  Coss–Adame, E., Erdogan, A., &amp; Rao, S. S. C. (2014, August). Treatment of esophageal (noncardiac) chest pain: An expert review.  Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology ,  12 (8), 1224–1245.  Esophageal spasms and strictures. (2014, September 1).  Esophageal varices. (2013, January).  Heller myotomy for achalasia. (n.d.).  Khashab, M. A., Messallam, A. A., Onimaru, M., Teitelbaum, E. N., Ujiki, M. B., Gitelis, M. E., ... Inoue, H. (2015, May). International multicenter experience with peroral endoscopic myotomy for the treatment of spastic esophageal disorders refractory to medical therapy (with video) [Abstract].  Gastrointestinal Endoscopy ,  81 (5), 1170–1177.  Klatte, D. C. F., Gasparini, A., Xu, H., de Deco, P., Trevisan, M., Johansson, A. L., ... Carrero, J. J. (2017, September). Association between proton pump inhibitor use and risk of progression of chronic kidney disease [Abstract].  Gastroenterology ,  153 (3), 702–710.  Narducci, F., Bassotti, G., Gaburri, M., &amp; Morelli, A. (1985, April). Transition from nutcracker esophagus to diffuse esophageal spasm [Abstract].  American Journal of Gastroenterology ,  80 (4), 242–244.  Pimentel, M., Bonorris, G. G., Chow, E. J., &amp; Lin, H. C. (2001, July). Peppermint oil improves the manometric findings in diffuse esophageal spasm.  Journal of Clinical Gastroenterology ,  33 (1), 27–31.  Ravi, K., &amp; Katzka, D. A. (2015, April). Diagnosis and medical management of esophageal dysmotility [Abstract].  Techniques in Gastrointestinal Endoscopy ,  17 (2), 62–69.  Vanuytsel, T., Bisschops, R., Farré, R., Pauwels, A., Holvoet, L., Arts, J., ... Tack, J. (2013, September). Botulinum toxin reduces dysphagia in patients with nonachalasia primary esophageal motility disorders [Abstract}.  Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology ,  11 (9), 1115–1121.  Weijenborg, P. W., de Schepper, H. S., Smout, A. J. P. M., &amp; Bredenoord, A. J. (2015, February). Effects of antidepressants in patients with functional esophageal disorders or gastroesophageal reflux disease: A systematic review [Abstract].  Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology ,  13 (2), 251–259.  Xie, Y., Bowe, B., Li, T., Xian, H., Yan, Y., &amp; Al-Aly, Z. (2017, June). Long-term kidney outcomes among users of proton pump inhibitors without intervening acute kidney injury [Abstract].  Kidney International ,  91 (6), 1482–1494.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What is an esophageal spasm?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320926.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, February 15). "What is an esophageal spasm?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  