 Modern technology and the use of anesthetics make this procedure quick, safe, typically pain-free, and an excellent way to help save the natural tooth.  However, to avoid needing root canal treatment, anyone who has a toothache should see a dentist promptly to prevent any infection from getting worse, forming an abscess, or spreading throughout the tooth root system.  Most people report feeling a little sensitive or tender for a few days after having a root canal.  There are several reasons for this:  In most cases, the sensitivity and discomfort associated with a root canal should go away within a few days.  If it does not get better, or if the pain is severe or unrelieved by home measures, it is important to call the endodontist or dentist for an evaluation.  Fortunately, most root canals are successful. However, some root canal treatments are unsuccessful, and a person can experience more pain. There are many reasons why this happens:  If the cause of the pain is due to a missed canal, the endodontist will need to open the tooth, remove the filling and try to find the canal.  If the tooth has a vertical  fracture , the dentist would likely have to remove the tooth.  If a person experiences persistent  inflammation  or infection after a root canal, they may require a surgical procedure called a root-end resection.  Over-the-counter or prescription pain relievers should be sufficient to relieve the pain after a root canal. When using medications, make sure to follow instructions carefully and call the endodontist if the pain medication is not working. Ibuprofen is a pain reliever available for  purchase online .  It is important to avoid chewing or biting down on the affected tooth until the final restoration has been completed. The temporary filling is delicate and may break as a result. Also, practicing good oral hygiene with regular brushing and flossing should continue. A range of  toothbrushes ,  toothpaste , and  dental floss  is available for purchase online.  A root canal is usually performed by an endodontist (a specialist who cares for the inside of teeth).  The following are the steps of a root canal procedure:  A person who has undergone root canal treatment will need to revisit the dentist to have the temporary filling removed. At this stage, the dentist will either put in a permanent crown or will carry out other permanent restoration on the tooth.  Once the root canal is complete, the tooth should be back to full functioning and should not cause any more pain.  Root canal treatments are carried out millions of times each year. In most cases, endodontic treatment can successfully save a tooth that has been infected or damaged.  New technologies and anesthetics help to ensure that a root canal procedure is as comfortable as possible. People who experience severe or lasting pain should report it to the endodontist for further evaluation.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bohle, C. (2015, March 24). I just had a root canal, why does my tooth still hurt?  Bohle, C. (2015, March 24). I just had a root canal, why does my tooth still hurt?  Post root canal treatment. (n.d.).  Root canal explained. (n.d.).  Root canal treatment. (2016, July 1).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "How long will pain last after root canal?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320978.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, February 20). "How long will pain last after root canal?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  