 The intercostal muscles have different layers that are attached to the ribs to help build the chest wall and assist in breathing. When an intercostal muscle gets twisted, strained, or stretched too far, it can tear, causing intercostal muscle strain.  In this article, we examine the signs of an intercostal muscle strain, and how to tell one apart from other upper body pains and injuries. We also look at the causes and treatment options for these strains.  The signs and symptoms of an intercostal muscle strain can differ slightly, depending on their cause. Symptoms may include:  The upper back is rarely injured because it is relatively immobile. If this area is the cause of pain, it is often due to long-term poor posture. It can also be due to a severe injury that has weakened the sturdiness of the upper spine, such as a car accident.  Pain due to upper back injuries is usually felt as a sharp, burning pain in one spot. The pain can spread to the shoulder, neck, or elsewhere in the upper body, and it may come and go.  Intercostal muscle strain is almost always the result of some event, such as overexertion or injury. In contrast, the initial source of pain from  pneumonia  or other lung disorders is difficult to pinpoint.  If the specific area of discomfort can be located, such as between the ribs, this indicates the pain is not coming from the lungs or the upper back. Lung pain is usually described as sharp and spreading outward.  When a rib is fractured, the pain is usually much more severe than that of intercostal muscle strain.  The following symptoms may signal a rib fracture:  A fractured rib is a medical emergency requiring immediate attention.  Routine activities are not usually the cause of intercostal muscle strain. These strains most often occur as the result of an injury or overexertion of the muscles.  Common causes include:  A sudden increase in physical activity can also lead to an intercostal muscle strain. This is the case particularly when muscles are weakened by a lack of exercise or poor posture.  The time to see the doctor depends on the severity of the injury. A mild injury may result in a low level of pain and stiffness that goes away within a few days.  It is advisable to see a doctor if the pain is severe, lasts for more than a few days, or interferes with sleep or daily activities.  If a traumatic injury, such as a fall or an automobile accident, has occurred, or breathing is difficult, immediate medical attention is needed.  Diagnosing intercostal muscle strain involves a physical exam. The aim is to check for any limitations of movement and assess areas that are tender. The doctor will also ask about any recent injuries or sports involvement.  An X-ray or  MRI scan  may be ordered if the doctor rules out internal injuries, such as a fractured rib.  Home treatment may be all that is required if the injury that causes an intercostal muscle strain is not severe and symptoms are mild. Home treatment options include the following:  In addition to the home remedies described above, the doctor may order the following:  PT may involve various stretches to strengthen intercostal muscles, foam roller stretches, and deep breathing exercises.  If difficult or painful breathing occurs, deep breathing exercises are often ordered to improve a person's shallow breathing. Long-term shallow breathing can lead to complications, such as pneumonia.  A person with intercostal muscle strain should not do any stretching exercise unless under the supervision of a physical therapist or other healthcare providers.  Stretching should be stopped immediately if it increases pain or makes symptoms worse.  Mild intercostal muscle strain commonly heals within a few days. Moderate strains may take 3 to 7 weeks to heal, and severe strains that involve a complete tear of the muscles can take longer.  In general, most intercostal muscle sprains should heal within a 6-week time span.  Prevention of future muscle strains involves warming up and stretching before strenuous exercises are performed. It is important not to overdo it when it comes to working out or taking part in sports.  Keeping muscles strong also helps with the prevention of intercostal muscle strain.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Yoo, W. (2017, August 10). Effect of a combined thoracic and backward lifting exercise on the thoracic kyphosis angle and intercostal muscle pain.  Journal of Physical Therapy Science ,  29 (8), 1481–1482.  Yoo, W. (2017, August 10). Effect of a combined thoracic and backward lifting exercise on the thoracic kyphosis angle and intercostal muscle pain.  Journal of Physical Therapy Science ,  29 (8), 1481–1482.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Christiansen, Sherry. "What is an intercostal muscle strain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320925.php&gt;    APA  Christiansen, S. (2018, February 14). "What is an intercostal muscle strain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  