 The condition affects both male and female babies at equal rates. Some babies may be at higher risk of developing it if either of the parents carries genes that are suspected of causing the disorder.  While some scientists suspect genetics may play a role in hydranencephaly, the exact cause is unknown, and there is no cure for the condition. Often, a baby with hydranencephaly will die in the womb or within a few months of birth.  When a baby is born with hydranencephaly, there may or may not be obvious symptoms that the baby has the disorder. In clear cases, the baby's head appears enlarged.  When the head is not enlarged, it may take weeks or even months for symptoms to be observed and suspected. Often, a baby may have limited or jerky movement.  Other symptoms of hydranencephaly can include:   Some scientists  suspect that hydranencephaly is a disorder inherited from a child's parents.  Others suspect hydranencephaly occurs due to a blockage of the carotid artery where it enters the head. It is unclear, however, how or why a blockage may occur.  Another theory is that the baby's  central nervous system  sustains an injury at a very early stage of development, or does not develop properly.  A few additional causes may include:  Doctors may diagnose hydranencephaly at different points in time for different babies.  In some cases, detection can occur while the baby is still in the womb. An  ultrasound scan  may reveal that there are physical abnormalities of the fetus that suggest hydranencephaly.  In other cases, a doctor may see characteristic signs of the disorder at birth. However, it may not be until other signs and symptoms appear that a doctor will know more clearly to check for the disorder.  To make a diagnosis, a doctor may:  A transillumination is a relatively simple, painless procedure. Doctors place a bright light at the base of the baby's head, which allows them to see if the brain has grown irregularly.  Hydranencephaly causes physical and  mental health  issues for the child. As a result, several potential complications can result from hydranencephaly.  Some complications may include:  There is no cure for hydranencephaly. Treatment focuses on managing symptoms associated with the disorder.  Parents and caregivers should follow a doctor's recommended treatment plan. Medications and therapies should be discussed with a doctor to avoid issues of overmedicating the child.  Treatments will vary from child to child and will be set up to manage the individual's specific symptoms. For example, if a child is experiencing seizures, a doctor may prescribe anti-seizure medications.  Relaxation therapies may help reduce symptoms of irritability. Stool softeners may be used to help relieve associated  constipation .  Doctors will often recommend surgery to drain fluid from the baby's head. In these cases, a doctor places a one-way valve in the head. A catheter is attached to the valve, and the fluid is drained into the upper body. This procedure relieves pressure and pain in the head and may help extend the life of the child.  In some cases, a fetus may not survive beyond the mother's pregnancy. In other cases, a baby may only survive a few days after birth before dying.  It is not uncommon for a child with hydranencephaly to survive several years. However, due to the amount of missing brain,  many children with hydranencephaly  will not survive to adulthood.  Parents and caregivers of a child with hydranencephaly may benefit from seeking additional emotional support. Counseling and other mental health services, such as support groups, can provide help when needed.  Studies into hydranencephaly and its causes are still ongoing. Continued research may lead to ways to prevent hydranencephaly and similar disorders.    
 All things hydranencephaly. Guide for parents/caregivers. (n.d.).  All things hydranencephaly. Guide for parents/caregivers. (n.d.).  Hydranencephaly. (2007).  Hydranencephaly. (n.d.).  Hydranencephaly information page. (2017, May 25).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is hydranencephaly?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320904.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, February 13). "What is hydranencephaly?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  