 However, when the color change is abnormal, unexplained, or accompanied by pain or itchiness, a man should see his doctor, as a purple coloration may be a sign of infection, injury, or circulation issues.  A urologist is the best doctor to see when it comes to questions about the penis. Men without access to a urologist should seek medical attention from their primary care provider.  When a color change results from arousal, it is not a cause for concern. In these instances, the color change is due to extra blood flowing to the penis.  At most other times, a man should be concerned about either part or all of the penis turning a purplish color, as it may be the result of illness or an injury.  Other common causes of purple penis aside from arousal include the following:  Purple sores are typical of diseases, such as genital  herpes  and  syphilis . Both herpes and syphilis are accompanied by additional symptoms. These can include:  The best way to prevent contracting an STD is to practice safe sex. Knowing a partner's sexual health can also prevent the transmission of STDs.  Bruising on the body occurs when small blood vessels rupture, leaking blood under the surface of the skin. Where the blood collects, it causes the skin to turn purple. This can happen anywhere, including on the penis. Often, when a bruise occurs, the cause is known to the individual.  Small bruises do not necessarily require particular attention. Some common causes of minor bruising to the penis may include:  A small bruise may feel painful or tender to the touch. It may turn to a deeper color as it heals. If a small bruise fails to heal on its own or becomes larger, a man should seek medical attention.  Severe bruises that are the result of blunt force trauma require immediate medical attention. A man should wear protective gear when involved in contact sports to help prevent severe injury.  Purpura, also called blood spots, appear as purple or reddish blemishes on the skin. These spots are not a direct result of an injury to the penis. Instead, purpura is often the symptom of an underlying condition.  Some possible causes of purpura include:  A hematoma is a bruise that occurs deep within the tissue of an organ. The bruising is firm or lumpy to the touch. When a hematoma occurs, blood from a damaged vessel pools under the skin.  A hematoma can cause a loss of blood flow. It may also indicate a dangerous bleeding issue. When a hematoma occurs on the penis, a man should seek immediate medical attention.  Lichen sclerosus is a long-lasting, inflammatory skin disorder characterized by white patches that can develop purple spots.  The condition tends to develop on the penis. Also, uncircumcised men are more likely to develop lichen sclerosus than men who are circumcised.  Lichen sclerosus, if left untreated, can lead to sexual dysfunction and severe scarring. As with most disorders, early treatment can help prevent permanent damage and scarring.  People react to medications differently. In some cases, medications may result in a severe allergic reaction known as Stevens-Johnson syndrome.  Stevens-Johnson syndrome is characterized by a purple or red rash that appears on the penis, as well as some other parts of the body. The rash can develop into peeling skin and sores. As the reaction progresses, life-threatening complications can occur.  Stevens-Johnson syndrome requires emergency care. Some medications are more likely to cause Stevens-Johnson syndrome than others. These medications include:  There are less severe allergic reactions that can be caused by some medications. When these occur, a person should stop taking any over-the-counter drugs immediately. Before stopping a prescription drug, a person should consult his doctor.  A man should seek out his doctor for any unexplained change in color to the penis, especially when accompanied by pain or discomfort.  Other indications that a doctor may be needed include:  A doctor will likely perform a physical exam and ask questions about a person's medical history. They may also run some tests to help determine the exact cause of discoloration to a man's penis. Determining the cause will enable the doctor to prescribe the correct treatment.  Although it is usually treatable, a man should seek medical advice for any unexplained discoloration of the penis. Several treatments can help clear the underlying condition and return the penis to a more normal state and color.  If in doubt, a man should talk to his doctor to confirm that there are no underlying medical conditions that may be causing the penis to discolor.    
 Eken, A., Acil, M., &amp; Arpaci, T. (2014). Isolated rupture of the superficial vein of the penis [Abstract].  Canadian Urological Association Journal ,  8 (5–6), e371–e373.  Eken, A., Acil, M., &amp; Arpaci, T. (2014). Isolated rupture of the superficial vein of the penis [Abstract].  Canadian Urological Association Journal ,  8 (5–6), e371–e373.  Genital injury — Male. (2014, October 20).  Sexually transmitted infections (STIs). (2017, June 14).  Singh, J. P., Priyadarshi, V., Goel, H. K., Vijay, M. K., Pal, D. K., Chakraborty, S., … Kundu, A. K. (2015, July 9). Penile lichen sclerosus: An urologist's nightmare! -A single center experience.  Urology Annals ,  7 (3), 303–308.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Why does the penis change color?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320963.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, February 19). "Why does the penis change color?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  