 Symptoms like these can interfere with normal urination and a person's sex life. Some  research  shows that 2 percent of men have nonretractable foreskins throughout their lives, despite being otherwise healthy.  Read on to learn more about the classifications of tightness in the foreskin, causes, and treatment options.  The medical community categorizes a tight foreskin as:   Phimosis   When the foreskin is too tight to be pulled back over the head of the penis, this is termed phimosis.  It is normal for young boys (usually aged 2 to 6 years) to have a foreskin that will not retract. In these instances, there is no need to be concerned about phimosis unless it causes pain, swelling, or difficulty urinating.   Paraphimosis   In cases of paraphimosis, the foreskin does not pull forward once retracted. The tip of the penis, called the glans, becomes painful and swollen.  Paraphimosis is more serious than phimosis. Emergency medical treatment may be needed to reduce the pain and swelling, and to restore blood flow to the penis.  Phimosis can be either physiologic or pathologic.  This describes a foreskin that is tight from birth. The condition usually resolves by age 6 or 7.  Pathologic phimosis is caused by:  Conditions that cause pathologic phimosis include:   Balanitis    Balanitis , or inflammation of the head of the penis, can lead to a tight foreskin, painful urination, and other symptoms. Some people will also have a thick discharge beneath the foreskin.   Balanoposthitis   When both the glans and foreskin are inflamed, it is called balanoposthitis. Several types of infections can cause balanoposthitis, including the yeast infection  Candidiasis .  Infections may lead to scarring, which can contribute to the tightness of the foreskin.   Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)   Some STIs can cause inflammation of the glans, which may lead to tightness and discomfort. Common STIs that may be responsible for tightness of the foreskin include:   Skin conditions   Some skin conditions that may cause or worsen symptoms include:   Age   Advancing age may lead to the development of phimosis. As skin loses elasticity, it can become stiffer and less pliable.  Paraphimosis may be caused by:  Paraphimosis can also occur when a medical professional fails to return the foreskin into position following an examination or procedure.  People without symptoms often do not need treatment. The following methods may reduce symptoms.  Best practices for adults include:  Tightness can often be prevented or treated by employing good hygiene techniques.  Manually stretch the foreskin to preserve elasticity. This can help to prevent and treat tightness. Gently pull the foreskin backward and forward when cleaning the penis. This exercise should be performed as soon as the foreskin separates from the glans, usually at  age 7 .  Consult a doctor before teaching children to perform this exercise, as not all boys develop at the same rate. A doctor can also advise on the proper way to perform this exercise.  Several medications are used to treat a tight foreskin. The best choice will depend on the cause of the condition. Below are some options to consider.   Over-the-counter medications   Using a topical steroid cream may alleviate  most cases  of tight foreskin. The creams have a softening effect and should be massaged into the foreskin daily for up to 2 months. Many will contain the steroid hydrocortisone.  These medications work best when a person is also performing the manual stretching exercise described above. Even after steroid use is discontinued, exercises can prevent recurrence of tightness.  In the short term, some people may also benefit from using pain relievers such as ibuprofen (Advil).   Prescription medications   If a tight foreskin is caused by infection,  a doctor may prescribe   antibiotics  such as bacitracin or antifungals such as clotrimazole (Lotrimin AF).  If the cause is something else, a doctor may prescribe a topical steroid. It will be stronger than the over-the-counter varieties mentioned earlier. Prescription steroids include betamethasone (Celestone) and triamcinolone (Aristospan).  In some cases of paraphimosis, a local anesthetic gel may be applied to the penis so that the foreskin can be pushed forward without too much discomfort.  When other treatments have proven ineffective, surgery may be required. Types include:  Circumcision carries risks of bleeding and infection. Doctors only recommend it as a last resort.  There are several ways to prevent a tight foreskin.  These include:  In most boys, a tight foreskin will resolve before adulthood. Cases of phimosis that persist into adulthood may cause pain, discomfort during sex, increased risk of infection, or difficulty urinating.  If symptoms are present at any age, it is important to see a doctor. Paraphimosis, in particular, requires prompt medical attention, to prevent further complications.  Any of the many treatments options available can successfully resolve both phimosis and paraphimosis. To prevent tightness of the foreskin, practice good hygiene and stretching techniques.    
 Lisboa, C., Ferreira, A., Resende, C., &amp; Rodrigues, A. G. (2009, January 19). Infectious balanoposthitis: management, clinical and laboratory features.  International Journal of Dermatology ,  48 (2), 121–124.  Lisboa, C., Ferreira, A., Resende, C., &amp; Rodrigues, A. G. (2009, January 19). Infectious balanoposthitis: management, clinical and laboratory features.  International Journal of Dermatology ,  48 (2), 121–124.  McGregor, T. B., Pike, J. G., &amp; Leonard, M. P. (2007, March). Pathologic and physiologic phimosis: approach to the phimotic foreskin [Abstract].  Canadian Family Physician ,  53 (3), 445–448.  Phimosis. (n.d.).  Shahid, S. K. (2012, March 5). Phimosis in children.  ISRN Urology ,  2012 .  What are ways to loosen a tight foreskin? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What causes a tight foreskin?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320997.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, February 22). "What causes a tight foreskin?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  