 This tension, between a widespread belief that marijuana is an effective treatment for a wide assortment of ailments and a lack of scientific knowledge on its effects, has been somewhat exacerbated in recent times by a drive toward legalization.  Twenty-nine states plus the District of Columbia have now made marijuana available for medical — and, in some states, recreational — purposes.  A  recent study  published in the journal  Addiction  also found that use of marijuana is increasing sharply across the United States, although this rise may not be linked to the legalization of marijuana in participating states. Nevertheless, this rise in use is prompting major public health concerns.  In this article, we look at the scientific evidence weighing the medical benefits of marijuana against its associated health risks in an attempt to answer this simple question: is marijuana good or bad?  Over the years, research has yielded results to suggest that marijuana may be of benefit in the treatment of some conditions. These are listed below.  Last year, a  large review  from the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine assessed more than 10,000 scientific studies on the medical benefits and adverse effects of marijuana.  One area that the report looked closely at was the use of medical marijuana to treat chronic pain. Chronic pain is a leading cause of disability, affecting more than  25 million adults  in the U.S.  The review found that marijuana, or products containing cannabinoids — which are the active ingredients in marijuana, or other compounds that act on the same receptors in the brain as marijuana — are effective at relieving chronic pain.  Another  comprehensive review  of evidence, published last year in the journal  Clinical Psychology Review , revealed that using marijuana may help people with alcohol or opioid dependencies to fight their addictions.  But this finding may be contentious; the National Academies of Sciences review  suggests  that marijuana use actually drives increased risk for abusing, and becoming dependent on, other substances.  Also, the more that someone uses marijuana, the more likely they are to develop a problem with using marijuana. Individuals who began using the drug at a young age are also known to be at increased risk of developing a problem with marijuana use.  The review published in  Clinical Psychology Review  assessed all published scientific literature that investigated the use of marijuana to  treat symptoms of mental illness .  Its authors found some evidence supporting the use of marijuana to relieve  depression  and  post-traumatic stress disorder  symptoms.  That being said, they caution that marijuana is not an appropriate treatment for some other  mental health  conditions, such as  bipolar disorder  and  psychosis .  The review indicates that there is some evidence to suggest that marijuana might alleviate symptoms of social  anxiety , but again, this is contradicted by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine review, which instead found that regular users of marijuana may actually be at increased risk of social anxiety.  Evidence  suggests  that oral cannabinoids are effective against nausea and vomiting caused by  chemotherapy , and some small studies have found that smoked marijuana may also help to  alleviate these symptoms .  Some studies on  cancer  cells suggest that cannabinoids may either slow down the growth of or kill some types of cancer. However,  early studies  that tested this hypothesis in humans revealed that although cannabinoids are a safe treatment, they are not effective at controlling or curing cancer.  The short-term use of oral cannabinoids may improve symptoms of spasticity among people with  multiple sclerosis , but the positive effects have been  found to be modest .  In June 2018, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  approved the use  of a medication containing cannabidiol (CBD) to treat two rare, severe, and specific types of  epilepsy  — called Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome — that are difficult to control with other types of medication. This CBD-based drug is known as Epidiolex.  CBD is one of many substances that occurs in cannabis. It is not psychoactive. The drug for treating these conditions involves a purified form of CBD. The approval was based on the findings of research and clinical trials.  A  study  published in 2017 found that the use of CBD resulted in far fewer seizures among children with Dravet syndrome, compared with a  placebo .  Dravet syndrome seizures are prolonged, repetitive, and potentially lethal. In fact, 1 in 5 children with Dravet syndrome do not reach the age of 20 years.  In the study, 120 children and teenagers with Dravet syndrome, all of whom were aged between 2 and 18, were randomly assigned to receive an oral CBD solution or a placebo for 14 weeks, along with their usual medication.  The researchers found that the children who received the CBD solution went from having around 12 seizures per month to an average of six seizures per month. Three children receiving CBD did not experience any seizures at all.  Children who received the placebo also saw a reduction in seizures, but this was slight — their average number of seizures went down from 15 each month before the study to 14 seizures per month during the study.  The researchers say that this 39 percent reduction in seizure occurrence provides strong evidence that the compound can help people living with Dravet syndrome, and that their paper has the first rigorous scientific data to demonstrate this.  However, the study also found a high rate of side effects linked to CBD. More than 9 in 10 of the children treated with CBD experienced side effects — most commonly vomiting,  fatigue , and  fever .  The patient information leaflet for Epidiolex  warns of side effects  such as liver damage, sedation, and thoughts of suicide.  At the other end of the spectrum is the plethora of studies that have found negative associations between marijuana use and health. They are listed below.  Daily marijuana use is believed to exacerbate existing symptoms of bipolar disorder among people who have this mental health problem. However, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine report suggests that among people with no history of the condition, there is only limited evidence of a link between marijuana use and developing bipolar disorder.  Moderate evidence suggests that regular marijuana users are more likely to experience  suicidal thoughts , and there is a small increased risk of depression among marijuana users.  Marijuana use is likely to increase risk of psychosis, including  schizophrenia . But a curious finding among people with schizophrenia and other psychoses is that a history of marijuana use is linked with  improved performance  on tests assessing learning and memory.  Although there is no evidence to suggest any link between using marijuana and an increased risk for most cancers, the National Academies of Sciences did find some evidence to suggest an increased risk for the slow-growing seminoma subtype of  testicular cancer .  Regular marijuana smoking is linked to increased risk of chronic cough, but " it is unclear " whether smoking marijuana worsens lung function or increases the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or  asthma .  A  2014 study  that explored the relationship between marijuana use and lung disease suggested that it was plausible that smoking marijuana could contribute to  lung cancer , though it has been difficult to conclusively link the two.  The authors of that study — published in the journal  Current Opinion in Pulmonary Medicine  — conclude:   " There is unequivocal evidence that habitual or regular marijuana smoking is not harmless. A caution against regular heavy marijuana usage is prudent."  "The medicinal use of marijuana is likely not harmful to lungs in low cumulative doses," they add, "but the dose limit needs to be defined. Recreational use is not the same as medicinal use and should be discouraged."  There is evidence that demonstrates both the harms and health benefits of marijuana. Yet despite the emergence over the past couple of years of very comprehensive, up-to-date reviews of the scientific studies evaluating the benefits and harms of the drug, it's clear that more research is needed to fully determine the public health implications of rising marijuana use.  Many scientists and health bodies — including the  American Cancer Society  (ACS) — support the need for further scientific research on the use of marijuana and cannabinoids to treat medical conditions.  However, there is an obstacle to this: marijuana is classed as a Schedule I controlled substance by the Drug Enforcement Administration, which deters the study of marijuana and cannabinoids through its imposition of strict conditions on the researchers working in this area.  If you happen to live in a state where medical use of marijuana is legal, you and your doctor will need to carefully consider these factors and how they relate to your illness and health history before using this drug.  For instance, while there is some evidence to support the use for marijuana for pain relief, you should certainly avoid marijuana if you have a history of mental health problems.  Remember to always speak to your doctor before taking a new medicine.  