 Researchers from the University of Queensland in Australia have found distinct gut microbiota alterations in rodents and humans that are at high risk of  type 1 diabetes .  Furthermore, the scientists found that these gut microbiota alterations were a result of genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes, as well as changes in immune system functioning.  Study co-author Dr. Emma Hamilton-Williams — from the Translational Research Institute at the University of Queensland — and colleagues say that their findings suggest that targeting the gut microbiota might have the potential to prevent type 1 diabetes.  The  results  were recently published in the journal  Microbiome .  In type 1 diabetes, the immune system mistakingly attacks and destroys the beta cells, or those that produce  insulin , of the pancreas. As a result, not enough insulin is made, and this can lead to an increase in blood sugar levels.  Type 1 diabetes accounts for around  5 percent  of all  diabetes  cases, and onset of the condition is most common in childhood, adolescence, and young adulthood.  Although the precise cause of type 1 diabetes remains unclear, it is known that those who possess  certain genetic variants  are at greater risk of the condition.  For example, susceptibility to type 1 diabetes is higher among individuals who have variants of the human leukocyte antigen complex, such as the HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, and HLA-DRB1 genes. These are genes that play a role in immune system functioning.   Research  also suggested that changes in gut microbiota — or the population of microorganisms that reside in the intestine — play a role in the development of type 1 diabetes.  However, as Dr. Hamilton-Williams and colleagues explain, it is unclear whether such changes in gut microbiota are driven by genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes or other factors. The team sought to find out with the new study.  First, they conducted an analysis of non-obese mouse models that were genetically susceptible to type 1 diabetes. They looked at whether the rodents' gut microbiota differed to that of mice that were protected against type 1 diabetes, and, if so, whether genetic susceptibility played a role.   The results of the analysis revealed that the mouse models with genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes demonstrated alterations in gut microbiota composition. Specifically, they showed reductions in  Ruminococcus ,  Lachnospiraceae , and  Clostridiales  bacteria.   What is more, the scientists found that these alterations were associated with changes in immune system functioning.  The study also found that using immunotherapy to target T cells — which are a type of white blood cell — related to type 1 diabetes led to significant changes in the gut microbiota of rodents.  The researchers were able to confirm their findings in a study of humans with genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes who were a part of the  TwinsUK  cohort.  Dr. Hamilton-Williams and her team now plan to assess clinical trials of immunotherapies for type 1 diabetes, with the aim of finding out whether the treatment led to changes in gut microbiota.  If so, the researchers say that it could then be possible to protect against type 1 diabetes by restoring protective gut microorganisms.  "This research has shown," says Dr. Hamilton-Williams, "there is a genetic component to microbiota and the immune response involved in regulating it. This means that changes in the microbiota in type 1 diabetes occur before symptoms develop, and are not just a side effect of the disease."   " Therapies targeting the microbiota could therefore have the potential to help prevent type 1 diabetes in the future."  Dr. Emma Hamilton-Williams  