 Clogged pores often cause  pimples  on the scalp, or scalp  acne . Keeping the hair clean and using medicated shampoos can help treat the condition.  In this article, we look at how to identify scalp acne, its causes, and ways to treat and prevent this condition.  In most cases, a doctor will recommend a medicated shampoo or scalp treatment. These shampoos can wash away any excess oil and debris and prevent scalp acne from returning.  Medicated shampoos for scalp acne  can be bought online  without a prescription. Common ingredients in these products include:  For persistent scalp acne and associated symptoms, such as  hair loss  and  inflammation , a doctor may prescribe the following treatments:  A person with scalp acne should only use one type of scalp treatment at a time unless otherwise directed by a doctor. This way it is easier to track the effectiveness of individual products.  Scalp acne looks like small pimples or zits on the scalp, including the back of the head. These pimples can be itchy and sore.  Just like pimples elsewhere, pimples on the scalp occur when a pore or hair follicle gets clogged with dead skin cells or sebum, which is the natural oil the skin uses to keep itself moisturized.  Bacteria, yeast, or mites can also get into the pores and cause a reaction.  Factors that can cause scalp acne include:  Specific germs that may be causing severe scalp acne include:  Diet may also be linked to acne. A study published in  Advances in Dermatology and Allergology  suggests that a diet high in sugary  carbohydrates  may  increase the risk  of acne.  Scalp hygiene plays an essential role in avoiding clogged pores. A good rule of thumb is to wash the hair whenever it starts to feel oily and after every workout.  To treat scalp acne and prevent further flare-ups, try:  For some people, infrequent hair washing can cause scalp acne. For other people, washing the hair too often can strip the skin of protective sebum, which can increase the risk of other contaminants getting in. Speak to a dermatologist to find out the best hair care routine.  There are a number of reasons why pimples or  blackheads  might appear on the scalp, which can make it more difficult to identify scalp acne.   Scalp folliculitis  is a related condition, where bacteria on the scalp cause the hair follicles to become infected and inflamed. This can result in small, very itchy red bumps.   Seborrheic dermatitis  is a common condition that causes dandruff and often leaves the scalp red and scaly. Picking at the area can cause additional injury, leading to marks that look like pimples.   Pilar cysts  are hard bumps filled with keratin that form near the hair root. Unlike scalp acne, these bumps usually do not have a white head.  In other cases, bumps on the scalp may be a sign of cancerous cells, such as squamous cell  carcinoma .  Pimples on the scalp are relatively common and are treated in a similar way to acne on other parts of the body.  Scalp acne may sometimes be a sign of more serious conditions. When the acne does not respond to usual treatments, a person should consult their doctor to find out the best treatment plan.  When treating scalp acne, a dermatologist will often start with daily medicated shampoos. If this is not effective, they may recommend a stronger treatment.  Acne scars may take some time to fade. Avoid picking pimples on the scalp to prevent spreading bacteria or creating deep scar tissue.  Taking preventive measures may stop scalp acne from coming back in many cases.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Acne: Diagnosis and treatment. (n.d.).  Acne: Diagnosis and treatment. (n.d.).  D'Souza, P., &amp; Rathi, S. K. (2015, May–June). Shampoo and conditioners: What a dermatologist should know?  Indian Journal of Dermatology ,  60 (3), 248–254.  Kucharska, A., Szmurło, A., &amp; Sińska, B. (2016, May 16). Significance of diet in treated and untreated acne vulgaris.  Advances in Dermatology and Allergology ,  33 (2), 81–86.  Oakley, A., Ngan, V. (2014, June). Scalp folliculitis.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "How to treat and prevent scalp acne."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320968.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, February 20). "How to treat and prevent scalp acne."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  