 Many women use a douche to try to get rid of vaginal odor and believe that doing so helps to keep the vagina clean.  While as many as  1 in 5 women between 15 and 44 years old  are thought to practice douching regularly, it can have unpleasant and even dangerous consequences.  The primary use of douches is by women to wash the vagina.  Vaginal douching involves filling a bottle or bag with water and squirting this upward into the vagina.  Women sometimes choose to mix the water with other fluids, such as vinegar, or to buy douching products that may contain ingredients, such as baking soda, iodine, antiseptics, or fragrance.  Women state that they use a douche for the following reasons:  Despite this, douching has not been shown to achieve any of these aims.  The  American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology  state that women should not use douches.  The vaginal flora is the bacteria in the vagina. This keeps the vagina healthy and prevents infection. A woman's vagina is 'self-cleaning' and can maintain the correct pH balance without interference.  Douching can remove good bacteria from the vagina. Using a douche can change its pH balance, allow bad bacteria to multiply, and infections, irritations, raw skin, and more severe complications to occur.  Douching can cause more harm than good. The potential for complications, some of which may be severe, is dependent on the reasons a woman decides to douche in the first place.  Douching is not a valid form of  contraception . However, using a douche can make it more difficult for a woman who is trying to conceive.  Also, women who douche on a regular basis may have a more complicated pregnancy.  Pregnant women may experience:  There is a common misconception that douching can help prevent vaginal infections or get rid of them. However, the opposite is true.  Douching regularly can increase a woman's chances of developing a vaginal infection. Disrupting the vagina's natural pH balance can result in yeast infections and  bacterial vaginosis .  In fact, women who douche are  five times more likely  to develop vaginosis than those who do not.  Using a douche when an infection is already present is also more likely to make it worse and spread to other parts of the reproductive system.   Pelvic inflammatory disease  or PID is usually caused by a sexually transmitted infection. It affects the reproductive organs and can reduce a woman's chances of getting pregnant.  Women who douche regularly increase their risk of PID by  73 percent .  Cervicitis occurs when the cervix becomes irritated or inflamed, and it can cause itching, pain, and vaginal discharge. It is another condition that is usually contracted via a sexually transmitted infection. However, douching also increases the risk.  While a natural vaginal odor and some vaginal discharge are both perfectly healthy, it is essential to be aware of the signs and symptoms of a more serious problem.  Signs to look out for include:  If a woman notices any of the above, it is advisable to seek advice from a doctor.  A woman's vagina is self-cleaning and will get rid of semen, menstrual blood, and other bodily fluids on its own. Cleaning with a douche or any hash or disruptive cleaning method is likely to cause damage to the vagina, which in some cases, could be severe.  A woman who is worried about vaginal odor or abnormal discharge should contact her doctor to discuss the issue. Using a douche to eliminate these concerns could mask underlying issues and may lead to more severe complications if left untreated.  Keeping the vagina clean is simple. The easiest way is by washing with water when bathing or showering. A non-fragranced wash can be used, or one designed for vaginal use that will not upset the natural pH balance of the vagina.  When washing, a person should gently hold the outer folds of the vagina back and rinse or splash with water.  Do not scrub the area and avoid getting soap or washes inside the vagina. If using a wash, the individual should make sure to rinse thoroughly afterward and gently pat dry with a clean towel.  While the vagina has a natural odor, for some women the odor seems unpleasant or embarrassing.  Every woman's vaginal odor is different, and activities such as sex and exercise can change how the vagina smells.  There are ways to reduce vaginal odor safely. These are:  By following the above advice, the pH balance and good bacteria in the vagina should remain undisturbed, and infections and odors are less likely to occur.    
 Chandra, A., Martinez, G. M., Mosher, W. D., Abma, J. C., &amp; Jones, J. (2005, December). Fertility, family planning, and reproductive health of U.S. women: Data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth. National Center for Health Statistics.  Vital Health Statistics ,  23 (25).  Chandra, A., Martinez, G. M., Mosher, W. D., Abma, J. C., &amp; Jones, J. (2005, December). Fertility, family planning, and reproductive health of U.S. women: Data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth. National Center for Health Statistics.  Vital Health Statistics ,  23 (25).  Douching. (2017, April 18).  Douching [Fact sheet]. (2015, January 19).  Harding, M. (2017, October 18). Common problems of the cervix.  Keeping your vagina clean and healthy. (2015, December 1).  Markham, C. M., Tortolero, S. R., Addy, R. C., Baumler, E. R., McKirahan, N. K., Escobar-Chaves, S. L., … Peskin, M. F. (2007, November). Factors associated with frequent vaginal douching among alternative school youth [Abstract].  Journal of Adolescent Health ,  41 (5), 509512.  Martino, J. L., &amp; Vermund, S. H. (2002, December 1). Vaginal douching: Evidence for risks or benefits to women's health.  Epidemiologic Reviews ,  24 (2), 109124.  Ott, M. A., Ofner, S., &amp; Fortenberry, J. D. (2009, May). ORIGINAL RESEARCH–WOMEN'S SEXUAL HEALTH: Beyond douching: Use of feminine hygiene products and STI risk among young women [Abstract].  The Journal of Sexual Medicine ,  6 (5), 13351340.  Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) - CDC fact sheet [Fact sheet]. (2017, July 10).  Ross, E. (2015, March 10). Feminine odor problems? What every woman needs to know.  Vaginitis. (2017, January 26).  Vulvovaginal health. (2015, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What is a douche?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320998.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, February 22). "What is a douche?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  