 Accumulation of fluid may occur due to any illnesses and conditions that change the proteins of the body, affect the balance of fluids, or create abnormalities in the blood vessels or lymphatic system.  Often, if anasarca is present, it is a sign of severe organ damage or illness.  It is helpful to understand that anasarca is not a disease itself. Instead, it is a symptom or result of a medical condition.  Anasarca is different than typical  edema . Almost everyone experiences swelling at some time, which can be due to a variety of causes, such as an injury,  dehydration , or a minor side effect of medication.  In many instances, swelling or edema may only affect a specific part of the body, such as the feet, hands, or legs.  But with anasarca, the swelling involves the whole body and is considered severe. For example, the swelling is often so severe it makes movement difficult.  It is essential to find out what is causing anasarca to treat it accurately. For example, if kidney disease is causing anasarca,  treatment  is needed to assist kidney function.  Also, doctors often prescribe medications to treat the severe swelling.  Doctors often prescribe drugs called diuretics. Diuretics work by helping the kidneys release more salt into the urine, which causes the release of more fluid through urination.  The two main types of diuretics prescribed for anasarca include potassium-sparing and loop diuretics. Diuretics are either taken by mouth or given through an intravenous line (IV). The choice of diuretic, the dose, and the route of administration vary according to the severity of the swelling and the underlying condition that is causing anasarca.  Albumin is a protein made by the body that is necessary for a  variety of important functions , including balancing fluid. In cases of poor  nutrition  and certain serious medical conditions, the level of albumin can become too low. When this occurs fluid from the bloodstream is pushed out into the tissues causing swelling. In some cases,  replacing albumin  can help correct this problem.  A doctor may recommend additional home treatments to speed recovery. Monitoring fluid and salt intake is important to prevent any swelling from getting worse. Salt can increase  fluid retention , which is why people who have severe edema need to reduce their salt intake.  Anasarca can develop due to a variety of causes. Some conditions that may lead to anasarca are widespread, while others are considered rare.  The most common causes of anasarca include:  Less common causes include:  Capillary leak syndrome occurs when protein and fluid leak out of the blood vessels into the tissues of the body. The cause is not well understood, but it is believed to be due to  inflammation  and blood vessel injury. It has been shown to occur in relation to some medications and toxins.  According to one  case study , capillary leak syndrome can develop as a result of certain  cancer  medications, such as gemcitabine. Another case was reported following a  snakebite .  Various medications can lead to anasarca. The most common types of medication that might cause swelling include steroids and  blood pressure  drugs, such as amlodipine. Discontinuing the medication will often resolve symptoms of anasarca as indicated in this  case report .  The main symptom of anasarca is swelling of the body. The swelling is obvious, and the skin may look shiny and stretched. Sometimes, swelling is so extreme that a person has difficulty moving.  Swelling can become so severe that fluid will leak out directly from the skin. This is known as weeping edema.  Pitting edema may also develop. Pitting edema occurs when pressure is applied to the swollen skin, and a dimple or indentation remains after the pressure is released.  The swelling often causes additional symptoms including:  A life-threatening complication of anasarca can also develop if fluid accumulates in the lungs. Fluid in the lungs is called  pulmonary edema , and it can quickly become an emergency. Signs of pulmonary edema include chest pain, shortness of breath, and coughing.  A doctor can usually make a diagnosis of anasarca after a physical exam; and if the edema is severe, a doctor can often recognize it instantly. However, determining the underlying cause of anasarca requires further tests.  A blood test is often the first step in making a diagnosis of anasarca. Blood is tested to check the function of organs including the heart, lungs, liver, and kidneys.  A doctor will also take a medical history to help determine whether any underlying medical conditions are causing the fluid retention. A doctor may also recommend other diagnostic tests, such as an echocardiogram, a chest X-ray, and a  stress  test to evaluate heart and lung function.  Anasarca often occurs due to severe organ damage or illness. It may interfere with a person's ability to perform everyday activities and can greatly decrease their quality of life. But with proper treatment, swelling can often be reduced. Although medication can help treat the condition, anasarca might return if the underlying cause cannot be corrected.  The outlook for people with anasarca often depends on identifying the cause. In many instances, by the time anasarca has developed, the underlying condition has progressed to a critical state.  Treating problems with the heart, lungs, kidneys, and liver early on is the best chance of preventing and controlling anasarca in many cases.    
 Caironi, P., &amp; Gattinoni, L. (2009, October). The clinical use of albumin: The point of view of a specialist in intensive care.  Blood Transfusion .  7 (4), 259–267.  Caironi, P., &amp; Gattinoni, L. (2009, October). The clinical use of albumin: The point of view of a specialist in intensive care.  Blood Transfusion .  7 (4), 259–267.  Causes and signs of edema. (2016, December 30).  Chien, S.-C., Chen, C.-Y., Lin, C.-F., &amp; Yeh, H.-I. (2017, November 10). Critical appraisal of the role of serum albumin in cardiovascular disease.  Biomarker Research ,  5 , 31.  Duffy, M., Jain, S., Harrell, N., Kothari, N., &amp; Reddi, A. S. (2015, October 7). Albumin and furosemide combination for management of edema in nephrotic syndrome: A review of clinical studies.  Cells ,  4 (4), 622–630.  Mehta, M. D., &amp; Shah, M. D. (2016). Case report: Uncontrolled anasarca: Capillary leak syndrome The Medicine Forum ,  17 (8).  O'Brien, J. G., Chennubhotla, S. A., &amp; Chennubhotla, R. V. (2005, June 1). Treatment of edema.  American Family Physician ,  71 (11), 2111–2117.  Şener, D., Halil, M., Yavuz, B. B., Cankurtaran, M., &amp; Ariğul, S. (2005, April 1). Anasarca edema with amlodipine treatment. [Abstract].  Annals of Pharmacotherapy ,  39 (4), 761–763.  Trayes, K. P., Studdiford, J. S., Pickle, S., &amp; Tully, A. S. (2013, July 15). Edema: diagnosis and management.  American Family Physician ,  88 (2), 108–110.  Udayabhaskaran, V., Arun Thomas, E. T., &amp; Shaji, B. (2017, October 21). Capillary leak syndrome following snakebite envenomation.  Indian Journal of Critical Care Medicine ,  21 (10), 698–702.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  de Pietro, MaryAnn. "What is anasarca?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320906.php&gt;    APA  de Pietro, M. (2018, February 13). "What is anasarca?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  