 This can range from a small, painless lump to a large, infected growth. If a doctor diagnoses it, they may call it an epidermoid  cyst  or a pilonidal cyst.  Ingrown hairs are not usually dangerous, but they can be intensely painful. If an infection is left untreated, it may worsen or travel to the blood.  In this article, we discuss why ingrown hairs happen, how a cyst can develop, and how to stop this from happening.  When a hair grows into the skin, a fluid-filled lump can develop, which may become a cyst. When a cyst forms, the area becomes swollen.  A cyst may be hard, soft, large, or  smaller than a pea . Some cysts can develop deep under the skin, while others may be near the surface, where they can develop a white or yellow head.  Usually, cysts do not hurt unless an infection develops. An infected cyst may be red, itchy, and tender.  Cysts that result from an ingrown hair often go away without treatment. Often, home treatment can help, but sometimes, a person will need to see a doctor.  The following tips can help speed up healing:  Avoid picking or popping the cyst. Cysts  develop from a sac  under the skin, which can fill with a thick, yellow substance called keratin. Popping the cyst may release the liquid but will not get rid of the sac, and the cyst may grow back. Popping a cyst can also introduce bacteria to the skin, causing infection or making the cyst worse.  Sometimes, an ingrown hair is visible above the skin before it curls underneath. If this is the case, removing it may speed up healing. People can use clean tweezers to grab the hair and remove it.  They should not try this if the hair is completely under the skin, or if it is necessary to dig into the skin to remove it. Instead, the person should leave the hair alone.  Sometimes, a person will need medical treatment for a cyst. They should see a doctor if:  A doctor may prescribe antibiotics to clear up an underlying infection or may recommend removing the cyst surgically.  Removal of a cyst is usually possible at a doctor's office, under local anesthetic. Local anesthetic enables a fast recovery time and allows the individual to remain awake during the procedure.  Cysts can appear for various reasons, but when it stems from an ingrown hair, the following happens.  All hairs grow from a hair follicle, sometimes called a pore. This is a tiny opening in the skin, with a complex underlying structure that nourishes the hair.  Sometimes, a hair gets trapped under the skin before it leaves the follicle, resulting in an ingrown hair. At other times, a hair grows out of the follicle but curls back on itself and reenters the skin.  When hair becomes trapped underneath the skin, it can irritate the skin. It also blocks the hair follicle, trapping various substances in the pore. A cyst can develop.  Skin cysts often contain keratin, a protein that keeps skin strong and flexible. But sometimes, cysts arise from trapped bacteria or inflammatory response to an infection.  To  reduce the risk  of cysts developing from an ingrown hair, people can try the following:  Anyone can develop ingrown hairs. Risk factors for developing ingrown hairs include:  When a lump appears in an area where there is body hair, it may be because a cyst has formed around an ingrown hair.  A person should look for a small red bump with a hair in it that slowly grows into a bigger lump. Many cysts of this type develop in areas covered in razor burn.  Some signs that the problem might not be a cyst include:  It is easy to mistake a harmless cyst for a more serious skin condition. Anyone who has a cyst that does not clear up after a week or two should see their doctor.  Prompt treatment can be lifesaving in the case of  skin cancer ,  serious skin infections , and other dangerous skin problems.  Preventing ingrown hairs is the best way to prevent this type of cyst from developing. However, if cysts do appear, they are usually harmless and often go away on their own.  People who frequently develop cysts, razor burn, or ingrown hairs should ask their doctor about strategies for reducing the occurrence of these annoying skin conditions.  In most cases, a few changes in a person's skin care routine can significantly reduce the risk of ingrown hairs and the related irritation.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Higgins, J. C., Maher, M. H., &amp; Douglas, M. S. (2015, October 1). Diagnosing common benign skin tumors.  American Family Physician ,  92 (7), 601–607.  Higgins, J. C., Maher, M. H., &amp; Douglas, M. S. (2015, October 1). Diagnosing common benign skin tumors.  American Family Physician ,  92 (7), 601–607.  Ingrown hairs. (2016, May 24).  Kapadia, A. (2014, June). Pilar cyst.  Levinbook, W. S. (2016, June). Pseudofolliculitis barbae.  NYU Langone skin expert offers practical advice and best practices for dealing with ingrown hair or "razor bumps" [Press release]. (2015, January 28).  Oakley, A. (2016, July). Folliculitis barbae and pseudofolliculitis barbae.  Skin cyst. (2017, May 18).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "How should you treat an ingrown hair cyst?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320976.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, February 20). "How should you treat an ingrown hair cyst?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  