 Sometimes, poop can vary in its color, texture, amount, and odor. These differences can be worrying, but usually, these changes are not significant and will resolve in a day or two. Other times, however, changes in poop indicate a more serious condition.  Keep reading to discover more about the different types of poop, including what is and is not normal.  Normal poop is generally:  Devised by doctors in the Bristol Royal Infirmary, England, and based on the bowel movements of nearly 2,000 people, the Bristol stool chart characterizes the different types of poop  as shown above.   Types 1 and 2 indicate  constipation , types 3 and 4 are considered healthy stool, while types 5 to 7 suggest  diarrhea  and urgency.  While brown poop is considered the "normal" color of poop, some greenish-brown hues may also be acceptable.  Poop can be other colors too, such as:   Black   Stools that are black, especially if they have the appearance of  coffee  grounds, suggest gastrointestinal bleeding. Substances such as iron supplements, black licorice, black stout, and bismuth medications also cause black poop.   White   If stools are white, gray, or pale, a person may have an issue with the liver or gallbladder as pale stools suggest a lack of bile. Some anti-diarrhea medications cause white stools.   Green   Spinach,  kale , or other green foods can cause green poop. However, green-colored stool may be a sign that there is too much bile and not enough bilirubin in the poop.   Red   Poop that is red-colored may be the result of gastrointestinal bleeding. Small amounts of blood in the stool can indicate  hemorrhoids .  Eating beets or red berries, or drinking beet or tomato juice, also turns poop red. Once these foods have passed through the digestive tract, poop should become brown again.   Orange   Consuming many orange-colored foods, which are rich in a pigment called  beta-carotene , causes orange stool.  Carrots, sweet potatoes, and winter squash are among the many foods that contain this pigment.  However, blocked bile ducts or certain medications including some antacids and the  antibiotic  rifampin can cause orange poop.   Yellow   If stool appears yellow or is greasy-looking, it suggests the poop contains too much fat. This may be the result of absorption issues, or difficulty producing enzymes or bile.  Most people will experience variations in stool color at some stage. Usually, this is down to diet or some other minor cause. However, anyone who experiences changes in poop color that last for 2 or more weeks or has red or black stool should see their doctor.  At most, it should take no more than 10 to 15 minutes to pass stool.  People that take longer than this may have constipation, hemorrhoids, or another condition.  The following situations may suggest a digestive issue:  People experiencing any of these types of poop should see a doctor.  Abnormal poop can have many causes, ranging from minor to severe. Causes can include:   Stress   Digestive conditions, such as  irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS), can be triggered or exacerbated by  stress . In some people, it can manifest as diarrhea and in others as constipation.   Dehydration   Not drinking enough water and other fluids can lead to constipation, as stool requires moisture to be able to move through the digestive tract. Too much caffeine and alcohol can contribute to  dehydration .   Lack of dietary fiber   Fiber acts as a binding substance to give stool its form. It also helps poop to move smoothly through the digestive tract. A diet that is low in fiber-rich foods, such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and pulses, can lead to bowel problems.   Food intolerances and allergies   People with an intolerance or allergy to certain foods can often experience diarrhea, constipation, or other traits of abnormal poop when they consume a problematic food.  For example, people with  lactose intolerance  often experience diarrhea if they have dairy, while those with  celiac disease  will have an adverse reaction to gluten.   Medical conditions   Certain conditions can cause constipation, diarrhea, or other poop abnormalities. Examples of such conditions include:  See a doctor if changes to poop persist for 2 or more weeks.  Seek immediate medical treatment if the stool is bright red, black, or resembles coffee grounds. This suggests blood loss, which could become a medical emergency if left untreated.  To ensure healthy bowel function and healthy poops, follow the tips below:  A well-functioning digestive system is essential for health and wellbeing. It also suggests that a person is eating a balanced diet balanced diet.  Poop abnormalities that persist can lead to complications. For example, ongoing diarrhea can result in nutritional deficiencies while constipation can cause bowel obstructions.  Normal poop tends to be brown, soft to firm in texture, and easy to pass. If someone experiences changes in poop, they should monitor the changes and consult a doctor if the issue does not resolve within 2 weeks.  To encourage a normal bowel function, a person should eat a fiber-rich diet, take regular exercise, try to reduce stress, and drink lots of water to stay hydrated.    
 Bristol stool chart. (n.d.).  Bristol stool chart. (n.d.).  Dimidi, E., Christodoulides, S., Fragkos, K. C., Scott, S. M. &amp; Whelan, K. (2014, October). The effect of probiotics on functional constipation in adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials [Abstract].  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  100 (4), 1075–1084.  Easy ways to boost fiber in your daily diet. (2017, September 5).  Infectious diarrhea: Can probiotics help against diarrhea? (2016, May 4).  Liu, L. W. C. (2011, October). Chronic constipation: Current treatment options.  Canadian Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology ,  25 (Suppl B), 22B–28B.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What are the different types of poop?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320938.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, February 16). "What are the different types of poop?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  