 A person's  ideal weight  depends on several factors, including their height and build. Maintaining a good weight is important for health and can reduce the risk of developing serious conditions, such as  heart disease  and  type 2 diabetes .  This article looks at average weight in men and how this varies between different groups and world regions. It also discusses how to determine a healthy weight for a man, as well as risk factors for being overweight, and what men can do to improve their weight.  There is no simple answer to this question.  When only talking about the U.S., then the average man, aged 20 years or older, weighs 197.6 pounds (lbs). He also stands around 5 feet 9 inches tall and has a waist circumference of 40 inches. This is  according to data  collected by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) between 2015 and 2016 and published in 2018.  In contrast, the average U.S. woman is both lighter and shorter, weighing 170.6 lbs, standing 5 feet 3.7 inches tall, and having a waist of 38.2 inches.  Within the U.S., the average weight for men varies with age. Younger and older men tend to weigh less than those in middle age.  Another factor is racial background. For example, non-Hispanic Asian men tend to be lighter, but also shorter, on average, than black, white, or Mexican-American men.   Table 1.  Average weight and height for U.S. men aged over 20 years, according to age group.   Table 2.  Average weight and height for U.S. men aged over 20 years according to race.  At a global level, average weight changes according to country and region.  For instance, North Americans are heavier on average than people from any other geographic region, whereas people in Asia are the lightest, on average, compared to people in all other parts of the world.  This is  based on a study  that combines data from both men and women.   Table 3.  Average weight in adults (men and woman combined) by world region  Ideal weight varies from person-to-person and depends on height, build, and age.  The most widely used method for determining a healthy weight is the body mass index or  BMI . This measurement uses height and weight to estimate the proportion of body fat in an individual.  Despite being only an estimate, BMI corresponds reasonably well with more direct approaches for measuring body fat.  Normally, it provides a decent indication as to whether an individual is overweight or underweight for their height. It is also quick, easy, and cheap to perform.  Anyone who knows their height and weight can work out their BMI using this  online calculator  or by  consulting these tables . Alternatively, BMI can be calculated manually by using one of the following formulae:  BMI is interpreted differently for  children and teenagers . However, for adults aged 20 years and older, a BMI:  Based on a BMI of 18.5 to 24.9, this table gives a rough guide to the ideal weight for an average adult man of a specific height:   Table 4.  Ideal weight range based on height and a BMI of 18.5 to 24.9.  Unfortunately, BMI does have its limitations. It tends to overestimate or underestimate body fat in certain groups of people. For instance, at the same BMI:  A high BMI can also result from being lean or muscular, such as in the case of an athlete. This is because muscle is denser and weighs more than fat.  BMI can also underestimate body fat in older people or those who have lost muscle or bone mass.  As mentioned earlier, the average weight for a group of people is not the same as a healthy weight.  If the average U.S. man weighs 195.7 pounds and stands 5 feet 9 tall, then his BMI is 28.9. That puts him firmly in the overweight category.  According to  CDC data from 2011–2014 , 73 percent of men and 66.2 percent of women in the US were estimated to be overweight or obese based on their BMI. These figures were just 60.9 and 51.4 percent for 1988–1994. Upward trends in weight have also been  observed in other developed nations .  Being overweight or obese puts a person at greater risk of developing:  It is usually recommended that people with a BMI above 30 should try to lose weight. People with a BMI between 25 and 29.9 should try to prevent further weight gain. However, they should also try to lose weight if they have two or more of the following risk factors:  Even losing a small amount of weight can improve overall health, lower  blood pressure , and reduce the risk of developing other conditions.  A doctor can advise on whether a person needs to lose weight or simply stop gaining it. They may also be able to help formulate a weight loss plan or be able to provide access to other professional advice and resources.  General tips for reaching and maintaining an ideal weight include:  "Exercise more" and "eat less" are too vague, whereas "run 10 miles every day" or "lose 10 pounds each week" might be unrealistic.  Committing to walking for 30 minutes each day or losing 1 to 2 pounds a week, for example, would be far more sensible goals.  People should aim to get at least 150 minutes of moderately intense physical activity each week. The exercise should raise the heart rate and cause sweating.  Cycling, swimming, brisk walking, running, dancing, tennis, and soccer are all examples of suitable alternative or additional activities. If possible, an individual should aim for 60–90 minutes of exercise a day.  People can try using smaller plates or replacing half of a normal meal with fruit and vegetables. Or aim to reduce consumption by 500  calories  per day. Planning meals in advance can help with this.  Those wanting to lose weight should focus on eating more fruit, vegetables, and whole grains. Also, they should aim to eat leaner meats and get protein from healthier sources, such as poultry, fish, beans, eggs, and nuts.  Replacing sugary drinks with water or drinking unsweetened tea and  coffee  is also helpful while also limiting alcohol.  Calculating BMI can help men determine their ideal weight range. Reaching and maintaining that range can improve health and reduce the risk of developing conditions associated with being overweight or obese.    
 12 tips to help you lose weight on the 12-week plan. (2016, December 5).  12 tips to help you lose weight on the 12-week plan. (2016, December 5).  About adult BMI. (2017, August 29).  About child &amp; teen BMI. (2015, May 15).  Aim for a healthy weight. (n.d.).  Assessing your weight and health risk. (n.d.).  Body mass index table 1. (n.d.).  Calculate your body mass index. (n.d.).  Fryar, C. D., Kruszon-Moran, D., Gu, Q., &amp; Ogden, C. L. (2018, December). Mean body weight, height, waist circumference, and body mass index among adults: United States, 1999–2000 through 2015–2016.  National Health Statistics Reports, 122.   Guide to behavior change. (n.d.).  Healthy eating plan. (n.d.).  How much should I weigh? (n.d.).  Maffetone, P. B., Rivera-Dominguez, I., &amp; Laursen, P. B. (2017, July 24). Overfat adults and children in developed countries: The public health importance of identifying excess body fat.  Frontiers in Public Health , 5, 190.  National Center for Health Statistics. (2017).  Health, United States, 2016: With Chartbook on Long-term Trends in Health. Hyattsville , MD.  Ogden, C. L., Fryar, C. D., Carroll, M. D., &amp; Flegal, K. M. (2004, October 27). Mean body weight, height, and body mass index, United States 1960–2002.  Advance Data from Vital and Health Statistics ,  347 .  Understanding adult overweight and obesity. (2012, December).  Walpole, S. C., Prieto-Merino, D., Edwards, P., Cleland, J., Stevens, G., &amp; Roberts, I. (2016). The weight of nations: An estimation of adult human biomass.  BMC Public Health ,  12 , 439.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gill, Stephen. "Is there an average weight for men?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320917.php&gt;    APA  Gill, S. (2018, February 14). "Is there an average weight for men?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  