 In this article, we look at the following ways to stop a runny nose:  We also look at the evidence supporting these remedies and list some tips for coping with a runny nose.  A hot drink is a traditional, well-known remedy for a cold. In fact, there is some science to back up this home treatment.  A  2009 study  published in  Rhinology  found that drinking a hot beverage helped to reduce the symptoms of a cold.  The study noted that the effect might be mainly psychological, but it also identified a physical reaction. The hot drink stimulated a nerve linked to the oral and nasal cavities, which may explain the relief of cold symptoms.  There are different ways to perform a hot steam inhalation, but the basic idea is the same. A person adds herbs or essential oils to hot water, leans over the water, and breathes in the steam.  A  2015 study  published in the  Journal of Dental and Medical Sciences  looked at ways steam inhalations containing various additives helped to treat symptoms of the common cold.  The study found that symptoms improved faster and more effectively with inhalations than without.  A person can likely get some of the benefits of steam inhalation while soaking in a hot bath.  Resting in a hot bath will naturally lead to inhaling some steam, while also helping to relax the muscles of the body.  A neti pot is a device that looks like a small teapot. People use it to flush out the nose and sinuses.  To use a neti pot, a person should lean over the sink, tilt their head sideways, and pour water from the pot into one nostril until the pot is empty.  If done right, the water will be released from the opposite nostril. The person should then refill the pot and repeat the process on the other side.  Neti pots may seem like a strange concept, and they are a bit messier than nasal sprays. However, they can be effective at clearing up a runny nose. Various brands are available to  purchase online .  A  2009 study  in  The Journal of Family Practice  found that "large-volume, low-pressure irrigation," such as that achieved using a neti pot, was more effective than nasal spray at improving the investigated nasal  sinusitis  symptoms, including a runny nose.  A  2016 review  published in  Current Allergy and Asthma Reports  found that nasal spray containing capsaicin — the compound that gives chili peppers their heat — could effectively treat  non-allergic rhinitis . This condition causes a runny nose, among other symptoms.  Spicy food can initially make a runny nose worse. However, the authors noted that capsaicin is unique among natural irritants because the mild irritation it causes is followed by a long-lasting period during which symptoms significantly improve.  While capsaicin nasal spray has proven effective, people are not advised to make their own at home, using chili powder. Tested brands are available to  purchase online .  A person with a runny nose may also benefit from eating the spiciest food they can handle. The runny nose is likely to get worse during the meal, but any sinus congestion may improve shortly after the meal is finished.  The following are some straightforward tips to help clear up a runny nose and make the whole experience less unpleasant:  A runny nose is typically not a medical emergency. However, it can be a symptom of certain chronic or acute conditions, such as a sinus infection or  rhinitis .  If a runny nose does not begin to improve after a few days, it may be a good idea to consult a doctor, especially if the person is also experiencing flu-like symptoms.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Egan, M., &amp; Hickner, J. (2009, January). Saline irrigation spells relief for sinusitis sufferers.  The Journal of Family Practice ,   58 (1), 29–32.  Egan, M., &amp; Hickner, J. (2009, January). Saline irrigation spells relief for sinusitis sufferers.  The Journal of Family Practice ,   58 (1), 29–32.  Fokkens, W., Hellings, P., &amp; Segboer, C. (2016, August 3). Capsaicin for rhinitis.  Current Allergy and Asthma Reports ,  16 , 60.  Nanda, M. S. (2015, February). Efficacy of steam inhalation with inhalant capsules in patients with common cold in a rural set up.  Journal of Dental and Medical Sciences ,  14 (1), 37–41.  Sanu, A., &amp; Eccles, R. (2009, January). The effects of a hot drink on nasal airflow and symptoms of common cold and flu.  Rhinology ,  46 (4), 271–275.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Wessels, Dan. "What home remedies can help with a runny nose?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320992.php&gt;    APA  Wessels, D. (2018, February 22). "What home remedies can help with a runny nose?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  