 Here we look at the following conditions that can cause a feeling of pressure behind the eyes:  We also look at when someone should see a doctor, and what the treatment options are.  The  American Migraine Foundation  note that headaches and pain around the eyes often go together. However, they also point out that most headaches are classified as migraine- or tension-type, and have nothing to do with eye strain or related conditions.  Migraines are frequently associated with a feeling of pressure or pain behind the eyes.  Other symptoms of a migraine include:  Other  types of headache  include:  The sinuses are hollow spaces in the skull, positioned above, below, behind, and between the eyes.  Problems with the sinuses often include feelings of pain in and around the face.  One of the main symptoms of a sinus infection is throbbing pain and pressure around the eyeballs. At least one type of sinus infection — sphenoid  sinusitis  — is linked to an ache behind the eyes.  According to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , other symptoms of a sinus infection include:  A result of an overactive thyroid gland,  Graves' disease  can cause the tissues, muscles, and fat behind the eye to swell. This causes the eyeball to bulge from the socket and can lead to other issues, such as being unable to move the eyeball.  The swelling of the tissues behind the eye may result in a feeling of pressure.  Common eye-related symptoms of Graves' disease include:  Optic neuritis is a condition in which the nerve that connects the eyes and brain becomes inflamed and swollen. Side effects can include pain and temporary loss of vision, which usually peaks within a few days and can take  4–12 weeks  to improve.  Infections can trigger optic neuritis, and it is also commonly associated with  multiple sclerosis  (MS). Around  50 percent  of all people with MS experience optic neuritis, which is often the first indication of MS.  Symptoms of optic neuritis include:  A toothache, especially as a result of infection, may cause throbbing pain and feelings of pressure to spread to nearby parts of the face, as the surrounding nerves become affected.  For example, a 2007  case study  published in the  Malaysian Journal of Medical Sciences  concerned a person whose toothache led to a swelling of the left eye socket after 2 days. The vision in the swollen eye grew worse, and the pain increased along with the swelling.  Injuries to the face, such as those sustained in car accidents or while playing sports, may lead to a feeling of pressure and pain behind and around the eyes.  Different types of  fracture  to the eye socket can cause damage to the eye muscles, nerves, and sinuses.  Some symptoms of eye socket fractures include:  Pressure behind the eyes is not a serious medical concern on its own, but it may indicate the presence of a more acute condition.  Anyone who notices symptoms such as loss of vision,  bulging eyes , fever, frequent headaches, or facial swelling should see their doctor.  If the doctor is unable to make a diagnosis, they will refer the person to an appropriate expert who can investigate more thoroughly.  Some of these experts include:  Some techniques that may help with a diagnosis include:  Successfully treating pressure behind the eyes involves addressing the underlying causes.  Over-the-counter anti-inflammatory drugs and painkillers are safe to use. They may ease the feeling of pressure if it is not severe and does not seem to be a side effect of a more serious condition.  If the pressure is severe or comes with other symptoms, see a doctor. Following diagnosis, the doctor will prescribe any treatments needed.  These could include:  The outlook for pressure behind the eyes will depend on the underlying cause.  This pressure will often be due to simple headaches or sinus conditions, which are easy to deal with and unlikely to cause complications.  However, pressure behind the eyes may be a symptom of a more serious condition, such as optic neuritis or Graves' disease. In these cases, seek further treatment.    
 Boyd, K. (2017, September 1). Graves' disease symptoms.  Boyd, K. (2017, September 1). Graves' disease symptoms.  Embong, Z., Ismail, S., Thanaraj, A., &amp; Hussein, A. (2007, July). Dental infection presenting with ipsilateral parapharyngeal abscess and contralateral orbital cellulitis — a case report.  The Malaysian Journal of Medical Sciences ,  14 (2), 62–66.  Eye-socket fracture (fracture of the orbit). (2014, April).  Friedman, D. I. (2016, February 15). Do I need to have my eyes checked if my head hurts?  Identifying &amp; treating migraine. (2015, April 1).  Optic neuritis. (n.d.).  Sinus infection (sinusitis). (2017, September 25).  The international classification of headache disorders. (2004).  Cephalalgia: An International Journal of Headache ,  24 (1).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Wessels, Dan. "What causes a buildup of pressure behind the eyes?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320936.php&gt;    APA  Wessels, D. (2018, February 16). "What causes a buildup of pressure behind the eyes?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  