 There are some organs in the upper left region of the body that could be the source of the pain. These include the stomach, heart, lungs, ribs, colon, pancreas, and spleen.  Doctors often group the most common causes of pain under the left breast into two main categories: digestive and heart-related.  This article looks at the different causes of pain under the left breast, their symptoms, and the treatment options available.  As the heart is situated slightly to the left of the midline in the upper body, pain under the left breast can sometimes indicate a heart problem.  According to the  American Heart Association , when pain does occur during a  heart attack , it commonly happens in the center of the chest, lasts longer than a few minutes, and can return after fading.  Heart attack pain can cause a very strong, uncomfortable, crushing pressure or squeezing sensation, or it may feel like very bad  heartburn . Some people may not experience any or only mild chest pain; this is  more common  in women, older people, and those with  diabetes .  Other symptoms include:   Treatment   If someone suspects a heart attack, they should call an ambulance immediately. While waiting, they should rest, and if they are not intolerant to  aspirin , they should take an  adult-dose tablet  (300 milligrams) to help thin the blood.  Further treatment options will depend on when symptoms started and how soon the person having the attack can access the first stage of care.  If the cause of the attack is found to be a blocked coronary artery, the doctor may recommend a procedure called an angioplasty to open a blocked or severely narrowed coronary artery with a balloon and possibly place a stent.  When the heart muscle does not receive enough oxygen in the coronary artery blood supply, the resulting pain under the left breast or in the center of the chest is known as  angina .  Associated symptoms include an uncomfortable feeling in the shoulders, arms, neck, jaw, or back. Angina pain can also feel like  indigestion , and a person may also experience sweating, light-headedness, nausea, or shortness of breath.   Treatment   Angina is a possible symptom of severe underlying  heart disease , so anyone experiencing symptoms of angina should seek medical attention immediately. A doctor may prescribe medication, such as  beta-blockers , ACE-inhibitors, statins, or aspirin.  The heart is surrounded and protected by a thin, layered, fluid-filled membrane called the pericardium. It can become inflamed due to infection or a disorder where the body's immune system attacks itself.  Symptoms of acute pericarditis include:   Treatment   Immediate treatment for pericarditis may include an OTC anti-inflammatory medication, such as ibuprofen and rest until feverish symptoms decrease. If a person experiences severe pain, a doctor may prescribe a steroid, such as prednisone.  If the condition is severe, the person may need to say in the hospital for monitoring.  Ibuprofen is available for purchase  online .   Prevention   While acute pericarditis typically cannot be prevented, getting treated quickly and following a prescribed treatment plan will reduce the chance of the acute pericarditis recurring or becoming a long-term condition.  When the stomach's lining becomes inflamed, this is known as gastritis. Not everyone will experience symptoms, but a sharp, stabbing or burning pain under the left breast is a potential clue that gastritis may be present.  The pain can also be accompanied by heartburn, feeling sick, vomiting, and bloating.   Treatment   For mild symptoms, changing the diet and lifestyle can ease pain under the left breast. Over-the-counter (OTC) medications, such as antacids, can help reduce stomach acid.  Home remedy options include:  If the pain is caused by or related to the presence of the bacterium called  Helicobacter pylori , the doctor may prescribe a course of  antibiotics  and medicine that reduces the production of stomach acid.   Pancreatitis  is  inflammation  of the pancreas.  Acute pancreatitis  has symptoms that include:   Chronic pancreatitis , where the condition worsens over time, has symptoms including:   Treatment   Treatment for chronic pancreatitis ranges from pain management, using increasing strengths of medication, to surgery if pain under the left breast is still severe.  For acute pancreatitis, immediate treatment includes:  When stomach acid travels back up the food pipe, it causes a burning sensation in the mid-chest and throat, and sometimes pain under the left breast. Heartburn can be a symptom of indigestion and stomach acid issues.  Symptoms include:   Treatment   Self-help treatment options for mild heartburn include not eating big meals, not lying down to sleep right after eating, and raising one's pillow, so the head is higher than the waist when sleeping. This may help prevent stomach acid from traveling up the food pipe.  OTC medications such as antacids are a first medical option to try and are available for purchase  online .  The lungs are surrounded by a layered membrane called the pleura. If the pleura surrounding the left lung become inflamed due to infection or another cause, the resulting pain will develop under the left breast.  More severe causes of  pleurisy  include  rheumatoid arthritis  and  lung cancer .  The most common symptom of pleurisy is a sharp chest pain when taking a deep breath, but it can also be accompanied by:  The pain can get worse when the person walks around, coughs, or sneezes.   Treatment   Rest is highly recommended. Lying on the side of the pain can help relieve pain symptoms.  If a person experiences particularly severe chest pain, they should seek immediate treatment from a doctor, who may prescribe NSAIDs or other pain-relieving medication.  A doctor may also carry out further tests, such as blood tests, a chest X-ray, a chest  CT scan . They may also take a small sample of pleural lung tissue for biopsy.  Pleurisy caused by a viral infection often gets better after a few days, but a bacterial infection will require antibiotic therapy.   Prevention   The best way to prevent severe cases of pleurisy is early intervention.  The spleen can cause pain under the left breast if it is enlarged or if it bursts following an injury.  Symptoms of an enlarged spleen include:  A burst spleen typically will cause:   Treatment   If a person suspects a burst spleen, they should go immediately to the emergency room. Bleeding can be life-threatening if left untreated.  A doctor will check for an enlarged spleen by feeling the abdomen and may recommend further testing through blood testing or imaging, such as an abdominal  ultrasound , CT scan, or  MRI scan .  Underlying conditions, such as chronic liver disease and subsequent  cirrhosis , can affect and interact with the spleen.  A doctor will prescribe medication when medical therapy is possible to treat splenic or liver disease. Surgery is only required if underlying causes cannot be diagnosed clearly, or if complications arise from the enlarged or damaged organ.   Prevention   People should aim to keep the spleen safe when playing sport by wearing protective sporting equipment. Always wearing the seatbelt when in the car is also advised.  As cirrhosis can be caused by excessive or long-term high alcohol intake, cutting down is recommended.  Soreness and pain experienced under the left breast during pregnancy are often caused by pressure from the top of the uterus as it grows, or if the baby is kicking or punching the expectant mother. The pain can be worse when leaning forward.  Muscles and other tissues will stretch as the baby grows, and this can also cause pain under the breasts.  The expectant mother's body is changing during pregnancy, and the internal organs will be pushed and moved as the baby grows. The mother's body chemistry may also change, and other causes of pain under the left breast during pregnancy can include:  Some conditions can be treated at home with rest and OTC medication, but people should seek medical attention straight away if:  Pain under the left breast is often frightening to experience. As there are several organs in this area of the body, the earlier the cause of the pain can be diagnosed, the more likely that treatment and recovery will be successful.  A heart attack is not the most common reason for pain under the left breast, but it is always better to have the symptoms checked out, especially if other symptoms of a heart attack are present.  Many causes of pain under the left breast can be prevented through making changes to several everyday lifestyle choices. Following a healthful diet, getting regular exercise, lowering or cutting out tobacco smoking, reducing alcohol intake, keeping weight down, and reducing  stress  can all help.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 About chronic pancreatitis. (n.d.).  About chronic pancreatitis. (n.d.).  Acute pancreatitis risks and treatment. (n.d.).  Complementary pancreatitis therapies. (n.d.).  Conwell, D. L., Lee, L. S., Yadav, D., Longnecker, D. S., Miller, F. H., Mortele, K. J., … Vege, S. S. (2014, November). American Pancreatic Association practice guidelines in chronic pancreatitis: Evidence-based report on diagnostic guidelines.  Pancreas ,  43 (8), 1143–1162.  Gastritis. (2016, June 23).  Heart attack: Symptoms. (2016, November 10).  Heart attack: Treatment. (2016, November 10).  Intwala, S., &amp; Balady, G. J. (2015, October 5). Physical activity in the prevention of heart failure. Another step forward.  Circulation,   132 , 1777–1779.  Li, L., Duan, M., Chen, W., Jiang, A., Li, X., Yang, J., … Li, Z. (2017, May 23). The spleen in liver cirrhosis: Revisiting an old enemy with novel targets.  Journal of Translational Medicine ,  15 , 111  Mayo Clinic Staff. (2016, August 3). Enlarged spleen (splenomegaly).  Pleurisy. (2017, May 16).  Preventing heart disease. (n.d.).  Scott, J. (2016, June). If you've had heartburn most days for 3 weeks or more, tell your doctor.  Sipponen, P., &amp; Maaroos, H.-I. (2015, June 3). Chronic gastritis.  Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology ,  50 (6), 657–667.  Warning signs of heart attack, stroke &amp; cardiac arrest. (n.d.).  What is pericarditis? (2017, December 12).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Weaver, Bryony. "What causes pain under my left breast?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320966.php&gt;    APA  Weaver, B. (2018, February 20). "What causes pain under my left breast?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  