 This article discusses the causes and symptoms of dependent  edema , as well as the available treatment options.  Gravity pulls blood toward the parts of the body that are closest to the ground. For example, edema may occur in the feet, but people who are bedbound may experience edema in the buttocks.  Usually, the blood is pumped back from feet toward the heart by the veins and the motion of the muscles. When this system malfunctions, the lower body parts begin to fill up with excess fluid, causing the swelling and puffiness of edema.  According to the  American Family Physician , one of the  primary causes  of dependent edema is a problem with the veins, although muscular issues may also contribute.  Signs and symptoms of this condition include:  To differentiate between dependent edema and one of the other types of edema, apply gentle pressure to the affected area.  If dents appear on the skin, which is known as pitting, it suggests dependent edema.  People with dependent edema should be vigilant when it comes to their skin health because they are at increased risk of skin infections. When the skin stretches and breaks, it becomes more vulnerable to infections such as  cellulitis , which is a bacterial skin infection that can spread rapidly to other body parts.  If anyone observes any signs of a serious skin issue, seek emergency medical attention.  Symptoms include:  The risk of skin infection can be reduced by keeping the skin around the affected areas clean and moisturizing the skin regularly.  If there is an underlying cause for the dependent edema, then treating the condition may resolve the edema. Sometimes, these conditions are not curable such as in the case of  heart failure , so people may need to manage the edema to limit its symptoms and reduce the risk of complications.  A person can implement some lifestyle changes to help manage dependent edema:  Because gravity causes dependent edema, elevating the affected area to above heart level allows the excess fluid to drain toward the heart. If edema affects the feet, for example, lying down and propping up the legs with cushions can help.  If the feet or legs are affected, wearing compression socks or leg sleeves can stop the collection of fluid in the tissues. Compression bandages are also available to wrap other areas of the body.  People who cannot move their arms or legs should try manual mobility. This involves moving the immobile body part, perhaps with the hands or with the assistance of another person.  This type of movement can encourage the muscles to pump blood and fluids more efficiently, which can prevent fluid buildup and reduce the edema. A doctor can advise on specific exercises that may further reduce swelling.  A high-salt diet can increase  water retention , which increases the likelihood of edema. Discuss salt intake with a doctor or dietitian.  Massage may move excess fluid out of the affected area. Using firm pressure,  stroke  the skin in the direction of the heart. Never use pressure that causes pain.  Keep the skin clean and moisturized to prevent cracks, scrapes, and cuts, which can lead to infection.  If edema occurs in the feet, wear suitable shoes that do not restrict blood flow but that protect the feet from injury and infection.  Dependent edema can lead to some complications, such as:  Dependent edema is just one type of edema.  Others include:  Some causes of dependent edema are curable, and the edema may resolve once the underlying condition is treated. However, other causes have no cure.  However, there are some steps that a person can take to reduce symptoms and the risk of complications. Using elevation, compression, movement, and keeping the skin clean can offer relief to many people with dependent edema.  It is always important to discuss dependent edema and its symptoms with a doctor, who can best advise a person on the most effective treatment options for their condition.    
 Hartmann, S., &amp; Huch, R. (2005, November 16). Response of pregnancy leg edema to a single immersion exercise session [Abstract].  Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica ,  84 (12), 1150–1153.  Hartmann, S., &amp; Huch, R. (2005, November 16). Response of pregnancy leg edema to a single immersion exercise session [Abstract].  Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica ,  84 (12), 1150–1153.  Suehiro, K., Morikage, N., Murakami, M., Yamashita, O., Ueda, K., Samura, M., ... Hamano, K. (2014, February 4). Subcutaneous tissue ultrasonography in legs with dependent edema and secondary lymphedema [Abstract].  Annals of Vascular Diseases ,  7 (1), 21-27.  Trayes, K. P., Studdiford, J. S., Pickle, S., &amp; Tully, A. S. (2013, July 15). Edema: Diagnosis and management.  American Family Physician ,  88 (2), 102–110.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What is dependent edema?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320986.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, February 21). "What is dependent edema?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  