 This article looks at the various reasons a person might feel gas pain in their chest. It also discusses symptoms, treatments, and home remedies.  People often describe gas pain in the chest as a tightness or discomfort in the chest area. As well as the pain, there may be a slight burning or stabbing sensation. The pain may also move to the abdomen.  Other symptoms of gas pain in the chest may vary in each case, depending on the cause, but can include:  The sensation of gas pain can be worrying, as it may be difficult to tell apart from heart-related pains, such as those of a  heart attack .  Gas that gathers in the stomach or left part of the colon  can feel like  heart-related pain.  The following symptoms may suggest that chest pain is related to a heart attack:  A person experiencing symptoms of a heart attack should seek emergency medical attention.  Possible causes of gas pain in the chest include:   Heartburn  is a type of indigestion that typically feels like a sharp, burning sensation in the chest. It is caused by stomach acid leaking up into the esophagus.  When someone has a food intolerance, it can upset the digestive system, causing extra gas.  Lactose intolerance  and  gluten intolerance  are two known causes of gas buildup.  A person who lacks the enzymes needed to break down certain foods may experience bloating, abdominal pain, and excessive gas.  Eating contaminated food can cause  food poisoning , which may also explain gas pain in the chest. This pain often comes on quickly and can be experienced alongside other symptoms, including:  A diet high in artificial sweeteners or sugar alcohols, such as sorbitol and xylitol,  may cause  digestive symptoms, including excess gas, in some people.  Carbonated drinks, for example, soda, tonic water, or sparkling water, have a fizz, provided by carbon dioxide gas.  Too much of this gas can make a person burp, but it might also build up in the digestive tract and cause discomfort or pain.  Similarly to the carbon dioxide in fizzy drinks, the air we swallow when we eat, drink, or chew gum can become trapped in the digestive system.  Swallowing too much air can cause a buildup of gas in the gastrointestinal tract, which can lead to gas pain in the chest or abdomen.  Certain digestive conditions can lead to symptoms that resemble gas pain in the chest.  Inflammatory conditions, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) such as ulcerative colitis (UC) or  Crohn's disease , may cause gas to build up in the digestive system.  Other problems in the digestive tract, such as those due to  diabetes mellitus , can cause similar symptoms.  Chronic inflammatory conditions can also produce the following symptoms:  While fiber-rich foods are beneficial for the digestive system, eating too much of a certain type of fiber can lead to excessive gas.  This excess production is because the fiber may stay in the gut for a longer time than other food components. It is broken down by bacteria, resulting in gas.  A condition in the gallbladder or biliary tree, such as  gallstones , can cause chest pain and excess gas.  Other symptoms include:  Diagnosing gas pain in the chest is necessary to avoid serious complications.  A physical examination is usually not accurate enough for an exact diagnosis, so a doctor will usually recommend additional tests, such as an electrocardiogram (ECG). An ECG can look for heart problems.  Once heart concerns are ruled out, a doctor may recommend other tests to identify possible causes of the chest pain. These can include:  Treatment for gas pain in the chest often begins at home.  The following home remedies may help to ease the pain of excess gas in the chest:   Drink warm liquids   Drinking plenty of liquids can help to move excess gas through the digestive system, which can ease gas pain and discomfort. Drinking non-carbonated beverages will avoid extra gas intake.  Warm water or herbal teas may help to ease pain and discomfort for some people.   Eat some ginger    Ginger  root has traditionally been used to help with digestive issues. Research published in the  European Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology  suggests that ginger  can help with  certain digestive symptoms.  A small bit of the root may be eaten or made into ginger tea. Ginger products are available for purchase online, including  chewable candies ,  drinks , and  supplements .   Avoid possible triggers   If the exact cause of gas pain in the chest is not known, it may be best to avoid any possible digestive triggers. This could include carbonated drinks and sodas, milk and dairy products, and gluten.   Exercise   Exercise may help gas to move through the digestive system to be eliminated. Even a simple walk around the block may help.   Medical treatments   Medical treatment options are available to help with gas pain in the chest. Over-the-counter medications, such as bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto Bismol) may ease some indigestion symptoms.  Chronic conditions, for example, IBS,  GERD , UC, or Crohn's disease, may need to be treated with prescriptions from a doctor, though treatment will vary in each case.  In most instances of food poisoning, a person can recover with home treatment, such as hydration and rest. In worse cases, they may require  antibiotics  or time in the hospital.  In some cases, gallstones might be treatable with medication that may encourage the body to dissolve the stones over time.  Preventing gas pain can be as easy as avoiding common triggers, including:  Regular exercise can also help keep the digestive system working well.  Complications related to excess gas in the chest are mostly due to an underlying condition. For instance, people with severe food poisoning or food intolerances may be at risk of complications.  Symptoms of  anaphylaxis  or food poisoning need immediate medical care. These can include:  When a person experiences chest pain along with these symptoms, they should seek emergency medical care.  There are many causes of gas pain in the chest, and many treatments or home remedies that may help relieve the feeling. The reason behind gas pain in the chest should be diagnosed by a doctor to determine the best treatment.  Harmless gas pain in the chest will typically go away quickly with home treatments or over-the-counter medicines. Taking preventative measures and seeking a medical diagnosis may help treat any underlying issues and avoid complications.  Anyone experiencing other symptoms related to more serious conditions should seek emergency medical attention.  Anyone who experiences persistent and severe symptoms of gas pain in the chest, or symptoms that last for more than 2 hours and do not respond to home treatment, should also seek medical attention.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Fass, R., &amp; Achem, S. R. (2011, April). Noncardiac chest pain: Epidemiology, natural course and pathogenesis.  Journal of Neurogastroenterology and Motility ,  17 (2), 110–123.  Fass, R., &amp; Achem, S. R. (2011, April). Noncardiac chest pain: Epidemiology, natural course and pathogenesis.  Journal of Neurogastroenterology and Motility ,  17 (2), 110–123.  Grembecka, M. (2015, July). Sugar alcohols—their role in the modern world of sweeteners: A review.  European Food Research and Technology ,  241 (1), 114.  Modi, R., Clearfield, H. R., Levitt, M., &amp; Szarka, L. (2013, July). Belching, bloating, and flatulence.  Rao, S. S. C. (2011, January). Diagnosis and management of esophageal chest pain.  Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  7 (1), 50–52.  Symptoms and sources of food poisoning. (2017, July 25).  Warning signs of a heart attack. (2018, January 11).  Wu, K. L., Rayner, C. K., Chuah, S. K., Changchien, C. S., Lu, S. N., Chiu, Y. C., &amp; Lee, C. M. (2008). Effects of ginger on gastric emptying and motility in healthy humans [Abstract].  European Journal of Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  20 (5), 436–440.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "What to know about gas pain in the chest."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320995.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, February 22). "What to know about gas pain in the chest."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  