  Pimples  can occur on the ear, behind the ear, or inside the ear canal.  In this article, we talk about what causes ear pimples, how to get rid of them, and how to prevent them from coming back.  Pimples, also called whiteheads, zits, or  blackheads  are most common on the face and back, but they can show up almost anywhere.  The outer ear and external ear canal have skin cells, hair cells, and oil-producing glands, which are all it takes for a pimple to form.  Pimples appear when a pore becomes clogged with dead skin cells and sebum, which is the natural oil that protects the skin and keeps it moist.  Bacteria can also cause pimples, so anything that introduces bacteria or dirt into the ear can cause pimples.  Causes of pimples in the ear include:  Some conditions can cause symptoms similar to a pimple in the ear, so it is important to identify a pimple correctly in order to treat it. A dermatologist can help diagnose and treat these skin-related issues in the right way.  It is best to avoid popping pimples in the ear, particularly in the ear canal. Popping pimples can push  pus  and bacteria deeper into the pore and cause additional symptoms, such as  inflammation  and infection.  The ear is a sensitive area, and if a burst pimple becomes infected, this can cause further problems. It can also damage the skin and result in a scar.  A pimple that causes substantial distress can be removed by a doctor to prevent complications.  There are several treatments for pimples that are gentle enough to use in the sensitive ear area.  A warm compress or heat pad may reduce inflammation and irritation. This can soften a pimple to bring the pus to the surface.  If a pimple drains in this way, the individual should clean up the discharge and gently wash the area with a mild soap. Cleansers, such as witch hazel or alcohol, may prevent infections.  Over-the-counter or prescription drugs may help to treat  acne , such as:  For severe acne, a doctor will usually recommend topical or systemic drugs made from  vitamin  A. Tretinoin cream is one of the most common. Isotretinoin may also be used but is usually reserved for the most severe cases.  Doctors may also recommend antibiotics, including doxycycline or minocycline, to get rid of the bacteria. However, this type of treatment is becoming less popular, as cases of antibiotic-resistant bacteria appear.  There is  some evidence to suggest  that tea tree oil may reduce the severity of acne.  Dermatologists may also recommend specific store-bought acne creams or facial cleansers based on the grade of a person's acne.  Pimples in the ear can be prevented by practicing good ear hygiene. This includes:  When pimples do not respond to treatment, a dermatologist can help decide the best prevention methods. They can help identify which grade of acne the person has, and recommend medications or home practices to prevent flare-ups.  People need to be patient when starting a new prevention method, as this will take time to produce results.  While most spots in the ear are pimples, other conditions can also cause bumps that appear similar. Because we are unable to see our own ears, it is possible for bumps in and around the ear to go unnoticed until they become a problem.  Other ear bumps that can resemble pimples include:  A person who is uncertain about a bump in or on their ear should see a doctor for an accurate diagnosis and treatment.  Pimples in the ear are similar to pimples elsewhere and can be treated in the same way. They usually clear up relatively quickly, often without leaving a scar.  People with persistent acne, whether in the ear or anywhere else, should see a doctor or dermatologist for a diagnosis. A doctor or specialist will help assess the severity or grade of the acne and can suggest a treatment plan suited to individual cases.  The pimple treatments listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Cao, H., Yang, G., Wang, Y., Liu, J. P., Smith, C. A., Luo, H., … Liu, Y. (2015, January 19). Complementary therapies for acne vulgaris.  The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  1 , 1–138.  Cao, H., Yang, G., Wang, Y., Liu, J. P., Smith, C. A., Luo, H., … Liu, Y. (2015, January 19). Complementary therapies for acne vulgaris.  The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  1 , 1–138.  Deshpande, N. S., Sen, A., Vasudevan, B., &amp; Neema, S. (2017, April). Acanthoma fissuratum: Lest we forget.  Indian Dermatology Online Journal ,  8 (2), 141–143.  Goder, M., Kornhaber, R., Bordoni, D., Winkler, E., Haik, J., &amp; Tessone, A. (2016, August 2). Cutaneous basal cell carcinoma arising within a keloid scar: A case report.  OncoTargets and Therapy ,  9 , 4793–4796.  Gollnick, H. P., &amp; Zouboulis, C. C. (2014, April 25). Not all acne is acne vulgaris.  Deutsches Ärzteblatt International ,  111 (17), 301–312.  Well, D. (2013, October 10). Acne vulgaris: A review of causes and treatment options.  The Nurse Practitioner ,  38 (10), 22–31.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "How to remove a pimple in your ear."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320958.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, February 19). "How to remove a pimple in your ear."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  