  Acne  vulgaris is characterized by  blackheads  or whiteheads. It is a chronic skin condition that happens when the hair follicles and their associated glands become swollen or blocked with oil.  Acne  rosacea  is a type of rosacea, a common skin condition that affects the face. People with rosacea experience redness of the skin that can be lasting or pass quickly.  Rosacea is often accompanied by pustules or small  pimples  with yellow or white centers, or papules, which are small, solid pimples or swellings without any  pus .  Due to similar symptoms, it is often difficult to tell the difference between the two types of nose acne.  Acne vulgaris is closer to stereotypical acne. It is related to the following:  It is also likely that a person with acne vulgaris on the nose will notice it on other parts of the face and body.  Acne rosacea, on the other hand, is a subtype of rosacea and not related to acne types. It is also possible to have both acne vulgaris and acne rosacea.  One of the best ways to tell the two conditions apart is the presence of clogged pores. A person can check their nose for:  Acne rosacea is characterized by red, swollen, or inflamed skin. It will often start on the nose. And it can spread to nearby areas, such as the cheeks. It will not spread over the entire face or body. Often, the nose may appear enlarged.  Acne vulgaris is when the pores in the skin become clogged and trap bacteria.  The sebaceous glands support healthy skin by producing an oil-like substance called sebum. At times, these glands may produce too much sebum. Too much sebum can trap debris, such as dead skin or bacteria, in the pores.  The nose is particularly vulnerable because the pores in this location tend to be larger than elsewhere. The larger size makes it easier for debris to become trapped, leading to acne breakouts.  Some underlying conditions may also cause acne to form on different parts of the nose. Some examples include:  Certain conditions make acne vulgaris outbreaks more likely. These include:  Acne vulgaris may cause an inflammatory or noninflammatory response. These two responses require different treatments.  For inflammatory responses, nodes or cysts tend to form. This causes swelling around the nose and any other area that is affected. Often, over-the-counter and at-home solutions are sufficient to treat this type of acne vulgaris.  These treatments may include:  For more severe cases of inflammatory acne vulgaris, a person may need to see a dermatologist. A dermatologist can prescribe stronger medications to help clear up severe cases.  For non-inflammatory responses of acne vulgaris, it is often easy to treat with over-the-counter products and at-home remedies. Typically, the medication involved is salicylic acid. Salicylic acid can help remove dead skin and remove excess oil.  Some products include:  These products help clear oils from the skin. In the process, they help clear the clogged pores and kill any trapped bacteria.  In general, a person should:  Acne rosacea is not true acne, despite its name. Instead, it is a type of rosacea.  Rosacea is a skin condition that can cause redness and swelling in addition to acne-like breakouts. Acne rosacea is caused by inflamed blood vessels that become visible on the surface of the skin. The resulting redness may also form acne-like bumps on the skin.  Though acne rosacea causes acne-like bumps, it is not actually acne but is still often mistaken for what people usually know as acne.  Scientists are still uncertain what causes acne rosacea. However, the following are suspected of being risk factors or causes of rosacea:  Unlike acne vulgaris, there are no over-the-counter or home remedies that have been proven as effective in treating or preventing acne rosacea.  As a result, a doctor will need to help a person treat their acne rosacea. This is typically done with medications, such as:  Also, a doctor may suggest alternative therapies. These may include:  In cases where a person has both acne vulgaris and acne rosacea, they should speak to their dermatologist about what is the best treatment plan. Typically, if both conditions occur together, a person should not use treatments for acne vulgaris unless directed to do so.  Nose acne can be a nuisance when it develops on a person's face. Depending on the type, it can be easy to treat with both at-home, over-the-counter, and prescription medications. Following good facial hygiene can help prevent future outbreaks.    
 Acne. (2016, September 1).  Acne. (2016, September 1).  Acne or rosacea? A case of mistaken identity. (2013, November 4).  Different kinds of pimples. (n.d.).  Rosacea. (n.d.).  The many faces of rosacea. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "How do you get rid of acne around your nose?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320972.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, February 20). "How do you get rid of acne around your nose?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  