 Tightness in the throat may not indicate anything too serious. In some situations, however, emergency treatment should be sought, especially if accompanied by breathing difficulties or trouble swallowing.  Read on to learn more about tightness in the throat, including its causes and treatment options.  Tightness in the throat may feel as if:  Some of the possible reasons for tightness in the throat include:  Allergies are typically more serious than intolerances. They occur when the immune system mistakenly identifies something, such as a food or pollen allergen, as a threat to the body.  The immune system releases chemicals to combat these allergens, leading to symptoms, such as a blocked nose or an itchy, tight throat.  A severe, acute allergic reaction is called  anaphylaxis , which is life-threatening and requires immediate treatment. Anaphylactic reactions can be triggered by allergens that include:   Research indicates  that 1 in every 50 Americans experiences anaphylaxis, although it has been suggested that the rate may be closer to 1 in 20.  Anyone with symptoms of anaphylaxis should get emergency medical treatment. In addition to tightness in the throat, symptoms include:   Anxiety  can manifest as physical symptoms, including tightness in the throat. Difficulty breathing and the sensation that the throat is tightening are classic signs of a  panic attack .  Other symptoms of a panic attack include:  When acid from the stomach moves up into the esophagus, it can cause a burning sensation in the chest known as  heartburn .  If heartburn occurs more than twice a week, it may be diagnosed as gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ). According to the  American College of Gastroenterology , some research indicates that over 15 million Americans experience heartburn daily.  Heartburn can also cause tightness in the throat. If left untreated, GERD can lead to ulcers, permanent esophageal damage, and can increase the risk of esophageal  cancer .  GERD symptoms include:  A  goiter  occurs when there is an abnormal enlargement of the thyroid gland, which is the butterfly-shaped gland in the neck. The thyroid gland produces hormones that influence the metabolic rate of the body, among other functions.  Goiters are linked to a thyroid gland that produces too much hormone ( hyperthyroidism ) or too little hormone ( hypothyroidism ). Also, a thyroid that is producing the right amount of hormone can cause a goiter, according to the  American Thyroid Association .  Along with throat tightness, symptoms of a goiter include:  If there is an infection in the tonsils or elsewhere in a person's throat, it can lead to a sore, swollen, or tight throat. Also, a person with a throat infection may experience:  Some of the most common infections that lead to tightness in the throat include viral  tonsillitis  and  strep throat .  There may be other causes of tightness in the throat, including:  Treatment for tightness in the throat depends on the underlying cause and may include:  A shot of epinephrine is a key medication used to treat anaphylaxis. People with known acute allergies should carry an auto-injector, such as Adrenaclick or EpiPen, to use if they have an attack.  Some people with allergies may benefit from immunotherapy, which is treatment that desensitizes people to specific allergens.  If a person benefits from allergy shots, the doctor will inject small doses of allergens under the skin over time.  This process may last for at least a few years until the individual's allergy is no longer triggered.  Anxiety can be treated with psychotherapy or medications or a combination of both. It can also be helpful to try meditation, relaxation exercises, and healthy lifestyle changes.  GERD is treated with medications, dietary and lifestyle changes, or both.  Some of the medications used to treat GERD include:  Rarely, and in severe cases of GERD, surgery may be necessary.  People with a goiter may require surgery or, in cases of hyperthyroidism, radioactive iodine therapy.  Others may notice symptoms improve with medication to treat hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism.  Bacterial infections can be treated with  antibiotics . Viral infections are unaffected by antibiotics and need to resolve on their own. It is important to rest and stay hydrated when fighting any infection.  People can prevent future infections by washing their hands regularly and avoiding contact with those who are sick.  While medical treatment is often necessary for persistent tightness in the throat, some symptomatic treatments can be achieved without a prescription.  Tightness in one's throat can be annoying and uncomfortable, as well as debilitating. Therefore, a person should contact a doctor if the sensation persists for more than a few days.  It is important to get prompt medical attention if the following symptoms are present:  Tightness in the throat can be life-threatening. People with allergies should take a growing tightness in the throat seriously as it could be anaphylaxis. It is vital to seek emergency medical treatment, especially after exposure to the allergen, before symptoms become severe.  Many of the conditions that underlie throat tightness are easily treatable, such as GERD and common throat infections. Others, including thyroid disorders, can be managed through medical interventions and perhaps lifestyle changes.  People with severe acute allergies should carry an epinephrine pen and avoid contact with their triggers, whenever possible.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Acid reflux. (n.d.).  Acid reflux. (n.d.).  Anaphylaxis in America. (n.d.).  Goiter. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to do about tightness in the throat."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320931.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, February 15). "What to do about tightness in the throat."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  