 Symptoms of  ringworm  include a red, scaly, circular patch on the skin or nails. It usually affects the scalp and arms, but it can appear on any part of the body. Jock itch and athlete's foot are common forms of ringworm.  While many medications are available to treat this fungal infection, natural treatments can also be effective.  Read on to discover 11 natural treatments for fungal infections, such as ringworm:  Garlic is often used to treat infection. Although there are no studies that examine the effects of garlic on ringworm, it has  proven effective  for other types of fungi, including  Candida ,  Torulopsis ,  Trichophyton , and  Cryptococcus .  To use garlic as a treatment, make a paste of crushed garlic cloves by blending the garlic with some olive or  coconut oil . Apply a thin layer of paste to the affected skin and cover with gauze. Leave in place for up to 2 hours before rinsing. Repeat twice daily until symptoms resolve.  If the garlic paste causes stinging, swelling, or redness, rinse off immediately and do not reapply.  To prevent ringworm from spreading or infecting other areas of the body, keep the skin as clean as possible. To do this, rinse the infection with soap and warm water once or twice daily. Be sure to dry the skin fully, as fungus thrives in moist areas.  Always clean the skin in this way before using any of the other home remedies listed below. Before using any of the following substances on the ringworm patches, a person should apply a small amount to a healthy area of skin to ensure they do not have a sensitivity or allergy to the treatment.  Apple cider vinegar has  demonstrated  antifungal properties against  Candida , another fungal infection.  To treat ringworm with apple cider vinegar, soak a cotton wool pad in the undiluted vinegar and wipe it on the affected area. Repeat up to 3 times daily.  Aloe vera contains six antiseptic agents that, according to  research , exhibit antifungal, antibacterial, and antiviral activities.  Apply the gel from an aloe vera plant onto the ringworm patch three or four times daily. The gel also has cooling properties, so it may soothe itchy and swollen skin.  Certain fatty acids found in coconut oil may kill fungal cells by damaging their cell membranes.  Some  research  suggests that coconut oil may be an effective remedy for people with mild to moderate skin infections. Use it to treat ringworm by applying liquid coconut oil to the skin three times per day.  Also, people can use coconut oil as a moisturizing lotion, which may be an effective way to prevent future ringworm infections.  Anecdotal evidence suggests that grapefruit seed extract may treat fungal infections. To treat ringworm, proponents recommend mixing 1 drop of grapefruit seed extract with a tablespoon of water and applying to the skin twice daily.  Turmeric is a popular spice with anti-inflammatory properties. A part of turmeric known as curcumin is believed to be responsible for the spice's health benefits. Numerous  studies  detail its extensive antimicrobial abilities.  Consume turmeric as a tea or add it to meals to reap its benefits. For topical applications, mix it with a small amount of water or coconut oil until it forms a paste and apply this to the skin. Leave it to dry before wiping off.  Be aware that turmeric may stain lighter skin a yellow color, but this will fade within a few days.  A frequently used herb in traditional Chinese medicine, licorice  demonstrates  antiviral, antimicrobial, and anti-inflammatory properties.  It is also used as a home remedy for ringworm and other fungal infections. For best results, mix 3 tablespoons of powdered licorice root into a cup of water.  Bring this mixture to a boil, then reduce heat and simmer for 10 minutes. Once the liquid has cooled, it should form a paste.  Apply this to the ringworm patch twice a day, allowing it to sit for at least 10 minutes each time before wiping or rinsing off.  Native Australians have used tea tree oil as  a remedy  for many bacterial and fungal skin conditions for almost a century. Today, tea tree oil is both popular and effective in treating ringworm.  Make a 2 percent dilution of tea tree oil by mixing 12 drops of the essential oil with 1 ounce of a cold-pressed carrier oil, such as coconut oil. Apply this to the skin three times daily.  Those who do not have sensitive skin may be able to apply the tea tree oil directly to the affected skin without diluting it first.  Oil of oregano that is made from wild oregano ( Origanum vulgare ) contains two strong antifungals called thymol and carvacrol.  Some  research  has shown that oil of oregano can stop the growth of the fungus  Candida albicans . Always dilute oil of oregano with a carrier oil before use. Apply the oil to the affected area up to three times daily.  Note that the majority of oil of oregano on the market contains common oregano ( Origanum marjoram ) rather than wild oregano.  Lemongrass essential oil has been  shown  to reduce the activity of several types of fungus. To use lemongrass oil for ringworm, mix it with a carrier oil, and apply it to the skin twice daily with a cotton ball.  If symptoms do not clear up within 2 weeks of using home remedies, then it may be necessary to see a doctor.  A doctor may recommend using an over-the-counter topical lotion that contains clotrimazole or terbinafine. These products must be applied twice daily. In some cases, the doctor may prescribe stronger antifungal medications.  Those who are likely to spread ringworm to others through their job or lifestyle — such as teachers and athletes — should see their doctor promptly.  Preventing ringworm is easier than treating an established infection. However, ringworm is highly contagious (it can be caught from other people or infected objects), so it is necessary to be diligent about preventative techniques.  The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  (CDC) recommend the following:  The outlook for people with ringworm is excellent, with most cases clearing up within 2 weeks. At-home remedies for ringworm can be very effective if applied consistently and at the onset of symptoms.  However, not all remedies will work for all cases of ringworm, and it is difficult to say which treatment is most effective. Children and those with sensitive skin may wish to try other remedies first before using essential oils, which may irritate some types of skin.  If symptoms do not resolve within 2 weeks, a doctor will recommend a stronger treatment that will likely cure the infection quickly.  The home remedies listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bayan, L., Koulivand, P. H., &amp; Gorji, A. (2014, January–February). Garlic: A review of potential therapeutic effects.  Avicenna Journal of Phytomedicine ,  4 (1), 1–14.  Bayan, L., Koulivand, P. H., &amp; Gorji, A. (2014, January–February). Garlic: A review of potential therapeutic effects.  Avicenna Journal of Phytomedicine ,  4 (1), 1–14.  Carson, C. F., Hammer, K. A., &amp; Riley, T. V. (2006, January).  Melaleuca alternifolia  (tea tree) oil: A review of antimicrobial and other medicinal properties.  Clinical Microbiology Reviews ,  19 (1), 50–62.  Elmore, L. K, Nance, G., Singleton, S., &amp; Lorenz, L. (2014, May). Treatment of dermal infections with topical coconut oil.  Natural Medicine Journal ,  6 (5).  Manohar, V., Ingram, C., Gray, J., Talpur, N. A., Echard, B. W., Bagchi, D. &amp; Preuss, H. G. (2001, December). Antifungal activities of origanum oil against Candida albicans [Abstract].  Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry ,  228 (1–2), 111–117.  Moghadamtousi, S. Z., Kadir, H. A., Hassandarvish, P., Tajik, H., Abubakar, S., &amp; Zandi, K. (2014, April 29). A review on antibacterial, antiviral, and antifungal activity of curcumin.  BioMed Research International .  Mota, A. C., de Castro, R. D., de Araújo Oliveira, J., &amp; de Oliveira Lima, E. (2015, June). Antifungal activity of apple cider vinegar on Candida species involved in denture stomatitis [Abstract].  Journal of Prosthodontics , 24(4), 296–302.  Ringworm risk &amp; prevention. (2017, August 16).  Surjushe, A., Vasani, R. &amp; Saple, D. G. (2008). Aloe vera: A short review.  Indian Journal of Dermatology,   53 (4), 163–166.  Tzortzakis, N. G. &amp; Economakis, C. D. (2007, June). Antifungal activity of lemongrass ( Cympopogon citratus  L.) essential oil against key postharvest pathogens [Abstract].  Innovative Food Science &amp; Emerging Technologies ,  8 (2), 253–258.  Wang, L., Yang, R., Yuan, B., Liu, Y. &amp; Liu, C. (2015, July). The antiviral and antimicrobial activities of licorice, a widely-used Chinese herb.  Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B ,  5 (4), 310–315.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Are there any home remedies for ringworm?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320911.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, February 14). "Are there any home remedies for ringworm?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  