 In this article, we look at home remedies, how a doctor can drain an abscess, how to prevent infection, and possible complications.  Infection occurs when bacteria or fungus get under the skin. An infection between the nail and the skin is called paronychia.  Hangnails commonly occur on the fingernails and are sometimes also found on the toenails.  The following symptoms suggest a hangnail is infected:  Bacterial infections can produce symptoms almost immediately, while fungal infections may take longer to appear.  A hangnail can be treated at home using the following steps:  If the hangnail develops an abscess or starts producing  pus , it may need to be drained to stop the infection from spreading. This procedure should be done by a medical professional.  To drain an infected hangnail, a doctor will:  The dressing and gauze should be removed within a couple of days. A person should then soak their nail in warm water up to  4 times a day .  People can also use the RICE method to reduce pain and swelling. The acronym RICE stands for rest, ice, compression, and elevation. Taking over-the-counter painkillers and anti-inflammatories can also help.  In most cases, infected hangnails are temporary, mild, and can be treated at home.  If the hangnail develops an abscess or starts producing pus, it may need to be drained by a doctor. Avoid doing this at home, as improper drainage can lead to further complications.  A medical professional can usually diagnose an infected hangnail by sight. They may also send a sample off to a laboratory to determine the type of infection.  An infection lasting for  longer than 6 weeks  may be a chronic condition. A doctor can advise on the best course of treatment for this condition.  Rarely, the infection can spread to the hand or foot. This can be very serious, resulting in a loss of sensation or mobility, and can put the extremity at risk of amputation. Infections are  more likely  to spread in people with  diabetes  or other circulation disorders.  Hangnails occur when the skin around the nail becomes irritated or damaged. Infection occurs when bacteria or fungus get into the wound.  A person is more likely to develop an infection if their hands or feet are frequently in moist conditions. For example, people who work as bakers and dishwashers are more likely to experience this condition.  A hangnail may be caused by:  Infections around the nail can also be caused by ingrown fingernails or toenails, which occur when the edge of the nail starts to grow into the soft tissue surrounding it.  To prevent a hangnail from becoming infected:  Hangnail infections are common and will often heal without complication.  Home remedies, such as warm water soaks and antibiotics, can be effective for most mild infections. More serious infections involving pus or abscesses may require medical attention.    
 Adigun, C. G. (n.d.). Acute paronychia.  Adigun, C. G. (n.d.). Acute paronychia.  Hangnails. (n.d.).  Mukherjee, S. (2015, January). Paronychia.  Oakley, A. (2017, August). Paronychia.  Patel, D. B., Emmanuel, N. B., Stevanovic, M. V., Matcuk Jr, G. R., Gottsegen, C. J., Forrester, D. M., … White, E. A. (2014, February 27). Hand infections: Anatomy, types and spread of infection, imaging findings, and treatment options.  Radiographics ,  34 (7).  Rockwell, P. G. (2001, March 15). Acute and chronic paronychia.  American Family Physician ,  63 (6), 1113–1117.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "How to treat an infected hangnail."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320933.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2018, February 15). "How to treat an infected hangnail."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  