 Interferon is, therefore, a critical part of the immune system.  There are three basic forms of interferon. These are alpha and beta, also known as type 1, while gamma is known as type 2. Each form of interferon has different effects on the body.  As well as occurring naturally in the body, interferon is also used as a treatment for various health disorders, including  multiple sclerosis  (MS), some types of  cancer , and  hepatitis C .  The side effects of interferon can be grouped into three categories, according to  Cancer Research UK . These are as follows:  Common side effects are those that affect more than 10 percent of users. They include:  Occasional side effects affect between 1 and 10 percent of people. They include:  Rare side effects affect less than 1 percent of people. They include:  Some side effects are more serious than others. Here is a look at some of the more severe side effects and what should be done about them.  One of the common and potentially most serious side effects of treatment with interferon is depression.  A  2009 review  on the subject found that the risk factors for developing depression during interferon treatment include:  The review found that using  antidepressants  along with interferon might be helpful in staving off bouts of depression.  Unfortunately, depression caused by interferon use is likely to become a long-term, recurring condition, according to a  2016 study  published in  Translational Psychiatry .   Infertility  is an  occasional side effect  of interferon use and can affect either men or women.  Male infertility from interferon might be reversed after some months or years. However, female infertility will usually be a result of the drug triggering early menopause. As such, it will be permanent.  Anyone hoping to become a parent who is due to have interferon treatment should speak to their doctor about freezing their sperm or eggs before the procedure.  Some past research has found evidence that interferon might lead to heart damage.  One  2004 study  looked at the case of a 56-year-old man with normal heart function, who began to experience heart problems, following interferon treatment.   Another study , which was done in 2012, looked at the effects of interferon on increasing risk of  heart disease  in people with  lupus . The researchers found that all subjects, regardless of lupus, seemed to have increased signs of potential heart damage from using interferon.  At the same time, a  2004 study  looked at the effects of interferon on the heart health of people with chronic  hepatitis . It found no significant negative effects. The authors suggested that interferon therapy might be used safely on people who did not have pre-existing  heart disease .  The connection between interferon and heart damage is not clearly understood, but it is worth being mindful of when someone is considering treatment.  Anyone who is concerned, especially those with a history of heart disease, should discuss this with their doctor before starting interferon treatment.  A  2010 review  published in  Digestive Diseases and Sciences , looked at four cases where people had received long-term interferon treatment. In each case, interferon seemed to cause irreversible  high blood pressure  in people with hepatitis C.  The authors noted that this particular issue was rare and had not previously been reported. But it was, nonetheless, a possible side effect of interferon to keep in mind.  The study noted that the underlying risk factors and causes of this issue were unclear, but it occurred during a long course of interferon treatment.  Interferon is usually given by injection underneath the skin of the thigh or belly. The drug may also be given through a drip.  In a  2013 study , interferon was given orally to see whether this would be effective in preventing chest infections. The results suggested this method did not work, although it might have reduced the infection's symptoms.   Older research  from 2003 found interferon to have no effect when taken by mouth.  Before undergoing interferon treatment, people should have a lengthy and in-depth conversation with their doctor about what to expect, regarding side effects and symptoms.  After starting treatment, the right time to get in touch with a doctor is whenever these side effects present a real problem to well-being or interfere with someone's quality of life.  A doctor who knows about any side effects may be able to help address these with medication, adjust the treatment plan, or offer advice on counseling and other services.    
 Bennett, A. L., Smith, D. W., Cummins, M. J., Jacoby, P. A., Cummins, J. M., &amp; Beilharz, M. W. (2013, September). Low-dose oral interferon alpha as prophylaxis against viral respiratory illness: A double-blind, parallel controlled trial during an influenza pandemic year.  Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses ,  7 (5), 854–862.  Bennett, A. L., Smith, D. W., Cummins, M. J., Jacoby, P. A., Cummins, J. M., &amp; Beilharz, M. W. (2013, September). Low-dose oral interferon alpha as prophylaxis against viral respiratory illness: A double-blind, parallel controlled trial during an influenza pandemic year.  Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses ,  7 (5), 854–862.  Chiu, W.-C., Su, Y.-P., Su, K.-P., &amp; Chen, P.-C. (2017, February 7). Recurrence of depressive disorders after interferon-induced depression.  Translational Psychiatry ,  7 , e1026.  Dhillon, S., Kaker, A., Dosanjh, A., Japra, D., &amp; VanThiel, D. H. (2010, April 22). Irreversible pulmonary hypertension associated with the use of interferon alpha for chronic hepatitis C.  Digestive Diseases and Sciences ,  55 (6), 1785–1790.  Erol, M. K., Erol, S., Koruk, M., Ertek, M., &amp; Bozkurt, E. (2004, November). Effects of interferon-alpha therapy on cardiac function in patients with chronic hepatitis B infection [Abstract].  Heart and Vessels ,  19 (6), 263–266.  Khakoo, A. Y., Halushka, M. K., Rame, J. E., Rodriguez, E. R., Kasper, E. K., &amp; Judge, D. P. (2005, January 1). Reversible cardiomyopathy caused by administration of interferon α [Abstract].  Nature Clinical Practice Cardiovascular Medicine ,  2 , 53–57.  Lotrich, F. E. (2009, December). Major depression during interferon-α treatment: Vulnerability and prevention.  Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience ,  11 (4), 417–425.  Parker, B. S., Rautela, J., &amp; Hertzog, P. J. (2016, February 25). Antitumour actions of interferons: Implications for cancer therapy [Abstract].  Nature Reviews Cancer , 16, 131–144.  Polman, C., Barkhof, F., Kappos, L., Pozzilli, C., Sandbrink, R., Dahlke, F., … Lorenz, A. (2003, August). Oral interferon beta-1a in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: A double-blind randomized study [Abstract].  Multiple Sclerosis ,  9 (4), 342–348.  Side effects of interferon (Intron A). (2015, February 11).  Somers, E. C., Zhao, W., Lewis, E. E., Wang, L., Wing, J. J., Sundaram, B., … Kaplan, M. J. (2012, May 14). Type I interferons are associated with subclinical markers of cardiovascular disease in a cohort of systemic lupus erythematosus patients.  PLoS One ,  7 (5), e37000.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Wessels, Dan. "What side effects can result from interferon?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/320945.php&gt;    APA  Wessels, D. (2018, February 16). "What side effects can result from interferon?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  