 An estimated  60 percent  of people experience nosebleeds but only around 6 percent of cases require medical attention.  It can be hard to determine what causes broken blood vessels in the nose. However, there are several factors that may contribute to or cause the nose to bleed when blowing it. We take a look at them in this article.  Common causes of blood appearing when blowing the nose include:  Less common causes of nosebleeds include:  Some hereditary or genetic conditions that cause abnormal bleeding can also lead to blood appearing when the nose is blown. These conditions include:  In most cases, a nosebleed or minor bleeding from the nose eventually stops on its own after a few minutes.  There are a few at-home remedies, however, that may encourage nosebleeds to stop earlier or reduce the amount of bleeding.  Basic treatment options for bleeding noses include:  Around  90 percent  of nosebleeds occur in the front bottom portion of the septum, the fleshy wall that divides the nostrils.  Prolonged or repetitive nosebleeds, or those caused by an underlying medical condition, require medical attention and treatment.  If nosebleeds are severe, a person may require more aggressive treatment to prevent extensive blood loss.  Medical treatment options include:  In many cases, there is no specific way to avoid nosebleeds, but there are some things that may help prevent or reduce the risk of them.  Blowing the nose gently and not picking at the skin can usually prevent minor bleeding.  Other tips for preventing bleeding when blowing the nose include:  One example of a nasal rinse is a Neti pot. These are commonly  available online  and can be used at home.  People should seek medical attention anytime a nosebleed does not stop naturally within 20 minutes. They should also seek medical attention if it does not respond to initial treatments, such as applying pressure.  Although nosebleeds tend to be harmless, severe or prolonged nosebleeds can cause serious blood loss, especially in:  It is also important to talk with a doctor about chronic or repetitive nosebleeds.  Chronic nosebleeds can be a sign of underlying medical conditions, such as blood or inflammatory disorders. Repetitive nosebleeds can also be a sign of nasal deformities or tumors, especially when they only involve one nostril.  People should also seek medical attention if nosebleeds are accompanied by any of the following symptoms:  Bleeding from the nose when blowing it is a common experience. It is usually due to inflamed or damaged nasal tissues and blood vessels, and is not a cause for concern.  Nosebleeds are generally harmless, and stop on their own or after applying gentle pressure to the area.  Severe or repetitive nosebleeds can be a sign of an underlying medical condition that may require treatment, such blood disorders or obstructions.  People should speak with a doctor about severe or repetitive nosebleeds, especially when accompanied by additional symptoms.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Anie, M. T., Arjun, G. M., Andrews, C. J., &amp; Vinayakumar, A. R. (2015, September). Descriptive epidemiology of epistaxis in a tertiary care hospital.  International Journal of Advances in Medicine ,  2 (3), 255–259.  Anie, M. T., Arjun, G. M., Andrews, C. J., &amp; Vinayakumar, A. R. (2015, September). Descriptive epidemiology of epistaxis in a tertiary care hospital.  International Journal of Advances in Medicine ,  2 (3), 255–259.  Muzaffar, R., Mattoo, O., Jallu, A., &amp; Hussain, T. (2013, September–December). Role of local hemostatic agents in epistaxis.  Clinical Rhinology: An International Journal ,  6 (3), 113–117.  Signs and symptoms of acute myeloid leukemia. (2016, February 22).  Signs and symptoms of nasal and paranasal sinus cancers. (2017, December 1).  Suh, J. D., &amp; Garg, R. (2015, February 17). Epistaxis (nosebleeds).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Why do I bleed when I blow my nose?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321021.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, February 24). "Why do I bleed when I blow my nose?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  