 The term may refer to  eczema ,  psoriasis , or seborrheic dermatitis on the eyelids. When the cause is an allergen or irritant, the condition is called eyelid contact dermatitis.  This article discusses how to manage eyelid dermatitis, using treatments and home remedies. It also looks at the symptoms and causes of the condition.  For all kinds of eyelid dermatitis, people should keep the eye area clean and avoid touching it or scratching. This helps to prevent further irritation or infection.  Where possible, it is helpful to identify and avoid contact irritants and allergens that can cause flare-ups. These can include:  To treat eyelid dermatitis caused by atopic dermatitis (eczema) or psoriasis, and for immediate relief from symptoms, a person can:  People should use corticosteroid creams cautiously as they can lose some of their effectiveness if applied for too long. When used close to the eye, there is a risk of  glaucoma  if used for long periods of time.  These creams can also induce certain short-term side effect, such as  acne , hair growth on the treated areas, and thinning of the skin.  Corticosteroid tablets are reserved for the most severe symptoms, as their side effects can be serious. Possible effects include  high blood pressure ,  diabetes , and  osteoporosis .  Dermatitis on the eyelids causes inflammation of the thin, sensitive skin around the eyes. The eyelids become irritated, swollen, dry, and reddened. It can affect one or both of the eyes.  If this condition persists, the eyelids can become thickened in a process called lichenification.  When caused by an irritant or allergen, symptoms typically occur within a few hours or days of contact with a trigger substance. Symptoms should subside when the trigger substance is removed.  Common forms of eyelid dermatitis include:  It is unclear what causes conditions such as atopic dermatitis, though there seems to be a genetic component, and it can  run in families .  The following actions may help to prevent outbreaks of eyelid dermatitis:  The causes, types, and triggers of eyelid dermatitis vary. It may be necessary to try several of these actions before finding the most effective ones.  The skin around the eyes is thin and delicate, and so the eyes are especially sensitive to irritation.  While it is hard to predict who will develop eyelid dermatitis, certain factors may increase the likelihood of the condition developing. These include:  It is possible to self-diagnose eyelid dermatitis if the cause is obvious. Through trial and error, it is possible to identify and avoid triggers without the need for medical attention.  A doctor can often diagnose the form of dermatitis through a physical exam. They may ask about risk factors, such as hay fever.  When an allergic reaction is suspected as the cause, a doctor may recommend a patch test. Here, a common allergen is placed on the skin to test for an allergic reaction.  If an irritant is the suspected cause, a repeated open application test (ROAT) can be used. This involves exposing the skin to the irritant over several days to test for problematic skin reactions.  It can be more difficult to determine a specific irritant compared with an allergen.  Some complications that may occur with eyelid dermatitis include:  Eyelid dermatitis poses no serious health risks, though it can be uncomfortable and can interfere with daily life.  In most cases, the symptoms are easily managed with treatment and by avoiding triggers. It can, however, become a long-term and recurring condition.  When triggers cannot be identified or avoided, treatment will be used to manage symptoms as best as possible.  The effectiveness of treatments can depend on the extent of exposure to triggers, and the sensitivity of the skin.  Using strategies to prevent symptoms, such as avoiding itching or rubbing the eyes, will help to improve and reduce the severity or onset of symptoms. A doctor or skin specialist can recommend actions that are most suitable for each person.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Amin, K. A., &amp; Belsito, D. V. (2006, November). The aetiology of eyelid dermatitis: A 10‐year retrospective analysis [Abstract].  Contact Dermatitis ,  55 (5), 280–285.  Amin, K. A., &amp; Belsito, D. V. (2006, November). The aetiology of eyelid dermatitis: A 10‐year retrospective analysis [Abstract].  Contact Dermatitis ,  55 (5), 280–285.  Atopic eczema. (2016, December 2).  Contact dermatitis. (2016, October 10).  Contact dermatitis. (n.d.).  Eichenfield, L. F., Tom, W. L., Chamlin, S. L., Feldman, S. R., Hanifin, J. M., Simpson, E. L., … Sidbury, R. (2014, February). Guidelines of care for the management of atopic dermatitis: Part 1: Diagnosis and assessment of atopic dermatitis.  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  70 (2), 338–351.  Oakley, A. (2016, January). Calcineurin inhibitors.  Rietschel, R. L., Warshaw, E. M., Sasseville, D., Fowler, J. F. Jr., DeLeo, V. A., Belsito, D. V., … Pratt, M. (2007, June). Common contact allergens associated with eyelid dermatitis: Data from the North American Contact Dermatitis Group 2003–2004 study period [Abstract].  Dermatitis ,  18 (2), 78–81.  Ryder, E. (2014, May). Eyelid contact dermatitis.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "How to identify and treat eyelid dermatitis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321004.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, February 23). "How to identify and treat eyelid dermatitis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  