 The labia are sometimes called the vaginal lips. There are two pairs of labia — the labia majora, located on the outside of the vagina, and labia minora, which are the inner folds of skin that lead to the vagina.  Read on to learn more about swollen labia and what can be done to prevent or treat this issue.  In addition to the swollen labia, the following symptoms may suggest an infection or another underlying medical problem:  Common causes of swollen labia include:  The majority of women —  almost 75 percent  — will experience a yeast infection at least once in their lives.  Symptoms of a yeast infection include:  Conditions that increase the risk of a yeast infection include pregnancy, uncontrolled  diabetes , and having a weakened immune system.  Certain medications, including steroids,  antibiotics , and oral  birth control  pills, also increase the risk.   Bacterial vaginosis  (BV) affects approximately  30 percent  of women of childbearing age and is caused by an imbalance of bacteria in the vagina.  Symptoms include swollen labia, a green or gray discharge, and a fish-like odor. However,  many women  with a bacterial imbalance may not experience any symptoms.  Factors that increase the risk of BV include:  This  sexually transmitted infection  (STI) affects approximately  3 percent  of women of childbearing age. Many women with the infection do not show symptoms.  Those who do may experience:  Having a history of STIs or multiple sexual partners increases the risk of getting trichomoniasis.  If no infection is present, swollen labia may have been caused by contact with an irritating product or allergen.  Substances that may trigger swelling include:  Bartholin's glands are located on either side of the vaginal opening. These glands can become blocked and cause swelling in and around the vagina.  While this swelling does not usually cause other symptoms, it may lead to an infection and cause pain and a buildup of  pus .  Around  2 percent of women  will experience a  Bartholin's cyst . These  cysts  usually occur in women in their 20s and the risk decreases with age.  Sexual intercourse without adequate lubrication — either from the vagina itself or a lubricating product — can cause friction.  This friction can damage the vaginal area and labia, leading to swelling and discomfort.  One or more of the following may be used to diagnose the cause of swollen labia:  Further tests may be used depending on the individual's symptoms and initial test results.  Women with swollen labia should see a doctor if the swelling worsens over time or is accompanied by any of the following:  The treatment for swollen labia will depend on the underlying cause. Treatment options include:  Steroid creams may be beneficial for those with swelling caused by allergies or sexual intercourse.  Women with a yeast infection may need to take an over-the-counter or prescription antifungal medication, which may be applied topically or taken orally.  Swollen labia caused by bacterial infections such as bacterial vaginosis or trichomoniasis can be treated with antibiotics.  Bartholin's cysts do not always require treatment. However, some will require antibiotics, surgical drainage, or even surgical removal.  Home remedies for swollen labia include:  There are several steps a person can take to prevent swollen labia, including:  For most women, swollen labia do not indicate a serious condition. However, anyone experiencing swelling that persists or is accompanied by other symptoms should see a doctor.  There are many medical treatments for swollen labia, depending on the underlying cause. Several home remedies can also effectively manage or alleviate symptoms.  To prevent swollen labia and other genital problems, practice good hygiene, use contraception, and avoid irritating products and clothing.    
 Bahadoran, P., Rokni, F. K., &amp; Fahami, F. (2010, December). Investigating the therapeutic effect of vaginal cream containing garlic and thyme compared to clotrimazole cream for the treatment of mycotic vaginitis.  Iranian Journal of Nursing and Midwifery Research ,  15 (Suppl1), 343—349.  Bahadoran, P., Rokni, F. K., &amp; Fahami, F. (2010, December). Investigating the therapeutic effect of vaginal cream containing garlic and thyme compared to clotrimazole cream for the treatment of mycotic vaginitis.  Iranian Journal of Nursing and Midwifery Research ,  15 (Suppl1), 343—349.  Cribby, S., Taylor, M., &amp; Reid, G. (2009, March 29). Vaginal microbiota and the use of probiotics.  Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Infectious Diseases ,  2008 , 256490.  Diseases characterized by vaginal discharge. (2011, January 28).  How many women are affected/at risk? (2016, January 12).  McNeeley, S. G. (n.d.). Bartholin gland cysts.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What causes labia swelling?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321077.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, February 28). "What causes labia swelling?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  