  Warts  are rough bumps of skin caused by the  human papillomavirus  (HPV). Apple cider vinegar's effectiveness for treating warts is not known, and there are reports of risks and complications with this home remedy.  In this article, we look at how a person might use apple cider vinegar on warts, its effectiveness, and side effects. The article also looks at other ways to treat warts.  There is currently no scientific research to suggest that apple cider vinegar is an effective treatment for warts.  The idea behind this treatment is that the acid should destroy the wart tissue, in a similar way that salicylic acid does. At high concentrations, salicylic acid can be  more effective than a placebo  for treating warts.  In general, vinegar can be used to kill some types of bacteria. According to  one study , vinegar may be effective against common bacteria including  Escherichia coli  ( E. Coli ) and Salmonella. However, scientists have not tested this theory with apple cider vinegar.  There may also be some side effects of using acidic products on the skin, so a person considering this treatment should proceed with caution.  When using apple cider vinegar to treat a wart, a person can follow these steps:  Apple cider vinegar is a form of acid. It is usually available at a concentration of 5 percent acetic acid.  Although weaker than other acids, such as sulfuric and hydrochloric acid, it still has the potential to cause a chemical burn and damage to the skin.  Therefore, people should not apply apple cider vinegar to warts in sensitive areas, such as on the genitals or face.  In  one report , a young person experienced burns to their nose after applying apple cider vinegar to a mole.  In  another report , a child experienced chemical burns and irritant contact dermatitis to their leg after using apple cider vinegar directly on the skin.  One possible treatment is the application of cantharidine. This substance causes the skin under the wart to blister so that the wart comes off. This treatment must be done in a doctor's office.  The American Academy of Dermatology also recommend the following  treatments  for warts:   Salicylic acid   Products containing salicylic acid are available over the counter. When applied to damp skin on a daily basis over several weeks, the acid can destroy skin cells on the wart.  Always follow the instructions from the manufacturer. Usually, a person can follow these steps:   Freezing   A wart can be frozen off using a freezing spray. This procedure can be done at the doctor's office, but wart-freezing sprays are also available over the counter.  These sprays should create a blister around the wart, which will eventually fall off. Alternatively, a doctor can remove it with a laser or scalpel.   Duct tape   Another home remedy some people use for wart treatment is the application of duct tape. Apply duct tape over the wart and change it every few days.  While it is unclear whether this works, it is possible that it causes the skin cells of the wart to come off.  If a person uses the apple cider method to treat their wart, they should watch the skin around the wart carefully for signs of a chemical burn on the skin.  Signs a person should discontinue their treatment and see a doctor include:  If a person experiences anything they did not expect related to their wart treatments, they should contact their doctor.  Warts are not usually painful, and they typically go away on their own over time. However, some warts may bleed or rub against clothing, which can be uncomfortable and annoying.  There is no guaranteed cure for warts, and they may return in the same or a different location.  Apple cider vinegar is not an approved treatment method. However, there is a range of medical treatments and over-the-counter medications available that might help.    
 Bunick, C. G., Lott, J. P., Warren, C. B., Galan, A., Bolognia, J., &amp; King, B. (2012, October). Chemical burn from topical apple cider vinegar [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  67 (4), e143–e144.  Bunick, C. G., Lott, J. P., Warren, C. B., Galan, A., Bolognia, J., &amp; King, B. (2012, October). Chemical burn from topical apple cider vinegar [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  67 (4), e143–e144.  Feldstein, S., Afshar, M., &amp; Krakowski, A. C. (2015, June). Chemical burn from vinegar following an Internet-based protocol for self-removal of nevi.  The Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology ,  8 (6), 50.  How to get rid of warts. (n.d.).  Johnston, C. S., &amp; Gaas, C. A. (2006, May 30). Vinegar: Medicinal uses and antiglycemic effect.  Medscape General Medicine ,  8 (2), 61.  Ngan, V. (2003). Cantharidine.  Rutala, W. A., Barbee, S. L., Aguiar, N. C., Sobsey, M. D., &amp; Weber, D. J. (2000, January 2). Antimicrobial activity of home disinfectants and natural products against potential human pathogens.  Infection Control &amp; Hospital Epidemiology ,  21 (1), 33–38.  Steele, K., Shirodaria, P., O'Hare, M., Merrett, J. D., Irwin, W. G., Simpson, D. I., &amp; Pfister, H. (1988, April).  British Journal of Dermatology ,  118 (4), 537–543.  Warts. (n.d.).  Warts. (2014, April).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Can apple cider vinegar treat warts?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321055.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, February 27). "Can apple cider vinegar treat warts?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  