 Spina bifida occulta may leave those with the condition susceptible to symptoms caused by their spinal column being left exposed.  According to the Spina Bifida Association,  10 to 20 percent  of people have spina bifida occulta. However, many do not realize they have it, as it is possible not to experience symptoms. Another name for this is hidden spina bifida.  The name spina bifida occulta comes from the Latin words "spina," meaning spine, "bifida," meaning split, and "occulta," meaning hidden or secret.  People with spina bifida occulta may have very mild symptoms or none at all.  Therefore, the condition is usually discovered accidentally via an X-ray or  MRI scan  that a person has for another reason.  Open spina bifida, which is also known as myelomeningocele, is a severe congenital disability.  Those with open spina bifida are likely to have mobility issues, and experience injury and infection more frequently than people with spina bifida occulta.  A person with open spina bifida has a spinal canal that is open to varying degrees all the way along its length. Also, a sac that contains part of the spinal cord pushes out through the skin.  Symptoms of spina bifida occulta are usually mild, the gaps in the vertebrae are minimal and the spinal cord is still well protected.  However, some people with spina bifida occulta report having some symptoms. These can include:  Approximately  1 in 1,000 people  with spina bifida occulta will experience symptoms such as these.  In some cases, people can see signs of their spinal cord abnormality, as this can cause changes in the skin along the midline of the lower back. Visible signs of a possible spinal cord abnormality include:  If a person notices these signs, they should see their doctor to talk about their concerns.  Tethered cord syndrome is the most common complication of spina bifida occulta.  A person's spinal cord runs from their brain down their spinal column. When tethered cord syndrome occurs, the usually free-hanging spinal cord becomes attached to the spinal column, restricting its movement.  Children with tethered cord syndrome can experience nerve damage and neurological problems because the fixed cord must stretch as they grow.  The symptoms include:  There is no cure for spina bifida occulta, but treatment is unnecessary for most people as they have no symptoms.  When symptoms do occur, they are treated individually. If a person suffers from back pain, for example, they could receive  physiotherapy  or pain medication to help manage this. If tethered cord syndrome occurs due to spina bifida occulta, it may be possible to have simple surgery to free the cord.  Even though surgery is usually successful, the cord can re-tether and, therefore, the surgery may need to be repeated several times.  Researchers are not certain why one person and not another might have spina bifida occulta. However, spinal cord defects are more likely to occur in babies whose mothers do not have a sufficient intake of  folic acid  while pregnant.  Pregnant women are advised to take a folic acid supplement, during pregnancy, to boost their intake.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)and the United States Public Health Service (PHS) advise that all women who can become pregnant ensure they  consume 400 micrograms (mcg) of folic acid daily , even before conception occurs.  Women with  diabetes  and those who have previously given birth to a child with a neural tube defect are at a higher risk.  Ensuring the proper intake of folic acid supplementation during pregnancy can reduce the risk of spinal defects, such as spina bifida, by  40 to 100 percent .  People can try to boost their folic acid intake by eating more of the foods that contain it, including dark leafy vegetables and fortified cereals. Alternatively, supplements can be taken orally in pill or capsule form.  Spina bifida occulta is often only discovered when a person with the condition visits their doctor for an unrelated reason.  If a doctor does specific tests or examinations and notices the signs of spina bifida occulta, they may do follow up tests.  These may include an X-ray or MRI scan to confirm that the condition is present.  Having spina bifida occulta does not mean a person has a disability. However, it may be that someone who suffers severe symptoms because of the condition will be entitled to benefits due to restrictions or limitations they may experience.  Spina bifida occulta is a common condition. Many people live their whole lives without realizing they have it because symptoms are often mild or unnoticeable.  Spina bifida occulta can occur without prior family history, and those who have it are not likely to pass it on if they have children.  Complications of spina bifida occulta, such as tethered cord syndrome, may require surgery. Other symptoms are usually successfully managed through pain relief medication and physical therapy if they occur.    
 Folic acid. (2016, December 28).  Folic acid. (2016, December 28).  Linebaugh, M. (n.d.). Social security disability based on spina bifida.  Shepard, C. L., Yan, P. L., Hollingsworth, J. M., &amp; Kraft, K. H. (2017, September 6). Pregnancy among mothers with spina bifida.  Journal of Pediatric Urology .  Spina bifida. (2015, January 4).  Spina bifida. (2017, May 4).  Spina bifida. (2018, January 31).  Spina bifida occulta. (n.d.).  Spina bifida occulta. A mild form of spina bifida. (n.d.).  Spinal cord tethering. A common cause of deterioration in spina bifida. (n.d.).  Toriello, H. V. (2005, April, 1). Folic acid and neural tube defects.  Genetics in Medicine ,  7   (4) 283–284.  Why do I need folic acid in pregnancy? (2015, March 18).  https://www.nhs.uk/chq/Pages/913.aspx   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What causes spina bifida occulta?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321054.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, February 27). "What causes spina bifida occulta?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  