  Most genital warts  are caused by the  human papillomavirus  (HPV). There is no cure for the HPV virus that causes  genital warts . Even when the  warts  disappear, a person can still transmit the virus. Some remedies, including some home remedies, may temporarily clear up genital warts.  Though the virus itself is associated with cervical and some other  cancers , genital warts themselves do not cause cancer. Moreover, not all people with HPV develop genital warts.  In this article, we examine some home remedies that could help with cases of genital warts. We also look at how some lifestyle changes might affect this condition.  Because genital warts can come back even after surgical removal, home remedies are likely to be most effective when used alongside standard medical treatments.  It is important to note that the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not regulate alternative medicines. Anyone wanting to use these remedies should discuss it with a doctor first, and should always buy them from reliable sources.  The following home remedies may speed the healing of genital warts, but will not cure the underlying virus.   1. Green tea extract    Green tea  extract may help fight genital warts. A  2015 study  reviewed the use of a specific type of green tea extract called sinecatechins. Green tea extract worked better than a  placebo  — and was about as effective as standard topical medical remedies — in clearing genital warts.  Compared with standard remedies, people do not need to wash the green tea extract off their skin before applying it again.  Green tea products are available for  purchase online .   2. Tea tree oil   Advocates of traditional medicine have long used tea tree oil to treat a variety of skin conditions. Its antimicrobial properties may reduce the severity of some viruses, including those that cause warts.  Tea tree oil has not been well-studied for use with genital warts, but limited evidence suggests it might treat warts on other areas of the body.  One example is an old  case study from 2008  that detailed the successful use of tea tree oil to treat a child with warts on her hand. The authors suggested that their positive results might mean that tea tree oil can also treat warts caused by HPV.  A more recent  2012 study  reported that tea tree oil could help with the treatment of  molluscum contagiosum , another type of viral skin condition.  As tea tree oil can burn the skin, people should consult a doctor or herbal medicine expert before trying it.  Tea tree oil is available for  purchase online .   3. Witch hazel   Like tea tree oil, witch hazel is a popular remedy for various skin issues. It is relatively mild, so unlikely to irritate sensitive skin. It should not be used on mucous membranes, including inside the vagina or anus, however.  A  2014 study  found that witch hazel might be effective at fighting HPV type 16, which is one of the strains of HPV that causes genital warts.  Witch hazel is available for  purchase online .  As HPV is a  sexually transmitted infection  (STI), people with the virus should take steps to reduce the risk of passing the virus on, including the use of condoms during sexual intercourse. However, HPV  often affects areas  not covered by a condom, so can be easily transmitted even when using this form of  contraception .  Some evidence suggests that dietary changes may improve symptoms of genital warts. According to a  2015 literature review , cruciferous vegetables, such as broccoli and cabbage, may have the potential to halt the development of genital warts. These vegetables contain molecules that the body metabolizes into chemicals that may attack HPV.  A handful of trials of juice and other edible forms of these vegetables suggest that they can be effective against genital warts.  HPV is a serious virus  linked to  throat, cervical, and some other cancers. By knowing their HPV status, a person can help slow the spread of the virus, which can be potentially life-saving.  Not all people with HPV develop genital warts, but many people with genital warts have HPV.  People who develop warts or other sores on or around their genitals should see a doctor. Proper diagnosis can ensure appropriate treatment. It is possible that something that resembles genital warts is another condition, such as  herpes  or a bacterial infection. Only a doctor can tell for sure.  People with  HIV  and other diseases that harm the immune system may have  more severe outbreaks  of genital warts. They may also experience more difficulty clearing up outbreaks. People with genital warts should consider testing for other STIs.  Medical remedies for genital warts are usually effective. They can reduce the appearance of the warts and the length of each outbreak.  Medication will not, however, kill the underlying virus. The virus continues living in the body so future outbreaks are possible.  One of two creams — podofilox or imiquimod — applied directly to the warts can be effective. A person will need to get a prescription from a doctor before using these medications, and  should not use them if they are pregnant .  A third cream, also available through a prescription, is sinecatechins. This is a green tea extract cream that is FDA-approved for genital warts. Other green tea formulations may be available over the counter.  A doctor may also be able to freeze off the warts through a process called cryotherapy. This permanently removes existing warts, though new ones may appear. Cryotherapy may require several treatments to work.  Surgical removal is also possible and is usually done under local anesthesia. Surgery removes warts in a single treatment session.  A doctor can also apply one of two topical treatments to speed the removal of the warts. Due to the strength of these treatments, they can only be applied in a doctor's office. It may take several treatments for the warts to disappear.  Some experimental treatments, including treatment with the drug interferon, may help people for whom other treatments do not work.  Genital warts sometimes disappear without treatment. It is essential, however, to distinguish the warts from the infection that causes them.  HPV is a lifelong, incurable condition. Even when genital warts disappear, whether this is due to treatment or on their own, a person will still have HPV. This means that they can develop genital warts again and may pass the virus onto sexual partners.  People who have genital warts should discuss ways to help prevent spreading the virus with their doctor. It is essential that people tell any sexual partners about their HPV status.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Anogenital warts. (2015, June 4).  Anogenital warts. (2015, June 4).  Gupta, A. K., &amp; Daigle, D. (2015, February 1). Sinecatechins 10% ointment: A green tea extract for the treatment of external genital warts.  Skin Therapy Letter ,  20 (1).  HPV and oropharyngeal cancer. (2017, July 17).  Markum, E., &amp; Baillie, J. (2012, March). Combination of essential oil of Melaleuca alternifolia and iodine in the treatment of molluscum contagiosum in children [Abstract].  Journal of Drugs in Dermatology ,  11 (3), 349–54.  Millar, B. C., &amp; Moore, J. E. (2008, November). Successful topical treatment of hand warts in a paediatric patient with tea tree oil ( Melaleuca alternifolia ) [Abstract].  Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice ,  14 (4), 225–227.  Theisen, L. L., Erdelmeier, C. A., Spoden, G. A., Boukhallouk, F., Sausy, A., Florin, L., &amp; Muller, C. P. (2014, January 31). Tannins from  Hamamelis virginiana  bark extract: Characterization and improvement of the antiviral efficacy against influenza A virus and human papillomavirus.  PLoS ONE ,  9 (1), e88062.  Yarnell, E. (2015, April). Herbs against human papillomavirus.  Alternative and Complementary Therapies ,  21 (2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Can you treat genital warts at home?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321036.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, February 26). "Can you treat genital warts at home?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  