 Cancerous plasma cells can cause  anemia  and lead to infections. Normal plasma cells help fight infections, but  myeloma  cells keep the healthy plasma cells from doing their job. Myeloma cells speed up the breakdown of bone and prevent new bone from forming, making breaks and  fractures  common.  Traditional treatment for  multiple myeloma  can include  chemotherapy , bisphosphonates, radiation, surgery, and  stem cell  transplants.  Complementary treatments that can be used alongside regular treatment include special diets,  vitamins , herbs,  acupuncture , or massage.  There are no proven special diets to treat multiple myeloma. However, there are specific  nutrition  strategies that can be used to treat common symptoms, such as kidney damage and anemia, as well as to reduce  cancer  recurrence.  Despite the lack of evidence to support an alternative diet, proper nutrition with a focus on particular foods still plays a role in the overall health, energy levels, and strength of people with multiple myeloma.  Multiple myeloma can cause anemia, a condition where there are too few red blood cells in the body. A decreased amount of red blood cells can cause  fatigue  and weakness. Anemia can also be caused by iron,  folate , and vitamin B-12 deficiencies.   Iron   There are two types of iron: heme and non-heme. Animal-based foods provide heme iron and plant foods provide non-heme iron. Heme iron is more readily absorbed by the body. If a person is found to have low iron levels, taking an iron supplement and eating foods high in iron can help.  The best sources of heme iron include:  The best sources of non-heme iron include:  A person should be sure to include sources of vitamin C with non-heme iron in their diet to improve absorption. Examples include bell peppers, oranges, berries, and lemon juice.   Folate   Folate is a B vitamin that helps with the formation of red and white blood cells in the  bone marrow .  Foods that are high in folate include:   Vitamin B-12   Vitamin B-12 works together with folate to form red blood cells. A deficiency in B-12 can further decrease the bone marrow's ability to make and maintain red blood cells in people with multiple myeloma.  Food sources of B-12 include:   Vitamin D   A  small study  of 32 people post myeloma treatment found that 59 percent had a  vitamin D  deficiency, 25 percent had insufficient folate, and 6 percent were lacking in B-12.  Sources of vitamin D include:  Recent studies show promising benefits of certain vegetables and fruits for cancer prevention and complementary treatment.  Ursolic acid is found in many plants and  has been shown  to be cytotoxic, which can inhibit a variety of cancer cells.  Foods with ursolic acid include:  Cruciferous vegetables, such as cabbage, broccoli, cauliflower and Brussels sprouts, contain nutrients called isothiocyanates that  exhibit anti-myeloma properties .   Pterostilbene , a natural compound found primarily in  blueberries ,  exhibits anti-tumor activity .  Curcumin, which is found in the spice turmeric, has also shown anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer benefits.  Overall, a diet rich in plant foods and low in sugar is helpful for cancer prevention as well as support during treatment.  There are some foods people with multiple myeloma may wish to avoid to reduce their symptoms.  People with multiple myeloma can develop kidney damage. The breakdown of bone releases high amounts of  calcium  and protein into the bloodstream, which the kidneys work hard to filter out.  As kidney function declines, people with multiple myeloma may need to limit their intake of  potassium , phosphorus, and fluids.  Foods that are high in potassium include:  Foods that are high in phosphorus include:  For people who do not have multiple myeloma, foods that are high in potassium and phosphorus are not harmful. However, for those whose kidneys cannot filter out these minerals, a build-up of potassium and phosphorus can be dangerous.  A doctor will closely follow the kidney function of someone with multiple myeloma to see if potassium or phosphorus need to be monitored.  While cancer itself can damage a person's immune system, so can cancer treatments, such as chemotherapy. Damage to a person's immune system can put them at a higher risk for infection.  Hand washing and staying away from people who are sick are essential for people with a weakened immune system.  Some foods can also cause further illness and infection in a person who is receiving chemotherapy. While someone with a healthy immune system can fight off pathogens in food, someone with decreased immunity would benefit from avoiding foods that could contain a food-borne illness or bacteria.  Foods to avoid:  To safely cook and prepare food for a compromised immune system, a person should:  According to the American Cancer Society, multiple myeloma is a relatively rare cancer and occurs in about  1 in 143 people . The median survival rate for stage I multiple myeloma is  62 months , meaning that at 62 months, half of the people in that group were still alive.  However, treatments are constantly evolving, and many people with multiple myeloma may be able to take part in clinical trials that test new medications and treatments.  Eating a healthful diet that reduces the symptoms of multiple myeloma and the side effects of chemotherapy can help improve a person's quality of life and keep them strong and comfortable during treatment.    
 Frolova, T. S., Lipeeva, A. V., Baev, D. S., Tsepilov, Y. A., &amp; Sinitsyna, O. I. (2017, September–October). Apoptosis as the basic mechanism of cytotoxic action of ursolic and pomolic acids in glioma cells.  Molecular Biology ,  51 (5), 809–816.  Frolova, T. S., Lipeeva, A. V., Baev, D. S., Tsepilov, Y. A., &amp; Sinitsyna, O. I. (2017, September–October). Apoptosis as the basic mechanism of cytotoxic action of ursolic and pomolic acids in glioma cells.  Molecular Biology ,  51 (5), 809–816.  Greenfield, D. M., Boland, E., Ezaydi, Y., Ross, R. J. M., Ahmedzai, S. H., Snowden, J. A. &amp; Late Effects Group. (2014, July 2). Endocrine, metabolic, nutritional and body composition abnormalities are common in advanced intensively-treated (transplanted) multiple myeloma.  Bone Marrow Transplantation ,  49 , 907–912.  Herbst, M. C. (2016, July). Nutrition guidelines for individuals diagnosed with multiple myeloma.  Jakubikova, J., Cervi, D., Ooi, M., Kim, K., Nahar, S., Klippel, S., … Mitsiades, C. S. (2011, August). Anti-tumor activity and signaling events triggered by the isothiocyanates, sulforaphane and phenethyl isothiocyanate, in multiple myeloma.  Haematologica ,  96 (8), 1170–1179.  Key statistics for multiple myeloma. (2018, January 4).  Multiple myeloma anemia treatment. (n.d.).  Survival rates by stage for multiple myeloma. (2016, January 19).  Treating multiple myeloma. (n.d.).  Vitamin B-12 fact sheet for consumers [Fact sheet]. (2016, February 17).  What is multiple myeloma? (2016, January 19).  Xie, B., Xu, Z., Hu, L., Chen, G., Wei, R., Yang, G., … Zhu, W. (2016, November 17). Pterostilbene inhibits human multiple myeloma cells via ERK1/2 and JNK pathway in vitro and in vivo.  International Journal of Molecular Sciences ,  17 (11), 1927.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Ware, Megan. "What to eat if you have multiple myeloma."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321081.php&gt;    APA  Ware, M. (2018, February 28). "What to eat if you have multiple myeloma."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  