 Most cases of stomach spasms do not damage the body, but they may indicate an underlying condition that needs attention.  Learn more about stomach spasms in this article, including their causes and the available treatment options.  The following conditions are all known to cause stomach spasms:  Cramps and spasms are common symptoms of  constipation .  Other symptoms include:   Dehydration  can cause an imbalance of electrolytes in the body (particularly sodium and  potassium ). Muscles require these nutrients to function correctly, so they may begin to seize up and spasm when they do not have enough.  Additional symptoms of dehydration are:  Too much gas in the stomach may lead to spasms as the muscles in the intestines strain to let out the gas.  Excess gas can also cause:  Gastritis is  inflammation  of the stomach, while  gastroenteritis  involves inflammation of both the stomach and the intestines. These conditions are typically caused by infections.  Gastritis and gastroenteritis may also cause the following symptoms:  Digested food passes through the body's intestines thanks to wave-like muscle contractions called peristalsis. When peristalsis slows down or stops at any stage of the intestines, it is referred to as an ileus.  Several things can cause ileus, including:  Other symptoms of ileus include:  An ileus that involves the stomach is known as gastroparesis. This can also cause stomach spasms, especially after meals.  Colitis refers to inflammation of the colon (large intestine). There are many types of colitis. If the inflammation is caused by an infection, it is referred to as infectious colitis.  In addition to stomach spasms, the symptoms of infectious colitis include:  Infectious colitis may be caused by consuming contaminated food or water that contains pathogens such as  E. coli ,  Salmonella , or  Giardia .  Inflammatory bowel disease or IBD is the term given to a group of chronic conditions involving inflammation of the digestive tract. IBD affects up to  1.6 million people  in the United States.  The most common types of IBD are  Crohn's disease  and ulcerative colitis. Both conditions cause spasms and other symptoms, including:   Irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS) is a functional digestive disorder, which means that the digestive tract appears undamaged, but it still causes symptoms.  It affects  10 to 15 percent  of people worldwide, making it the most common functional digestive disorder.  Along with stomach spasms, IBS causes:  When poor blood supply causes inflammation of the large intestine, it is termed ischemic colitis. When this issue affects the small intestine, is it called ischemic enteritis.  Both conditions lead to stomach spasms and other symptoms, including:  Working the abdominal muscles too hard or too often can lead to stomach spasms. People who regularly do crunches and sit-ups may be most at risk.  Other muscle strain symptoms are:  Changes in the body that occur during pregnancy can lead to stomach spasms. Most cases of stomach spasms during pregnancy are not a cause for concern. However, women who experience regular spasms or spasms that are painful should see a doctor.  The following can cause spasms during pregnancy:  Braxton-Hicks are known false labor. Contractions typically occur in the third trimester, although they may begin in the second trimester in some cases.  Braxton-Hicks contractions are when the uterine muscles tense and tighten for  30 seconds to 2 minutes  before releasing. The contractions tend to be:  Contractions that ease up rather than get worse are most likely Braxton-Hicks contractions, especially if they occur earlier than the expected labor.  Many pregnant women experience gas as a result of increased levels of the hormone  progesterone  in the body.  While progesterone is necessary for a healthy pregnancy, it also causes the intestinal muscles to relax, which slows down digestion and leads to a buildup of gas.  The muscles of the stomach and uterus stretch throughout pregnancy to accommodate the growing baby. As the muscles stretch, they may spasm slightly or cause twinges of pain.  Some level of muscle pain and spasming is a normal part of pregnancy, but pain that is severe or accompanied by bleeding or fever requires urgent medical attention.  When the growing baby kicks or moves, it can feel like a spasm, especially in the second trimester. Usually, these kicks are stronger and more pronounced in the third trimester and will be different from a spasm.  A doctor may diagnose the underlying cause of stomach spasms based on:  They will also ask a person about their symptoms, when they started, and whether the spasms have any triggers.  A doctor may ask a person to keep a log of when the spasms occur, what they ate that day, and if they did any physical activity to help determine the cause.  In many cases, stomach spasms will resolve on their own and are not cause for concern. However, stomach spasms that are severe or frequent can indicate a more serious condition that should be investigated.  If a person experiences any of the following symptoms, they should seek immediate medical treatment:  The treatment for stomach spasms will depend on the underlying cause. Possible options include:  Many people get relief from stomach spasms with home remedies. Pregnant women should speak with their doctor before using home remedies, as they may not be suitable or safe for use during pregnancy.  Some home remedies that may be effective include:  Both over-the-counter and prescription medications are available for stomach spasms. The medication used will depend on the underlying cause of the stomach spasms.  Types of medications that may be recommended include:  The following steps can help prevent stomach spasms from occurring:   Staying hydrated . Dehydration leads to stomach spasms, so it is important to drink enough fluids. Higher levels of fluids may also be needed in hot weather and during intense exercise.   Exercising correctly . Do not overwork the muscles, as this can lead to spasms and injuries. Using proper form when carrying out exercises, staying hydrated throughout, and scheduling regular rest periods can help prevent spasms.   Avoiding problematic foods . Some foods are known to cause digestive distress and lead to stomach spasms and other symptoms. Consider limiting alcohol intake, spicy foods, and high-fat foods.   Making other dietary changes if necessary . People with gastritis, IBS, and IBD may find that making dietary changes eases their symptoms. For example, limiting fiber intake can reduce painful gas. It can be helpful to work with a doctor or dietitian to determine what to eat and avoid.   Managing underlying conditions . Stomach spasms that are related to conditions such as IBS or IBD may disappear or lessen once the condition is kept under control through medication, lifestyle changes, or both.  The outlook for people with stomach spasms depends on the underlying cause. Stomach spasms often resolve with minimal or no treatment. However, other times they require medical attention.  To improve the outlook, a person should consult a doctor quickly if stomach spasms persist or get worse, or if they are accompanied by bloody stools, fever, or vomiting.    
 Braxton Hicks contractions. (2017, March 24).  Braxton Hicks contractions. (2017, March 24).  Facts about inflammatory bowel diseases. (2011, May 1).  Mayo Clinic Staff. (2018, January 11). Abdominal pain.  Statistics. (2016, May 10).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Why do I have muscle spasms in my stomach?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321096.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, March 2). "Why do I have muscle spasms in my stomach?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  