  Boils  can also spread under the skin and cluster. If this happens, the clusters form deeper abscesses called carbuncles, which may scar the skin.  The size and color of a boil can vary, depending on how severe it is, or the amount of skin involved. However, most boils tend to have a similar appearance.  Fast facts about boils on the inner thigh:  While symptoms may vary in severity, most boils:  Boils may appear alone or as a group. Boils that form a group or cluster are collectively called a carbuncle.  Boils can appear anywhere on the body, including the inner thigh.  Boils occur when the bacteria  Staphyloccus auerus  invades the walls of a damaged or exposed hair follicle and colonizes it, causing infection.  Some  10 to 20 percent  of the population are carriers of  Staphyloccus auerus . Being a carrier means that the bacteria normally lives on the surface of a person's skin.  Carriers, and people with boils, can spread the bacteria through skin-to-skin contact. The bacteria can also spread through contact with contaminated objects, such as towels and sheets. In most people, infections only occur when the skin's natural barrier is broken or compromised by factors such as injury or friction.  Anyone of any age can develop boils. They commonly appear in areas of the body prone to chafing, particularly the inner thighs.  Certain factors are known to increase the likelihood of developing the condition.  Common risk factors for boils include:  Specific factors may contribute to a high risk of developing boils on the inner thigh. These include:  Some boils require medical attention. Consult a doctor about boils that:  A person should also see a doctor if a boil appears at the same time as any of the following symptoms:  Some individuals have a higher risk of complications from boils and are more likely to require medical attention.  People who have the following conditions should consider talking with a doctor about their boils:  In most cases, the first line of treatment is to clean the abscess and surrounding skin with warm, soapy water. Avoid touching, rubbing, or applying pressure to a boil that has just been cleaned.  There are ways to draw the pus to the surface of the boil. This increases pressure in the abscess, making the boil more likely to rupture.  One of the easiest ways to safely drain a boil at home is to dip a clean facecloth or towel in very warm water and gently hold it against the boil.  Ideally, this compress should be as warm as possible without burning the skin. The towel or cloth should be held in place until it becomes cool or room temperature. It will often take several sessions for the boil to burst. Hot compresses are also available to buy in pharmacies and  online .   The following tips can help when dealing with boils at home:  A doctor may need to cut into a boil to drain it. This may be necessary if a boil is severe, very large, or if it will not drain on its own. Incising might also be needed in cases of chronic boils.  A doctor may also prescribe oral antibiotics to clear the infection. When boils are chronic or do not respond to oral medication alone, a doctor may prescribe topical antibiotic creams or antibiotic nasal sprays.  The following tips can reduce the risk of developing boils:  Boils or furuncles are a common type of skin abscess. Most rupture within 10 days of forming, and after a boil drains, it tends to heal within 1 to 3 weeks.  In some cases, boils can lead to complications, including scarring and painful clustering deep beneath the skin's surface. These clusters of boils are called carbuncles.  If left untreated, severe boils or carbuncles can lead to life-threatening conditions. These may include systemic infections, which can compromise the bloodstream or the entire body.  Talk with a doctor about boils that do not heal on their own, are very large, or are complicated by additional symptoms or conditions.    
 Boils. (n.d.).  Boils. (n.d.).  How to treat boils and styes. (n.d.).  Oakley, A. (2016, January). Boils.  Shallcross, L. J., Hayward, A. C., Johnson, A. M., &amp; Petersen, I. (2015, April 30). Incidence and recurrence of boils and abscesses within the first year: A cohort study in UK primary care.  British Journal of General Practice ,  65 (639), e668–e676.  Stevens, D. L., Bisno, A. L., Chambers, H. F., Dellinger, E. P., Goldstein, E. J. C., Gorbach, S. L., ... Wade, J. C. (2014, July 15). Practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of skin and soft tissue infections: 2014 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.  Clinical Infectious Diseases ,  59 (2), e10–e52.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What causes boils on the inner thigh?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321082.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, February 28). "What causes boils on the inner thigh?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  