 Pain in the front of the head is sometimes described as a frontal lobe  headache .  According to the National Institute of Health, more than  9 out of 10 people  will experience a headache at some point. Headaches are among the most common reasons for visiting a doctor or missing work or school.  In this article, we look at types of headache that can cause pain in the front of the head. We discuss causes, symptoms, means of prevention, treatment options, and when to see a doctor.  A headache can cause pain anywhere in the head, but a frontal lobe headache tends to cause pain in areas such as the forehead and temples.  In spite of the name, a frontal lobe headache is rarely related to that part of the brain, and it is not a condition in itself. Pain in the front of the head is usually a symptom of another type of headache.  Each of the headaches listed below is likely to cause pain in the front of the head.  A tension headache is the most common type of headache. Most people will experience one from time to time.  These headaches have the following symptoms:  The severity of tension headaches can range from mild to severe.  They typically last between  30 minutes and several hours  but can persist for days. They may also occur on multiple days within a month.  Tension headaches are often triggered by  stress ,  anxiety , or  depression . They are sometimes caused by  tiredness , bad posture, or musculoskeletal problems in the neck.  Pain from tension headaches can often be relieved by taking over-the-counter (OTC) painkillers, such as ibuprofen, acetaminophen, or  aspirin . The following may also be helpful:  See a doctor for severe or persistent headaches. Experiencing tension headaches  more than 15 times a month  is considered chronic, and a person should consult a doctor. Chronic cases are sometimes managed with amitriptyline.  Eye strain may also result in frontal headaches. A headache caused by eye strain may feel similar to a tension headache. They are typically caused by uncorrected vision or  astigmatism  in one or both eyes.  Eye strain can have a number of causes:  People with eye strain headaches should see an ophthalmologist (eye doctor) for an eye test. If defective eyesight is the cause, a person may require glasses or contact lenses.  The following may also help with eye strain:   Cluster headaches  are rare and can be extremely painful. Pain is typically felt on one side of the head, often around the eye, temple, or forehead.  These headaches usually begin without warning, and they can last for several hours. A person may experience more than one of these headaches a day.  Other symptoms of cluster headaches include:  Successions of cluster headaches can go on for weeks or months. They tend to occur around the same times and often wake people up.  The cause of cluster headaches is not well understood, but they may run in families. Alcohol and smoking can trigger attacks.  People experiencing cluster headaches should speak to a doctor. Treatment options include:  The sinuses can become inflamed by an infection or allergic reaction, which is known as  sinusitis .  The swelling of the sinuses can result in a frontal headache and tenderness around the forehead, cheeks, and eyes.  Sinus headaches are characterized by:  People often have sinusitis following a cold or the  flu . It usually clears up by itself.  To relieve the associated congestion, a person can use a salt water solution to clear the nostrils or inhale steam from a bowl of hot water.  Management of sinusitis depends on the cause:  A doctor might also provide a corticosteroid nasal spray to relieve swelling. In some cases, it may be necessary to refer a person with sinusitis to an ear, nose, and throat specialist.  See a doctor if sinusitis persists for longer than a week or gets worse.  Giant cell  arteritis  — also known as temporal arteritis — is condition in which the blood vessels located toward the outside of the head become inflamed.  It is characterized by severe, recurrent headaches, and pain and tenderness around the temples.  Other symptoms include:  Giant cell arteritis is uncommon among people  under 50 . It is a serious condition and should be managed by a doctor as soon as possible. This will usually involve a corticosteroid, such as prednisolone.  Certain lifestyle changes can help to prevent or reduce the frequency of headaches. These include:  Therapies and activities that aid in relaxation or manage pain and stress may also help to prevent headaches. These include:  It may be a good idea to keep a headache diary to identify possible triggers.  Common triggers for headaches include:  Many types of headache can cause pain in the front of the head. In most cases, this pain is the result of a tension headache.  Consult a doctor about persistent, worsening or very severe headaches.    
 10 headache triggers. (2015, June 2).  10 headache triggers. (2015, June 2).  Cluster headaches. (2017, May 22).  Eyestrain from watching TV. (2007, October 25).  Headache: Hope through research. (2017, June 28).  Headaches: In depth. (2017, September 24).  Silberstein, S. D. (July, 2016). Approach to the patient with headache.  Sinusitis (sinus infection). (2017, December 19).  Temporal arteritis. (2017, November 29).  Tension-type headache. (2007, October 25).  Tension-type headaches. (2015, August 7).  The complete headache chart. (2008, December 11).  The international classification of headache disorders 3rd edition. (n.d.).  Trigger Avoidance Information. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gill, Stephen. "What to know about frontal lobe headaches."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321086.php&gt;    APA  Gill, S. (2018, March 1). "What to know about frontal lobe headaches."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  