 An estimated  0.7 to 9 percent  of menstruating women experience postcoital bleeding, primarily from the cervix.  The source of this bleeding tends to be more varied in women who are no longer menstruating.  Common causes of bleeding after sex include:  The friction and abrasion of intercourse can easily cause small tears and cuts in sensitive genital tissues.  Childbirth can also cause vaginal tissues to stretch and tear, sometimes making them more vulnerable to injury.  On the first occurrence of sexual intercourse, a small flap of vaginal skin called the hymen is often stretched and broken. The minor bleeding this causes can last 1 to 2 days.  Dryness is among the most common causes of postcoital bleeding. When the skin is dry it becomes extremely vulnerable to damage. Mucus-producing tissues, such as those in the vagina, are especially vulnerable.  Common causes of vaginal dryness include:  Any type of infection can cause  inflammation  of vaginal tissues, making them more vulnerable to damage. These commonly include yeast infections,  pelvic inflammatory disease , cervicitis,  vaginitis , and  sexually transmitted infections , such as  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea .  Polyps and  fibroids  are tiny noncancerous growths. They commonly grow on the lining of the cervix or uterus, especially in menstruating people, and can cause pain and bleeding.  Glandular cells from the inside of the cervical canal can abnormally grow on the outside of the cervix. This condition usually clears up without treatment, but it can cause spotting and vaginal bleeding.   Endometriosis  causes endometrial tissues, the tissues that line the uterus, to grow outside of the uterus. This can cause inflammation, usually in the pelvic region and lower abdomen.  Cervical dysplasia occurs when abnormal, precancerous cells grow in the lining of the cervical canal, which is the opening separating the vagina and uterus. These growths can irritate and eventually damage surrounding tissues, especially during intercourse.  Some people have differently shaped reproductive organs, which may increase the likelihood of painful friction and tearing.  Diseases that cause abnormal bleeding or clotting can increase the risk of postcoital bleeding. Blood-thinning medications may also have this effect.   Cancers  that impact the reproductive system or urogenital tract can alter vaginal tissues and hormone levels, making them more vulnerable to damage. Postcoital bleeding is considered a common symptom of both cervical and uterine cancers.  Common risk factors for postcoital bleeding include:  There are no national or international guidelines doctors use to diagnose or manage postcoital bleeding.  Many medical professionals will ask questions about individual and family medical histories and perform a full physical exam.  Additional tests may include:  If a doctor can not determine the cause of problematic bleeding, they may refer a woman to a  gynecologist .  Talk with a doctor any time postcoital bleeding is severe, frequent, or continues for more than a few hours after intercourse.  Also speak with a doctor if postcoital bleeding is accompanied by additional symptoms, including:  In many cases, there is no single clear cause of postcoital bleeding, so there is no direct course of treatment.  Potential treatment options include:  Pregnancy, childbirth, and breast-feeding all cause major hormonal changes, most of which can make vaginal tissues more prone to damage. During pregnancy, minor bleeding during or after intercourse is common.  Talk with a doctor about any form of heavy or prolonged bleeding during early pregnancy. Seek immediate medical care for bleeding during the late pregnancy, as it can be a sign of preterm labor.  Minor postcoital bleeding can often not be prevented. However, the following actions tend to greatly reduce the severity and frequency of bleeding.  Prevention tips include:  In addition, a person can use herbal supplements that have been scientifically shown to help reduce vaginal dryness and GSM symptoms. Some of these supplements are available for purchase online, including  black cohosh ,  vitamin E ,  omega-3 , and oil of primrose.  It may also be beneficial to consume foods rich in plant estrogens or phytoestrogens.  Foods rich in phytoestrogens include:  Bleeding after sexual intercourse is a common occurrence, especially in people who are no longer menstruating or who have ovarian conditions.  In people who are menstruating, postcoital bleeding normally stops on its own. However, severe, chronic, or complicated cases require medical attention.  People who experience postcoital bleeding during periods of hormonal changes, such as  menopause , pregnancy, or breast-feeding, should also talk with a doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bleeding during pregnancy. (2016, July).  Bleeding during pregnancy. (2016, July).  Cervical ectropion (cervical erosion). (2015, May 21).  Shapley, M., Blagojevic‐Bucknall, M., Jordan, K. P., &amp; Croft, P. R. (2013, October). The epidemiology of self‐reported intermenstrual and postcoital bleeding in the perimenopausal years.  BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics &amp; Gynaecology ,  120 (11), 1348–1355.  Tarney, C. M., &amp; Han, J. (2014, June 17). Postcoital bleeding: A review on etiology, diagnosis, and management.  Obstetrics and Gynecology International ,  2014 .  Uterine fibroids. (2016, January 12).  Wan, Y. L., Edmondson, R. J., &amp; Crosbie, E. J. (2015, April 1). Intermenstrual and postcoital bleeding.  Obstetrics, Gynaecology and Reproductive Medicine ,  25 (4), 106–112.  What causes a woman to bleed after sex? (2015, May 12).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Is it normal to bleed after intercourse?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321032.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, February 26). "Is it normal to bleed after intercourse?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  