 Vomiting is classed as projectile if it is very sudden, and the vomit exits the body with some force. It may travel a few feet from the body.  This type of vomiting is often linked to the body trying to get rid of something harmful. This can range from a toxin, such as alcohol, to bacteria, for example, salmonella.  Projectile vomiting differs from regular vomiting in several ways:  The symptoms can include  headaches , aches in the body, or lack of hunger. A  study into projectile vomiting  found that droplets from the vomit can travel a long way.  As a result, the illnesses that cause projectile vomiting can be highly contagious.  Projectile vomiting in infants is most often due to a condition called pyloric stenosis. This condition affects a tube in the child's body that connects the small bowel and the stomach.  Pyloric stenosis makes it difficult for an infant to get enough  nutrition  and fluids. They can become dehydrated quickly, so it is important to seek medical attention urgently.  Symptoms usually begin with vomiting a small amount of milk after feeding. This will gradually worsen over a few days until the infant begins to projectile vomit.  An infant with pyloric stenosis will not pee or poop as often as usual because they are not digesting food normally. Dehydration may make them seem more sleepy than normal or lacking in energy.  A doctor can diagnose the condition by feeling a lump in an infant's belly. They will ask questions about feeding and may need to do an  ultrasound  scan.  Treatment for pyloric stenosis is almost always surgery. This will widen the passage between the stomach and small bowel so that food can pass through and be digested.  The operation is carried out under general anesthetic. Once the operation is done, the infant will be given pain relief and fed with slowly increasing amounts of milk. When they are feeding normally, they can go home.  Surgery for pyloric stenosis is considered low-risk. There should be no long-term side effects.  Pyloric stenosis is rare in adults. Projectile vomiting in adults is more likely to be caused by an illness, a toxin, or  food poisoning .  Vomit from projectile vomiting is likely to have the same appearance and texture as that produced by regular vomiting.  However, projectile vomiting will often happen without warning and leave the body with force.  Regular vomiting and projectile vomiting normally have the same causes in adults, although projectile vomiting can be a sign that an illness is more severe.  There are three key causes of projectile vomiting:  A person can get food poisoning if food is not prepared safely or has become infected by germs. Food can be contaminated with a virus, or a bacteria, such as salmonella, which is one cause of gastroenteritis.  Gastroenteritis can also be caused by a virus, such as  norovirus . Norovirus is highly contagious and most common in the winter months.   Chemotherapy  drugs, morphine, and alcohol are all classed as toxins, and they can all cause nausea and vomiting. In some cases, this may be projectile vomiting.  There is no specific medical treatment for gastroenteritis or food poisoning. A person should stay at home until they feel better. Treatments at home include:  Chewing on ice chips can help rehydrate and reduce any fever that may occur.  Gastroenteritis can pass from person-to-person easily. It is vital that someone with the illness washes their hands regularly to prevent the risk of it being spread. They should also try to avoid contact with people until 48 hours after symptoms have disappeared.  Other symptoms of food poisoning include belly pain, lack of energy, and fever.  Dehydration and malnutrition can happen when the body does not have enough fluids or food to keep working as normal.  In a small number of instances, projectile vomiting may cause a torn food pipe. The medical term for this is an esophageal laceration or Mallory-Weiss syndrome.  In these instances, the tear is usually caused by forceful or projectile vomiting.  One of the key symptoms of an esophageal laceration is blood in the vomit. In most cases, the bleeding is temporary and will stop without treatment.  If the bleeding continues or is severe, a doctor may need to do some tests. Treatment is usually with drugs or minor surgery to close a blood vessel.  Inhaling vomit can cause suffocation or choking. The acid in the vomit can also result in damage to the lungs if breathed in. A person who vomits while lying down should move onto their side to avoid this. Vomit should be cleaned up quickly and the mouth rinsed.  Vomiting caused by food poisoning or gastroenteritis should last less than 1 week. Projectile vomiting caused by a toxin should stop once it is out of the system. The body's way of getting rid of something harmful from the digestive system is often to vomit.  In infants, pyloric stenosis is usually resolved with surgery. The infant may vomit a small amount as their digestive system adjusts, but projectile vomiting should stop.  For both adults and children, projectile vomiting should have no long-term side effects. In some cases, the food pipe may be torn when vomiting. This is also resolved relatively easily and should not cause lasting damage.    
 Food poisoning. (2017, August 9).  Food poisoning. (2017, August 9).  Gastroenteritis. (2017, December 22).  Greenberger, N. J. (n.d.). Nausea and vomiting in adults.  Lynch, K. L. (n.d.). Esophageal laceration (Mallory-Weiss syndrome).  Makison Booth, C. (2014, August 6). Vomiting Larry: A simulated vomiting system for assessing environmental contamination from projectile vomiting related to norovirus infection [Abstract].  Journal of Infection Prevention ,  15 (5), 176–180.  Pyloric stenosis. (2015, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "What are the causes of projectile vomiting?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321034.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2018, February 26). "What are the causes of projectile vomiting?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  