 In this article, we look at how to identify a pinched nerve, what home remedies can help, and exercises for this condition.  Nerves transmit pain signals. This means that when something goes wrong with a nerve, the symptoms can be very uncomfortable.  A common problem is when a nerve becomes pressed or pinched by nearby tendons, ligaments, or bone.  When a pinched nerve occurs, the nerve signals become aggravated, emphasized, or interrupted by pressure, irritation, or rubbing. This is known medically as radiculopathy.  In the hip, a pinched nerve can cause a:  Usually, the pain or numbness will worsen when a person moves. The nerve gets further irritated and aggravated by the structure that is pinching it.  A pinched nerve can be caused by a minor incident, such as sleeping in an improper position, or a major event, such as an accident.  Some of the more common causes of a pinched nerve in the hip include:  Minor pinched nerves can usually be treated at home.  Useful home remedies for a pinched nerve in the hip include:  Certain stretches can be very beneficial for a person with a pinched nerve in their hip. Stretching the following muscle areas may be helpful:  The piriformis is a muscle in the buttock area. When it is too tight, it can aggravate a pinched nerve and worsen hip pain.  This muscle gets tight when a person spends too long sitting down. It can also become overly tense if a person fails to stretch before and after strenuous exercise, such as running.  A person can use these three exercises to stretch the piriformis:   Piriformis stretch      The bridge    Floor slides   The glutes or gluteal muscles are muscles in the buttock area. They are closely connected to many causes of hip pain. Any tension in these muscles can also aggravate lower  back pain .  Use the following exercises to stretch the glutes:   Sit and twist    Lying down crossover   Because all of the body's muscles work together, having good flexibility in all muscle groups can help avoid a pinched nerve and muscle-related pain.  Try these relaxing and invigorating moves to stretch the various muscles in the body:   Classic bend and stretch    The Sphinx   This  yoga  pose helps stretch the lower back and strengthens the abdominals, both of which are related to the hips.  As with any stretches, some are better for certain body types and fitness levels. The best way to adopt a full stretching program is with the help of a certified personal trainer, sports medicine physician, or physical therapist.  Anyone who experiences a hip pain that lasts more than a few days and does not get better with rest and over-the-counter pain medicines should consult a doctor.  Severely pinched nerves can lead to scarring in the affected area or permanent nerve damage if not treated. Also, other medical causes for the pain should be ruled out.  In more severe cases, a doctor may recommend specific treatments for a pinched nerve. They include:  A pinched nerve in the hip is rarely serious, but the painful symptoms can interfere with daily life.  Home remedies and exercises can usually solve the issue, but it is best to see a doctor if symptoms persist beyond a few days.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Cibulka, M. T., Bloom, N. J., Enseki, K. R., MacDonald, C. W., Woehrle, J., &amp; McDonough, C. M. (2017). Clinical practice guidelines linked to the international classification of functioning, disability and health from the orthopaedic section of the American Physical Therapy Association.  Journal of Orthopaedic &amp; Sports Physical Therapy ,  47 (6), A1–A37.  Cibulka, M. T., Bloom, N. J., Enseki, K. R., MacDonald, C. W., Woehrle, J., &amp; McDonough, C. M. (2017). Clinical practice guidelines linked to the international classification of functioning, disability and health from the orthopaedic section of the American Physical Therapy Association.  Journal of Orthopaedic &amp; Sports Physical Therapy ,  47 (6), A1–A37.  Chou, R., Deyo, R., Friedly, J., Skelly, A., Hashimoto, R., Weimer, M., ... Brodt, E. D. (2017, April 4). Nonpharmacologic therapies for low back pain: A systematic review for an American College of Physicians clinical practice guideline.  Annals of Internal Medicine ,  166 (7), 493–505.  Chye, C.-L., Liang, C.-L., Lu, K., Chen, Y.-W., &amp; Liliang, P.-C. (2015, March 16). Pulsed radiofrequency treatment of articular branches of femoral and obturator nerves for chronic hip pain.  Clinical Interventions in Aging ,  10 , 569–574.  Nelson, A., &amp; Kokkonen, J. (2013).  Stretching anatomy  (2nd ed.). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.  Qaseem, A., Wilt, T. J., McLean, R. M., &amp; Forciea, M. A. (2017, April 4). Noninvasive treatments for acute, subacute, and chronic low back pain: A clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians.  Annals of Internal Medicine ,  166 (7), 514–530.  Wilson, T. J., Kleiber, G. M., Nunley, R. M., Mackinnon, S. E., &amp; Spinner, R. J. (2018, February 2). Distal peroneal nerve decompression after sciatic nerve injury secondary to total hip arthroplasty.  Journal of Neurosurgery , 1–5.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "Exercises for a pinched nerve in your hip."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321098.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, March 2). "Exercises for a pinched nerve in your hip."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  