 In this article, we discuss the reasons why the stomach might get itchy and suggest treatments that can help to reduce the itchiness.  Most of the causes associated with stomach itching are not severe. However, they can still be concerning and uncomfortable for someone.  Examples of conditions that can cause stomach itching include:   Contact dermatitis   This condition occurs when the skin comes into contact with something that causes it to be irritated. Common irritants include:  The result can be very dry, itchy skin on the stomach and other areas that are exposed to the irritant.  A person may experience contact dermatitis from using new kinds of soaps on their skin, or even exposure to water that is too hot.   Eczema   While contact dermatitis is a type of  eczema , there are other forms of eczema that affect the stomach and cause the skin to itch.  Eczema results in dry, scaling skin that is often very itchy. Sometimes a person may even experience swelling, raised areas, or dark-colored skin patches.   Infection   Sometimes an infection caused by bacteria or organisms, including  scabies  or lice, can lead to an itchy stomach.  In these instances, a person usually experiences the itching sensation at night.   Bedbugs or fleas   Small, itchy red bumps on the stomach and other parts of the body can indicate that a person has bedbugs or fleas in their house.  If the bites appear in a zigzag pattern and occur at night, bedbugs are a possible reason.   Medication reaction   If a person has begun taking a new medication, they may start to experience stomach itching and a red rash.  This type of rash will often appear on the stomach and back first.  A person should call their doctor if they think they are experiencing a negative reaction to a new medication.   Psoriasis    Psoriasis  is an inflammatory condition that causes an immune system response. Most types of psoriasis cause areas of scaly skin, redness, and itching.  The condition most commonly appears around the knees, elbows, and scalp. However, psoriasis can occur anywhere on the body, including the stomach.  When the areas of skin rub together, they are more likely to become damp and irritated. Psoriasis on the stomach may be more likely when there are folds of skin that are in contact with each other.  An itching stomach is a common experience during pregnancy. There are several reasons for this, including:  ICP occurs when there is a buildup of bile in the body. This is a potentially serious condition, as it can increase the likelihood of stillbirth.  ICP affects around  1 in 140 pregnant women .  Symptoms  usually develop  after 30 weeks of pregnancy, but they may also occur as early as 8 weeks.  Other symptoms of ICP include:  If this condition is suspected, it is important to consult a doctor as soon as possible. A doctor may recommend inducing birth after 37 weeks of pregnancy or earlier to protect the baby.  While it is often tempting to scratch an itchy stomach, this is likely to make the itching worse.  The following treatments for relieving itchy skin are  recommended by  the American Academy of Dermatology:  Some people may find relief from itching by applying corticosteroids creams or taking oral corticosteroids. Oral antihistamines can also reduce scratching. However, these treatments are usually intended for short-term use only.  Some of the steps a person can take to prevent stomach itching include:  A person can also talk to their doctor about additional measures that may reduce their symptoms, depending on the cause of the itching.  If over-the-counter treatments do not work, or if the cause is not known, a person may wish to see a doctor or dermatologist.  Other signs that a person should see a doctor include:  If at any time a person starts having difficulty breathing in addition to their stomach itching, they should call 911 and seek emergency medical attention.  If a person's stomach itching interferes with their daily life and sleeping, they should always seek medical attention. Through over-the-counter and prescription treatments, a person can usually find relief from their symptoms.    
 Contact dermatitis. (n.d.).  Contact dermatitis. (n.d.).  How to relieve itchy skin. (n.d.).  Itching. (n.d.).  Itching and intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. (2016, July 25).  Itchy skin. (2017, July 4).  Itching without rash. (2015, May).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What causes an itchy stomach?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321052.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, February 27). "What causes an itchy stomach?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  