 As some men get older, the prostate gland can become enlarged, a condition known as benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH.  In this article, learn what foods to eat to ease the symptoms of BPH.  The prostate gland is controlled by powerful hormones known as the sex hormones, including  testosterone .  In the prostate gland, testosterone is converted to another hormone called dihydrotestosterone ( DHT ). High levels of DHT cause the cells in the prostate to enlarge.  Certain foods and beverages are known to have an impact on prostate health because of their effects on testosterone and other hormones.   Research  has found that a diet primarily consisting of meat or dairy products can increase the risk of prostate enlargement and  cancer . This is especially true if a person does not incorporate enough vegetables into their diet.  A diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and healthy fats is thought to protect the prostate.  Specific foods known to benefit the prostate include:  Also,  some studies  on plant extract therapies, such as an extract from a type of palm tree known as saw palmetto, have been shown to have a positive impact on the prostate size and urinary flow. More research is needed, however.  A healthful diet for an enlarged prostate is more than just eating good foods. It also means avoiding other types of foods that are not good for the prostate.  Some foods to avoid include:  Dietary changes can be quite effective in managing some of the symptoms of BPH, but other basic lifestyle changes can help as well.  Some strategies that may ease BPH symptoms include:  If these lifestyle changes are not effective, medication or surgery may be recommended by a doctor.  An enlarged prostate or BPH is fairly common. Over  14 million men  in the United States experienced BPH symptoms in 2010.  Symptoms of BPH include:  These symptoms occur when an enlarged prostate gland blocks the urethra, the tube that runs between the bladder and outside of the body. This blockage can make it difficult or even impossible to pass urine.  Treating BPH depends on the severity of the symptoms. Sometimes, only basic lifestyle changes are needed.  However, there are also medications or surgical procedures that can be effective in reducing the size of the prostate or the symptoms associated with BPH.  Treating BPH can range from making simple lifestyle and dietary changes at home to medication and surgery. Reducing red meat consumption and eating plenty of fruits and vegetables can help manage symptoms.  It is important to stay in communication with a doctor about symptoms, particularly if the doctor suggested a "watch and wait" approach.  If the suggested lifestyle changes are not effective in reducing the symptoms, more aggressive treatment may be needed.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Barnard, N. D. (n.d.). Nutrition and prostate health.  Barnard, N. D. (n.d.). Nutrition and prostate health.  Caffeine. (2017, July 17).  Five foods to protect your prostate. (n.d.).  Maserejian, N. N., Giovannucci, E. L., &amp; McKinlay, J. B. (2009, May). Dietary macronutrients, cholesterol, and sodium and lower urinary tract symptoms in men.  European Urology ,  55 (5), 1179–1189.  Onion and garlic may ease BPH symptoms. (2011, April 18).  Prostate enlargement (Benign prostatic hyperplasia). (2014, September).  Rose, S. (2011, May 25). Using food to fight prostate cancer.  Saidi, S., Stavridis, S., Stankov, O., Dohcev, S., &amp; Panov, S. (2017, September 1). Effects of Serenoa repens alcohol extract on benign prostate hyperplasia [Abstract].  Prilozi ,  38 (2), 123–129.  Zinc and prostate cancer. (2006, March).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "What foods are good for an enlarged prostate?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321079.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, February 28). "What foods are good for an enlarged prostate?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  