 The prostate is a small gland that surrounds a man's urethra, the tube that takes urine and semen out of the body. The prostate supplies nutrients to semen, performing an important role in reproduction.  Below, we discuss the causes and symptoms of acute prostatitis, as well as possible complications and home remedies.  When the prostate gland becomes inflamed, symptoms may be similar to those of an acute  urinary tract infection  or UTI. In fact, acute prostatitis is often caused by a type of bacteria that causes UTIs and  sexually transmitted infections .   Inflammation  can result from bacteria entering the prostate via the blood or an infection in the area. A medical procedure may also lead to bacteria entering the prostate.  Underlying causes of acute prostatitis are usually a blocked urethra or a suppressed immune system. In a small number of cases, acute prostatitis may become chronic.  Prostatitis is a common condition, with about 50 percent of all men likely to experience it in their lifetimes. Acute prostatitis, on the other hand, is quite rare. Despite this, it is usually easy to diagnose because of distinct characteristics.  Some of the most common symptoms of acute prostatitis resemble those of a UTI. They can include:  Acute prostatitis is usually treated with  antibiotics . These may need to be taken for 4 to 6 weeks or longer. The type of antibiotic prescribed will depend on the bacteria that is causing the infection.  A doctor may also prescribe medication designed to alleviate symptoms of acute prostatitis. Alpha-blockers may be used to relax the bladder muscles and reduce discomfort. In some cases, a doctor may recommend over-the-counter pain relievers, such as ibuprofen or acetaminophen.  A person with a severe case of acute prostatitis may require hospitalization. For example, hospitalization is necessary when the swollen prostrate blocks the urethra. In the hospital, strong doses of antibiotics will be intravenously administered.  In addition to seeking medical intervention, a person may try to alleviate symptoms with home remedies. These can be used in conjunction with medical treatment.  Home remedies for acute prostatitis include:  While results have not been scientifically confirmed, some men may wish to try alternative therapies. Some alternative therapies that may alleviate symptoms include:  There are a variety of lifestyle changes that may reduce the risks of developing chronic or recurring prostatitis. These include:  Acute prostatitis may cause a blockage of the urethra. When this occurs, a person will experience pain and discomfort in the bladder. If left untreated, a blocked bladder can lead to permanent kidney damage.  Other complications may include:  Most cases of acute prostatitis will clear up with antibiotic treatment. Some severe cases of infection may require a hospital stay.  There is the chance that acute prostatitis can become chronic. Symptoms of chronic prostatitis may be reduced with diet and lifestyle changes.  Consult a doctor about the best treatment options available, and for advice about lifestyle changes that may help to reduce the risk of developing chronic prostatitis.    
 Conditions of the prostate: Prostatitis. (n.d.).  Conditions of the prostate: Prostatitis. (n.d.).  Krieger, J. N., Lee, S. W., Jeon, J., Cheah, P. Y., Liong, M. L., &amp; Riley, D. E. (2008, February). Epidemiology of prostatitis.  International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents ,  31 (Suppl 1), S85–S90.  Nickel, J. C. (2006). Alpha-blockers for the treatment of prostatitis-like syndromes.  Reviews in Urology ,  8 (Suppl 4), S26–S34.  Prostate problems. (2016, March).  Prostatitis: Inflammation of the prostate. (2014, July).  Sharp, V. J., Takacs, E. B., &amp; Powell, C. R. (2010, August 15). Prostatitis: Diagnosis and treatment.  American Family Physician ,  82 (4), 397–406.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is acute prostatitis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321027.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, February 24). "What is acute prostatitis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  