 This article looks at five of the most common causes of pain in the back of the head:  We also take a look at their symptoms, possible treatments, and prevention methods.  Tension or tension-type headaches (TTH) are the  most common cause  of pain in the back of the head. They can last for up to 7 days, but they can also be brief, lasting for as little as 30 minutes.  The  symptoms  of a TTH are:  Taking pain relief such as  aspirin  or acetaminophen is usually enough when tension headaches are infrequent.  When they occur more frequently,  alternative treatments  may help to reduce how often and how long they occur for.  Treatment options include:  The cause of TTH is  not currently known , but several factors are potential triggers. These include:  Migraines are a  common type  of recurring headache that often start during childhood and increase in frequency with age.  In adulthood, they can occur several times a week, especially in females between the ages of 35 and 45 years.   Common symptoms  include:  An "aura" might precede a migraine, in which the person experiences flashing lights or other visual disturbances.  A variety of factors that are specific to each person might trigger migraines.  These factors may be emotional, physical, environmental, dietary, or relate to medication and include:  Inflammatory substances that trigger pain sensors in the blood vessels and nerves of the head  might cause migraines .  The treatment of migraines should involve analgesics, such as aspirin or acetaminophen, and resting in a darkened room.  If normal analgesics do not work, then a doctor might prescribe antimigraine drugs known as triptans. These drugs cause blood vessels to shrink and contract, which reverses the changes in the brain that cause migraines.  The sooner a person receives treatment for a migraine attack, the more effective that treatment will be.  People can take certain steps to reduce the risk of having a migraine. These steps include:  Medication-overuse headaches (MOH) may develop if a person uses too much pain relief medication for other types of headaches. MOH headaches are also known as rebound headaches.  Occasional use of pain relief does not cause any problems. However, when a person take pain relief medication headaches more than  two or three times a week  over an extended period, a MOH or rebound headache can occur.  The  main symptoms  include:  Other problems associated with MOH are:  The best treatment for MOH is often to stop taking pain relief medication entirely. Headaches will become worse at first but will quickly resolve. A person can then continue taking their normal or preferred pain relief medication.  In  more severe cases , people should see a doctor. An individual may need physical or behavioral therapy to break the cycle of using pain relief.  For certain medications, such as opioids, a doctor will need to recommend a gradual reduction in dosage, as instantly stopping some medications is dangerous.  To prevent MOH, avoid using pain relief medication for headaches  more than a couple of times per week . If headaches requiring pain medication are persistent and frequent, seek advice from a doctor.  Occipital neuralgia (ON) is a distinctive headache that  tends to begin  at the base of the neck and spreads up to the back of the head, then behind the ears.  It may relate to damage or irritation of the occipital nerves, which run up the back of the neck to the base of the scalp.  Underlying diseases, neck tension, or other unknown factors might cause the damage or irritation.  The pain in occipital neuralgia can be severe. Other symptoms include:   Due to the similarity  of the symptoms, a person or medical professional might mistake ON for a migraine or another type of headache. A  distinguishing feature of  ON is pain after applying pressure to the back of the neck and scalp.  Sometimes, a doctor may diagnose ON by injecting local anesthetic close to the occipital nerves, providing a temporary nerve block. If pain decreases, then a doctor will likely diagnose ON.  As ON can be a symptom of other disorders, the doctor may also check for other underlying conditions.   Possible causes  include:  Applying heat packs, resting, massage, physical therapy, and taking anti-inflammatory medications, such as aspirin or naproxen, can help reduce pain levels. Various types of heat packs are  available online .  If pain is severe, a person with ON may need to take oral muscle relaxants or nerve blocking medications. For extreme pain, local anesthetic or steroid injections are used.  On rare occasions, surgery may be necessary to reduce pressure on the nerves or block pain messages to this part of the body.  Exercise-induced headaches occur as the result of strenuous physical activity. They  start suddenly  during or immediately after exercise, rapidly becoming severe.  A wide range of exercises might trigger this pain, from weight lifting or running to  sexual intercourse  and straining on the toilet.  Symptoms include a pulsating pain on both sides of head, which can last from  5 minutes to 2 days . These headaches are usually isolated events and may also produce migraine-like symptoms.  The cause of these headaches is unknown. They typically only occur for  3 to 6 months . Methods for preventing them recurring include:  Treatment consists of using normal headache pain relief medication, such as aspirin or acetaminophen.  A person with a severe headache is not alone. Around  50 percent of adults  worldwide have at least one severe headache every year. They can be painful and debilitating when they occur.  Headaches are extremely common, and many are just a pain in the head that goes away without treatment. Some may, however, have more serious causes.  Anyone who is worried about pain in the back of their head should always seek medical advice from a doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.   Article last updated on Fri 16 November 2018.  Visit our  Headache / Migraine  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Headache / Migraine.   
 Atlas of headache disorders and resources in the world 2011. (2011).  Atlas of headache disorders and resources in the world 2011. (2011).  Benz, T., Nüssle, A., Lehmann, S., Gantenbein, A. R., Sándor, P. S., Elfering, A., … Angst, F. (2017, November 27). Health and quality of life in patients with medication overuse headache syndrome after standardized inpatient rehabilitation. Medicine ,  96 (47).  Burstein, R., Noseda, R., &amp; Borsook, D. (2015, April 29). Migraine: Multiple processes, complex pathophysiology.   Journal of Neuroscience ,  35 (17), 6619–6629.  Derry, S., Wiffen, P. J., &amp; Moore, R. A. (2017, January 13). Aspirin for acute treatment of episodic tension-type headache in adults.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .  Headache disorders [Fact sheet]. (2016, April).  Headaches. (n.d.).  Migraine. (2016, May 26).  Migraine information page. (2017, May 25).  Occipital neuralgia. (n.d.).  Occipital neuralgia. (n.d.).  Occipital neuralgia. (2016, July 26).  Occipital neuralgia information page. (2017, May 24).  Other primary headache disorders. (n.d.).  Painkiller headaches. (2015, June 2).  Patchell, R. A. (n.d.). Brain tumors.  Primary exercise headache. (n.d.).  Primary exercise headache. (2017, March 3).  Primary headache associated with sexual activity (orgasmic and pre-orgasmic headache). (2016, July 10).  Probyn, K., Bowers, H., Mistry, D., Caldwell, F., Underwood, M., Patel, S., … Pincus, T. (2017, June 21). Non-pharmacological self-management for people living with migraine or tension-type headache: A systematic review including analysis of intervention components.  BMJ Open ,  7 .  Tension-type headaches. (2015, July 8).  Wilson, M.-C., &amp; Jiminez-Sanders, R. (2016, July 9). Medication overuse headache.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Aitken, Chris. "What is this pain in the back of my head?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Nov. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321017.php&gt;    APA  Aitken, C. (2018, November 16). "What is this pain in the back of my head?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  