  Boils  are otherwise known as furuncles, and are usually caused by a bacteria called  Staphylococcus aureus  ( S. aureus ).  In this article, we look at the common causes of boils on the buttocks, and how to identify a boil. We also discuss treatment, home remedies, and when to see a doctor.  Boils are often caused by the bacteria  S. aureus . This is commonly called a staph infection.  All humans have this bacteria living on their skin, where it is usually harmless. When a person develops boils on their buttocks or elsewhere, it is often due to bacteria under the skin.  Rapidly growing, severe, or recurrent boils may be caused by the bacteria  MRSA , or methicillin resistant  S. aureus . This is a specific type of  S. aureus  that is able to survive certain types of medication.  MRSA is immune to most types of  antibiotics , so it remains on the skin and can be difficult to treat.  MRSA skin infections can lead to more serious complications, including life-threatening deep tissue infections and complicated  pneumonia .  Other types of bacteria can also cause a boil if they get into a hair follicle or oil gland.  Several factors can make a person more susceptible to boils, including:  Other medical conditions or lifestyle factors that make people more likely to get boils include:  Depending on the size, exact location on the buttocks, and other health concerns, warm compresses and close observation may be the first line of treatment.  In cases where the boil is getting larger, a procedure called incision and drainage is typically recommended. In many cases, this will allow the boil to heal without the need for antibiotics.  However, if infection is severe, rapidly growing, or spreading into the surrounding tissue, antibiotics may also be necessary.  It can be very difficult to remove MRSA from the body. Because of this, other members of the household may also undergo treatment to decrease the presence of the bacteria.  This is especially important if multiple family members are experiencing ongoing skin infections.  The American Academy of Dermatology  recommends  the following home remedy for any type of boil:  Boils caused by MRSA may need more extensive or additional treatment.  People should also avoid picking, poking, squeezing, or trying to lance the boil at home, as this can cause it to become more inflamed and worsen the infection.  Some strategies for managing MRSA infections at home include:  Boils commonly appear on the buttocks, but can also occur on the face, neck, armpits, shoulders, or eyelids. When several boils occur together in a group, it is known as a carbuncle.  A boil on the buttocks is a raised lump that may be:  Boils will usually begin by resembling a small, firm bump around the size of a pea.  They may then grow in size and become softer, often with a yellow or white tip that leaks pus or clear liquid. A boil can grow to the size of a golf ball or even larger.  Diagnosing a boil on the buttocks is usually simple, as a healthcare professional may be able to identify it with only a visual examination. If it is draining, a sample can be collected to test for the presence of bacteria, particularly MRSA.  A doctor may also take urine and blood samples to test for underlying diabetes, systemic infection, or another health condition.  Nasal swabs may also be taken from the individual or close family members to see if they are carriers for the MRSA bacteria.  The bacteria from boils is contagious, so steps should be taken to reduce the risk of them recurring or spreading.  Tips for prevention include:  Decolonization may be recommended for households with recurrent MRSA infections to help prevent future infections. This goal of this process is to reduce the amount of MRSA bacteria carried on the skin.  Doctors  may prescribe  a five-day treatment plan with an antibiotic ointment (mupirocin) in the nose and a medicated soap (chlohexadine).  If a boil on the buttocks does not improve with warm compresses after a few days, it may be helpful to consult a doctor.  A person should see their doctor sooner if the boil becomes more swollen or painful, if the redness spreads, or if a  fever  develops.  In some cases, boils can lead to a deeper infection known as an abscess. This will also need to be drained and may require other treatments done by a specialist.  For individuals with immune system problems, these infections can be particularly serious.  In most cases, small boils on the buttocks will heal on their own within  1 to 2 weeks . Home remedies may help speed up the recovery process.  Boils that are getting larger, not healing on their own, causing other symptoms, or are recurrent may require drainage or more extensive treatment.  Recurrence is one of the most common complications associated with boils on the buttocks.  They rarely lead to systemic infections or a fever unless they are related to another underlying condition. Boils caused by MRSA are more likely to cause serious complications.  Boils that are not caused by MRSA rarely have any long-term effects, but may cause scarring.    
 Creech, C. B., Al-Zubeidi, D. N., &amp; Fritz, S. A. (2015, September). Prevention of recurrent staphylococcal skin infections.  Infectious Disease Clinics of North America ,  29 (3), 429–464.  Creech, C. B., Al-Zubeidi, D. N., &amp; Fritz, S. A. (2015, September). Prevention of recurrent staphylococcal skin infections.  Infectious Disease Clinics of North America ,  29 (3), 429–464.  How to treat boils and styes. (n.d.).  Ibler, K. S., &amp; Kromann, C. B. (2014, February 18). Recurrent furunculosis — challenges and management: A review.  Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology ,  7 , 59–64.  Methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA). (2016, January 28).  Recurrent boils. (2012, July).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "How to get rid of boils on the buttocks."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321051.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2018, February 27). "How to get rid of boils on the buttocks."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  