 Most types of  pimples  form when dead skin cells, oils, or bacteria block a pore. Hard pimples, such as nodules or  cysts , are often deeper and more inflamed.  In this article, we talk about how to treat and prevent hard pimples. We also look at different types of pimples and their causes.  Hard pimples can be more difficult to remove than other kinds, as they tend to be larger and deeper. They are often blind pimples, which means they do not have a head.  Depending on the severity of a pimple, a person may be able to treat it at home; sometimes a pimple requires medical treatment.  To treat a hard pimple at home, a person can use the following methods:  Some studies suggest that there  may be a link  between gastrointestinal (GI) health, acne, and  depression  or  anxiety . The researchers suggest that taking probiotics may help.  Popping pimples at home should be avoided, especially when they are hard, deep pimples. Attempts to do this can:  If a hard pimple is causing distress, a doctor can remove it safely and effectively. They may be able to drain it, or for deeper pimples, they may use a corticosteroid injection.  Acne is typically caused by the skin producing excess oils and is not directly caused by poor hygiene.  However, keeping the skin and hair clean can reduce outbreaks and prevent all kinds of pimples from developing.  Many different elements influence the development and growth of a hard pimple, including:  For individuals who already have pimples, the following can make outbreaks worse:  Types of pimples include:  Pimples and acne are a common experience, with an estimated  80 percent  of people aged 11 to 30 having an outbreak at some point.  In general, the outlook for individuals dealing with a hard pimple is good. The kind of pimples most people get tend to develop and disappear reasonably quickly.   Blackheads  or whiteheads are typically considered to be mild acne. Nodules, papules, and pustules are regarded as moderate acne. Severe acne is when a person has tender, red nodules, which can be painful.  In more severe cases, scarring is possible. Scars can be flat and barely noticeable, or, if the connective tissue was damaged, create pockmarks, or indentations.  If at-home treatment has not worked within  4 to 8 weeks , the American Academy of Dermatology recommends visiting a dermatologist to find out the best course of treatment.    
 Acne. (2016, September 1).  Acne. (2016, September 1).  Acne. (n.d.).  Acne. (n.d.).  Acne: Tips for managing. (n.d.).  Acne: An overview. (2016, July 28).  Bowe, W. P., Patel, N.B., &amp; Logan, N.C. (2014). Acne vulgaris, probiotics and the gut-brain-skin axis: From anecdote to translational medicine.  Beneficial Microbes ,  5 (2), 185–199.  Decker, A. &amp; Graber, E. M. (2012, May). Over-the-counter acne treatments.  Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology ,  5 (5), 32–40.  Different kinds of pimples. (n.d.).  Dermatologists advise patients that over-the-counter acne produces can have benefits and a pace on their medicine shelf. (2014, February 3).  Enshaieh, S., Jooya, A., Siadat, A. H., &amp; Iraji, F. (2007, January–February). The efficacy of 5% topical tea tree oil gel in mild to moderate acne vulgaris: A randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled study.  Indian Journal of Dermatology, Venereology, and Leprology ,  73 (1), 22–25.  Howard, D. (n.d.). What is acne?  Patton, E. E. (2016). Nutritional factors associated with acne vulgaris (unpublished master's thesis). Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.  Pimple popping: Why only a dermatologist should do it. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "How to get rid of a hard pimple."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321011.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, February 23). "How to get rid of a hard pimple."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  