 An electrocardiogram or ECG that displays each heartbeat as a waveform is used to determine if an NSTEMI or a STEMI has occurred in a person. When looking at the waveforms of a person who has had an NSTEMI, they appear very distinct from those of someone who has had a STEMI.  The damage to the heart from an NSTEMI is less serious than that from a STEMI. However, any  heart attack  can be very frightening.  Treatment for an NSTEMI depends on how blocked the coronary artery is, as well as the severity of the heart attack itself.  To determine this, a person will be given a GRACE score, which will decide if they are low, medium, or high risk.  To find a person's GRACE score, a doctor will look at factors that include:  If the GRACE score indicates a person is a low risk after an NSTEMI, a doctor may prescribe medication.  Drugs that are commonly given include:  For those that are considered medium to high risk, a percutaneous coronary intervention or PCI, or a coronary artery bypass graft or CABG may be performed.  There are ways to reduce the chances of having an NSTEMI and improving overall heart health.  Steps people can take to reduce their risk of an NSTEMI include:  If a person has  diabetes , high  cholesterol , or  high blood pressure , it is essential to manage these conditions well. Not doing so could increase the risk of a heart attack.  If a person is deemed to be at risk of having a heart attack, it is advisable for them to take precautions so that they are prepared.  They should ensure emergency contact numbers, a list of current medications and any allergens are to hand whenever they are heading out or going away, in case a heart attack occurs.  Symptoms of an NSTEMI are important to recognize. A person should call 911 immediately if they experience any of them.  The following are symptoms of an NSTEMI:  If an NSTEMI has occurred, a blood test will show higher than normal levels of creatinine kinase-myocardial band (CK-MB), troponin I, and troponin T.  If found, these indicate that damage to the heart cells has happened, though this will be less severe than in the case of a STEMI.  While blood tests are a good indication of whether a heart attack has occurred, an ECG must still be carried out. This will show the patterns of ST segments, which can then be measured and analyzed. ST segments show the area of damage that has been done to the heart.  An ECG in the case of an NSTEMI will show:  If a person has had a STEMI, the ECG will show:  A blockage of blood supply to the heart muscle can result in damage to the heart tissue.  Unstable  angina , also known as UA, and NSTEMI are difficult to tell apart initially.  UA is a heart condition where the heart does not get adequate blood or oxygen, which can result in a heart attack. It differs from stable angina, which can occur more frequently and without exertion. UA may also be more severe with more significant damage being done.  Symptoms of unstable angina can feel similar to NSTEMI and may include:  The likelihood of a person having an NSTEMI or any type of heart attack is substantially increased if:  Heart attacks are often frightening and are considered serious. This applies to an NSTEMI even though it is considered a less severe type of heart attack than a STEMI. Medication and, in some cases, surgery, may be required to treat an NSTEMI.  By paying attention to lifestyle factors, such as diet and exercise, as well as carefully managing any conditions that might increase the risk of an NSTEMI, a person can significantly lower their chances of one occurring.    
 Acute coronary syndrome. (2017, April 26).  Acute coronary syndrome. (2017, April 26).  American Heart Association recommendations for physical activity in adults. (2014, December 14).  Angina. (n.d.).  Coronary artery disease - Unstable angina/Non-STEMI topic review. (n.d.).  Heart attack. (2016, November 10).  Smith, J. N., Negrelli, J. M., Manek, M. B., Hawes, E. M., &amp; Viera, A. J. (2015, March–April). Diagnosis and management of acute coronary syndrome: An evidence-based update [Abstract].  Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine ,  28 (2), 283-293.  Simons, M. (2017, March 21). Classification of unstable angina and non-ST elevation myocardial infarction.  The GRACE risk score: Assessing heart attack risk and guiding treatment. (2016, March 30).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What is an NSTEMI?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321059.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, February 27). "What is an NSTEMI?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  