 Some people believe that a person is either left-brained or right-brained and that this determines the way they think and behave.  In this article, we explore the truth and fallacy behind this claim. Read on to learn more about the functions and characteristics of the left and right brain.  The brain is a complex and hardworking organ. It is made up of as many as  100 billion neurons  or brain cells but only weighs 3 pounds.  It is an energy-intensive organ, making up around  2 percent  of a person's weight but using a huge  20 percent  of the body's energy.  The left and right sides of the brain are connected by a great number of nerve fibers. In a healthy brain, the two sides communicate with one another.  The two sides do not necessarily have to communicate, though. If a person has an injury that separates the two brain hemispheres, they are still able to function relatively normally.  According to the left brain vs. right brain belief, everyone has one side of their brain that is dominant and determines their personality, thoughts, and behavior.  Because people can be left-handed or right-handed, the idea that people can be left-brained and right-brained is tempting.  Left-brained people are said to be more:  Right-brained people are said to be more:  Recent research suggests that the left brain vs. right brain theory is not correct.  A  2013 study  looked at 3-D pictures of over 1,000 people's brains. They measured the activity of the left and right hemispheres, using an  MRI  scanner.  Their results show that a person uses both hemispheres of their brain and that there does not seem to be a dominant side.  However, a person's brain activity does differ, depending on what task they are doing.  For example,  a study  in  PLoS Biology  says that the language centers in the brain are in the left hemisphere, while the right hemisphere is specialized for emotion and nonverbal communication.  Contributions towards this 'brain lateralization' research won Roger W. Sperry the Nobel Prize in 1960. However, popular cultural exaggeration of these findings led to the development of beliefs of left brain and right brain personalities.  Although people do not fall neatly into the categories of left-brained or right-brained, there are some differences in what the left and right hemispheres do.  Differences in the left and right brain hemisphere function exist in:   Emotion   This is the domain of the right brain, in both humans and  also in non-human primates . Emotions are expressed and recognized in others by the right brain.   Language   The left brain is  more active  in speech production than the right. In most people, the two main language areas, known as Broca's area and Wernicke's area, are found in the left hemisphere.   Sign language   Visually based languages are also the domain of the left brain. People who are deaf  show speech-like brain activity  when watching sign language.   Handedness   Left- and right-handed people use the left and right brain differently. For example, a left-handed person uses their right brain for manual tasks and vice versa.  Handedness is inbuilt, and it can even be detected  while the baby is in the womb . Some babies prefer to suck their left or right thumb from as early as 15 weeks.   Attention   The two brain hemispheres  also differ  in what they pay attention to.  The left side of the brain is more involved with attention to the internal world. The right side is more interested in attending to the external world.   Recent brain imaging studies  have shown no differences between males and females in terms of their brain lateralization.  The side of the brain used in each activity is not the same for every person. The side of the brain that gets used for certain activities may be influenced by whether a person is left- or right-handed.  A  2014 study  notes that up to 99 percent of right-handed individuals have the language centers in the left of the brain. But so do about 70 percent of left-handed individuals.  Hemispheric dominance varies from person to person and with different activities. More research is needed for science to fully understand all of the factors that affect this.  The theory that a person is either left-brained or right-brained is not supported by scientific research.  Some people may find the theory does align with their aptitudes. However, they should not rely on it as a scientifically accurate way to understand the brain.  The left brain vs. right brain personality belief may have lasted for so long because, in reality, brain activity is not symmetrical, and it does vary from person to person.    
 Corballis, M. C. (2014, January 21). Left brain, right brain: Facts and fantasies.  PLoS Biology ,  12 (1), e1001767.  Corballis, M. C. (2014, January 21). Left brain, right brain: Facts and fantasies.  PLoS Biology ,  12 (1), e1001767.  Herculano-Houzel, S. (2009, November 9). The human brain in numbers: A linearly scaled-up primate brain.  Frontiers in Human Neuroscience ,  3 (31), 1–11.  Hickok, G., &amp; Poeppel, D. (2007, May). The cortical organization of speech processing.  Natural Reviews Neurosciences ,  8 (5), 393–402.  Lindell, A. K. (2013, August 8). Continuities in emotion lateralization in human and non-human primates.  Frontiers in Human Neuroscience ,  7 , 464.  Nielsen, J. A., Zielinski, B. A., Ferguson, M. A., Lainhart, J. E., &amp; Anderson, J. S. (2013, August 14). An evaluation of the left-brain vs. right-brain hypothesis with resting state functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging.  PLoS ONE ,  8 (8), e71275.  Petitto, L. A., Zatorre, R. J., Gauna, K., Nikelski, E. J., Dostie, D., &amp; Evans, A. C. (2000, December 5). Speech-like cerebral activity in profoundly deaf people processing signed languages: Implications for the neural basis of human language.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,  97 (25), 13961–13966.  Raichle, M. E., &amp; Gusnard, D. A. (2002, August 6). Appraising the brain's energy budget.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,  99 (16), 10237–10239.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Left brain vs. right brain: Fact and fiction."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321037.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, February 26). "Left brain vs. right brain: Fact and fiction."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  