 Though once used as a catchall for a wide range of mental illnesses, the medical community no longer uses the term "nervous breakdown" to describe any specific medical condition.  Nonetheless, a so-called nervous breakdown remains a sign of a recognized, underlying  mental health  condition, such as  depression ,  anxiety , or  post-traumatic stress disorder  or PTSD.  So, the signs and symptoms of what some people may still call a nervous breakdown depend on the underlying medical condition.  Since it is not associated with any specific medical condition, a nervous or mental breakdown does not have any defined symptoms aside from difficulty or inability to function "normally."  What it takes for a person to be considered "fully functioning" differs between cultures, regions, and even families.  However, 16 common signs and symptoms of a nervous or mental breakdown are:  In extreme or untreated cases, especially when related to mental health conditions associated with  psychosis , symptoms may also include hallucinations, paranoia, delusions, and lack of insight.  There are a few things that may help reduce symptoms of emotional and physical  stress . Additionally, most of the treatment options for a nervous breakdown also help prevent the condition.  Common treatment and prevention strategies for a nervous breakdown include:  Anything that causes more emotional and physical stress than the body can handle can lead to a nervous breakdown or trigger an underlying medical condition.  But there are certain situations, genetic factors, and experiences that are more commonly associated with nervous or mental breakdowns than others.  Causes and risk factors for nervous breakdowns include:  It is no longer a recognized medical term, so, technically, there is no way to diagnose a nervous breakdown.  A doctor or, more commonly, a mental health professional, will try to identify contributing factors or medical conditions that may be causing the so-called nervous breakdown. They will do this by asking questions about symptoms, performing a physical exam, and reviewing an individual's medical history.  It is a good idea to talk with a doctor anytime physical or emotional stress interferes with day-to-day life, routines, or activities.  But, often people experiencing so-called nervous breakdown are not able to recognize the extent of their symptoms or that they may need help.  Unfortunately, many people are reluctant to seek outside help for mental conditions out of fear that they will be judged. They may also think that what is happening to them is somehow their fault, or that there are no treatment options available.  If a loved one, friend, or roommate is showing several of the signs of a nervous breakdown, they should be encouraged to seek medical help or be given support to do so.  Medical conditions that can cause symptoms commonly associated with so-called nervous breakdowns include:  Though not an official term, a nervous breakdown is often loosely used to describe conditions that involve many temporarily disabling mental and physical symptoms, especially when the cause is unknown.  Most people experience periods of extreme sadness, anxiety, and hopelessness from time to time, especially after very stressful events.  But when someone becomes unable to perform day-to-day tasks, withdraws from society, or begins to consider harming themselves, they need to have medical help.  Management medications and therapies exist to help treat most of the medical conditions associated with nervous breakdowns.    
 Acute stress disorder. (2018, January 9).  Acute stress disorder. (2018, January 9).  Chirico, F. (2015, October 11). Adjustment disorders in DSM-5: Implications for occupational health surveillance.  Acta Psychopathologica ,  1 (2), 14–17.  Clinical depression. (2016, October 5).  Post-traumatic stress disorder. (2016, February).  Shorter, E. (2013, September 15). Bring back the nervous breakdown!  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What are the signs of a nervous breakdown?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321018.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, February 24). "What are the signs of a nervous breakdown?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  