 Although  estrogen  is primarily associated with female development during  puberty  and the reproductive cycle, it affects everything from bone health to emotional well-being.  Low estrogen levels can develop in women of all ages for several reasons.  Levels of estrogen vary for many reasons. Any condition that affects or damages the ovaries can cause a decrease in estrogen levels in the body.  The most significant risk factor for having low estrogen is age. As women age and approach  menopause , it is normal for estrogen levels to drop.  In fact, estrogen levels start to lower several years before menopause occurs (a phase called perimenopause).  Estrogen levels can also decline for several other reasons including:  Having a family history of hormonal problems can also increase a woman's risk of developing low estrogen.  Estrogen is an essential hormone so the effects can be quite wide-ranging.  Symptoms of low estrogen may include the following:  Hormones including estrogen can play a role in weight management and how much fat the body stores. Low estrogen levels, such as during perimenopause and menopause, may contribute to weight gain.  The areas where women store fat may also change during menopause. Typically, women store fat in their hips and thighs. But that changes as estrogen levels drop. According to the   Journal of Climacteric  , the decrease in estrogen at midlife is associated with an increase in abdominal fat.  Although weight gain due to low estrogen levels is typical, it does not have to be inevitable. Eating a healthful diet and getting regular exercise can help women reduce their chances of weight gain.  A diagnosis of low estrogen often starts with a physical exam, medical history, and a review of symptoms. Telltale indicators of low estrogen include hot flashes and missed periods. But some of these symptoms can also occur as a result of other conditions, including thyroid problems.  To determine the cause of low estrogen, a doctor may do a blood test to check hormone levels. The doctor may also recommend additional tests to rule out other conditions that might be causing symptoms similar to low estrogen.  Not all women require treatment for low estrogen. But if low estrogen symptoms are bothersome, treatment may be recommended. Treatment is individualized based on the cause of low estrogen and the symptoms present.  Typically, doctors prescribe  hormone replacement therapy  (HRT) for low estrogen levels.  Different types of HRT are available. Sometimes, doctors suggest a combination hormone therapy that contains estrogen and  progesterone .  The combination of hormones may be effective in balancing estrogen levels in some women experiencing symptoms.  Doctors tend to prescribe combination HRT for women who are approaching menopause or are experiencing post-menopausal symptoms. Side effects from HRT may include bloating,  headaches , and vaginal bleeding.  Women can take HRT orally, topically, vaginally, or have pellets inserted under the skin. In some instances, women may have an injection. The dose given varies according to the individual. Usually, doctors prescribe the lowest dose that relieves symptoms.  Not all women can use HRT. For example, HRT may not be suitable for women who have had a history of a  stroke ,  heart attack , or  high blood pressure . It is essential that any woman who is considering HRT speaks to her doctor about the risks versus the benefits.  Sometimes, doctors prescribe just estrogen to treat some women with estrogen deficiency; for example, women who have had their ovaries removed. Sometimes, a doctor will prescribe estrogen therapy to treat bothersome symptoms at menopause.  There does not appear to be many scientifically proven methods for increasing estrogen levels using natural remedies. However, a few lifestyle and diet changes may help.  Because being extremely underweight can cause reduced estrogen levels, maintaining a healthy weight may help.  Extreme amounts of exercise can also cause a decline in estrogen production; so cutting back on exercise may help increase estrogen levels.  Some studies have been conducted on the benefits of soy for treating low estrogen symptoms. There is conflicting research on the benefits of soy for increasing estrogen levels. However, this small  study  indicated that soy isoflavones might reduce menopausal symptoms caused by declining estrogen levels.  Increasing soy may not be appropriate for all women. Before adding more soy or taking a soy supplement, a woman should talk with her doctor.  Soy supplements are available for  purchase online .  Low estrogen levels can cause a variety of health issues and affect a woman's overall well-being. Any woman who experiences symptoms of low estrogen should talk with her doctor.  In many instances, treatments for low estrogen symptoms work well. Although outlooks vary depending on the cause, HRT is often helpful.  It is also important to remember that the length of time a woman needs to take HRT will vary according to her situation.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Davis, S. R., Castelo-Branco, C., Chedraui, P., Lumsden, M. A., Nappi, R. E., Shah, D., &amp; Writing Group of the International Menopause Society for World Menopause Day 2012. (2012, September 15). Understanding weight gain at menopause.  Climacteric ,  15 (5), 419–429.  Davis, S. R., Castelo-Branco, C., Chedraui, P., Lumsden, M. A., Nappi, R. E., Shah, D., &amp; Writing Group of the International Menopause Society for World Menopause Day 2012. (2012, September 15). Understanding weight gain at menopause.  Climacteric ,  15 (5), 419–429.  Facts about menopausal hormone therapy. (2005, June).  Han, K. K., Soares Jr, J. M., Haidar, M. A., de Lima, G. R., &amp; Baracat, E. C. (2002, March). Benefits of soy isoflavone therapeutic regimen on menopausal symptoms. [Abstract].  Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  99 (3), 389–394.  Hormones and healthy bones. (n.d.)  Feintuch, S., Could you have low estrogen? (n.d)  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  de Pietro, MaryAnn. "What happens when estrogen levels are low?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321064.php&gt;    APA  de Pietro, M. (2018, February 27). "What happens when estrogen levels are low?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  