 Sinuses are spaces in the bones of the face. There are four pairs across the cheeks, bridge of the nose, and above the eyes. Scientists are not entirely sure what role the sinuses play in the body. It is possible that they make the skull lighter, prevent heat from escaping the head, or help make the voice louder.  Treatment for a sinus  headache  depends on the underlying cause. A mild sinus headache can often be treated at home.  The sinuses are lined with a membrane similar to the lining of the nose. If a person has an infection or allergy, this membrane can swell up and cause a sinus headache.  A person may feel this pain in their cheeks, the bridge of their nose, and in the area above the nose.  Sometimes, these areas might look swollen. A sinus headache might affect one or both sides of the face.  Sinus headaches are usually caused by an infection, such as  sinusitis . A person who develops sinusitis is likely to have other symptoms, including:  Some people find that the pain feels worse after coughing, leaning over, or bending down.  If a sinus headache is not causing too much pain, a person may be able to manage it at home. A person should rest, drink plenty of fluids, and take painkillers.  However, anyone experiencing severe pain from a sinus headache should see a doctor. A person may also need to seek medical advice if:  For a sinus headache caused by sinusitis, a doctor may prescribe decongestants or  antibiotics .  A sinus headache caused by an allergy will usually be treated with a nasal spray that contains antihistamines or steroids.  If a person repeatedly gets a sinus headache or has sinusitis for 3 months, a doctor may refer them to an ear, nose, and throat specialist.  The specialist will likely ask about symptoms, take a medical history, and examine the person's head, nose, and face. They may also take images of the head with an X-ray or  MRI  scan.  Some people may require surgery to widen the sinuses. The procedure might involve removing a small amount of tissue from the sinuses or inflating a tiny balloon device within the sinuses to widen the sinus passages.  A person who has a sinus headache caused by sinusitis might be able to treat it with home remedies. These treatments may not work if the pain is very severe, or symptoms last for over a week, however.   Breathing in steam   Breathing in steam can help to open up the nasal passages and sinuses, which may help to relieve pressure and pain:   Cleaning the nose with a salt water solution   Using a salt water solution can help to decongest the nose:   A warm washcloth   Holding a warm washcloth to the face can ease pain and pressure:  Research by the  American Migraine Foundation  found that a  migraine  is often mistaken for a sinus headache.  A sinus headache and a migraine have some symptoms in common, including:  There are different treatments for a migraine and sinus headaches, so it is important to get the correct diagnosis.  If a person has symptoms of sinusitis followed by pain and pressure in the face, this is probably a sinus headache. If a headache lasts for more than a week or is not cured by antibiotics, it may be a migraine.  A person who has a migraine is likely to experience other symptoms that do not appear with a sinus headache.  These include:  Allergies, particularly  hay fever , can cause headaches.  A person experiencing a headache caused by an allergy will probably experience pain in the same area of the face as a sinus headache.  This is because allergies can cause a blocked or inflamed nose.  A person who has a headache caused by an allergy may experience other symptoms, such as:  A doctor or allergist should be able to find the cause of the allergy and suggest ways to manage and treat it.  A person who experiences headaches regularly may have a medication headache. This can happen when someone takes too many painkillers or uses pain relief medication for an extended period.  Sinusitis is a primary cause of a sinus headache. Some forms of the condition can be severe if left untreated. This is because the sinuses are close to the brain and any infection could pass to the  central nervous system .  If a sinus headache does not improve within a week, a person should seek medical advice. Sinus headaches are usually not serious and can often be treated at home.  It is common for a person to mistake a migraine for a sinus headache. The two conditions require different treatment, so a person should consult a doctor if they have questions about their symptoms.    
 Headaches connected to allergies and sinus problems. (n.d.).  Headaches connected to allergies and sinus problems. (n.d.).  Hutchinson, S. (2016, May 27). Sinus headaches.  Patel, Z. M. (2015, February 17). Headaches and sinus disease.  Sinus. (n.d.).  Sinusitis (sinus infection). (2017, December 19).  Sinus headache vs. migraine. (n.d.).  Wilson, M-C. &amp; Jimenez-Sanders, R. (2016, July 9). Medication overuse headache.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "What to do about a sinus headache."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321012.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2018, February 23). "What to do about a sinus headache."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  