 The body closely monitors blood oxygen levels to keep them within a specific range, so that there is enough oxygen for the needs of every cell in the body.  A person's blood oxygen level is an indicator of how well the body distributes oxygen from the lungs to the cells, and it can be important for people's health.  The most efficient way to monitor blood oxygen levels is by an arterial blood gas or ABG test. For this test, a blood sample is taken from an artery, usually in the wrist. This procedure is very accurate, but it can be a little painful.  An ABG test can be difficult to do at home, so a person may wish to do an alternative test, using a small device known as a  pulse  oximeter.  A pulse oximeter is a small clip that is often put on a finger, although it can also be used on the ear or toe. It measures blood oxygen indirectly by  light absorption  through a person's pulse.  Although the pulse oximeter test is easier, quicker, and not painful, it is not as accurate as the ABG test. This is because it can be influenced by factors such as dirty fingers, bright lights, nail polish, and poor circulation to the extremities.  For people who wish to purchase a pulse oximeter, there is a range of easy-to-use devices  available online .  A normal blood oxygen level varies between  75 and 100 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) .  A blood oxygen level  below 60 mm Hg  is considered low and may require oxygen supplementation, depending on a doctor's decision and the individual case.  When blood oxygen level is too low compared to the average level of a healthy person, it can be a sign of a condition known as hypoxemia. This means that the body has difficulty delivering oxygen to all of its cells, tissues, and organs.  Low blood oxygen levels can result in abnormal circulation and cause the following symptoms:  Hypoxemia, or oxygen levels below the normal values, may be caused by:  Several medical conditions and situations can contribute to the above factors, including:  People should see a doctor if they:  Treatment for low blood oxygen levels includes receiving supplemental oxygen. This can be done at home when it is called home oxygen therapy or HOT.  There is a range of devices for delivering and monitoring HOT, but some of them are considered medications and need a prescription.  Some self-care measures can be taken by people to reduce symptoms of shortness of breath and improve general health and quality of life. These include:  Low oxygen levels in the blood are not necessarily harmful and can occur in people who can recover, or in healthy people when they are at high altitude. These people do not need to monitor their blood oxygen levels regularly.  But people with chronic lung diseases, such as COPD, pulmonary fibrosis, or emphysema, may have blood oxygen levels below the normal because of their illness. These people may require regular blood oxygen monitoring.  People with low blood oxygen can also make lifestyle changes, such as not smoking or improving their diet and exercise habits, as well as being treated with supplemental oxygen.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Blood oxygen level: Is my oxygen level normal? (2017, July 31).  Blood oxygen level: Is my oxygen level normal? (2017, July 31).  Chan, E. D., Chan, M. M., &amp; Chan, M. M. (2013, June). Pulse oximetry: Understanding its basic principles facilitates appreciation of its limitations.  Respiratory Medicine ,  107 (6), 789–799.  Dunn, J.-O. C., Mythen, M. G., &amp; Grocott, M. P. (2016, October). Physiology of oxygen transport.  BJA Education ,  16 (10), 341–348.  Ekström, M., &amp; Ringbaek, T. (2018, January 9). Which patients with moderate hypoxemia benefit from long-term oxygen therapy? Ways forward.  International Journal of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease ,  13 , 231–235.  Hatipoğlu, U., &amp; Stoller J. K. (2018, March). Supplemental oxygen in patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Evidence from Nocturnal Oxygen Treatment Trial to Long-term Oxygen Treatment Trial [Abstract].  Current Opinion in Pulmonary Medicine ,  24 (2), 179–186.  Katsenos, S., &amp; Constantopoulos, S. H. (2011, September 15). Long-term oxygen therapy in COPD: Factors affecting and ways of improving patient compliance.  Pulmonary Medicine ,  2011 , 325362.  Kent, B. D., Mitchell, P. D., &amp; McNicholas, W. T. (2011, March 14). Hypoxemia in patients with COPD: Cause, effects, and disease progression.  International Journal of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease ,  6 , 199–208.  Melani, A. S., Sestini, P., &amp; Rottoli, P. (2018, March). Home oxygen therapy: Re-thinking the role of devices [Abstract].  Expert Review of Clinical Pharmacology ,  11 (3), 279–289.  Plüddemann, A., Thompson, M., Heneghan, C., &amp; Price, C. (2011, May). Pulse oximetry in primary care: Primary care diagnostic technology update.  British Journal of General Practice ,  61 (586), 358–359.  Villar, J., Ferrando, C., &amp; Kacmarek, R. M. (2017, November 13). Managing persistent hypoxemia: What is new?  F1000Research ,  6 , 1993.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "Low and normal blood oxygen levels: What to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321044.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, February 26). "Low and normal blood oxygen levels: What to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  