 In this article we talk about types of inner knee pain, their treatment, and exercises that can help.  While the knee may seem like a simple hinge joint, its movement involves many tendons, ligaments, and other tissues. This means many things can go wrong in the knee.  Possible causes of inner knee pain include:   Injury   Inner knee pain can be the result of an injury caused by a sport or exercise, such as running, that puts a strain on the knee joint.  This pain can also be caused by trauma, where a person has fallen on their knee or been in an accident.   Bursitis   This condition occurs due to  inflammation  in a tissue in the knee called a bursa. Bursae are small, fluid-filled sacs that prevent muscles, tendons, and bones from rubbing together.  Inflammation of the pes anserine bursa may lead to inner knee pain. This can be caused by an acute injury or overuse of the knee joint.  The pain of  bursitis  may be felt on the inner knee, around  2 to 3 inches  below the knee joint.   Sprain or tear   Inner knee pain may be caused by a sprain or tear in the medial collateral ligament or MCL.  This is usually caused by an injury where there has been excessive twisting and tearing of the MCL.  It may occur when there is a blow or force to the outer aspect of the knee, as this may produce a strain along the inner aspect of the knee.  This injury usually results in almost immediate swelling or pain.   Torn meniscus   The meniscus is the protective cartilage that lines the knee joint.  A tear of the medial meniscus can result in inner knee pain. The meniscus can also wear down over time and cause pain when a person moves their knee.   Knee osteoarthritis   Osteoarthritis is a degenerative condition that causes a person's protective cartilage to wear down. The knees are especially vulnerable to this.  With this condition, the knees may be painful particularly first thing in the morning.   Medial plica syndrome   This condition causes inflammation of the plica that may be present inside the knee.  This overuse injury occurs most commonly after a person has increased their activity level.  A doctor may feel a nodule on the inner side of the knee that is very tender to the touch.   Rheumatoid arthritis    Rheumatoid arthritis  is an autoimmune disorder that causes inflammation in the body.  A person may experience severe inner knee pain related to their rheumatoid arthritis. The pain is usually worse in the morning and gets better through the day.  For many causes of knee pain, including injuries and inflammatory disorders, home treatment may resolve the problem.  For these kinds of disorders, the following treatments may be useful:  If these home treatments are not effective, a person should consult a doctor to determine the best course of treatment.  A doctor may recommend treatments that include:  A doctor will usually recommend conservative treatments before invasive ones, such as surgery.  Exercises to strengthen and stretch the knee may help to reduce pain and inflammation.  The most appropriate exercises for inner knee pain will depend on its cause and should be tailored to the individual.  Possible exercises include:   Quad Stretch   Stretching the quadriceps can help to reduce pressure on the knee joint.   Hamstring Stretch   This exercise releases tension in the back of the leg with a seated stretch.   Half Squats   Half squats are a way to strengthen the front of the legs without putting excess strain on the knees.  Pain in the inner knee may feel like a sharp stabbing or a dull aching.  A person may hear cracking or popping when the knee joint moves, depending upon the underlying cause of the pain.  Additional symptoms that can occur with inner knee pain include:  Symptoms that get better during the day may indicate an inflammatory knee condition. If they get worse throughout the day, this could indicate a degenerative disorder, such as  arthritis .  To diagnose an inner knee condition, a doctor will take a person's health history and ask questions about their symptoms.  They will need to know how the discomfort started and whether the person has a history of inflammatory disorders or a recent injury.  Other important questions to discuss with the doctor include:  A doctor will also perform a physical assessment of the knee. They may recommend an  ultrasound , X-ray, or  MRI scan  to look at the inner structure of the knee.  These scans will allow a doctor to check for problems with the meniscus, ligaments, and knee joint itself.  If a doctor suspects an autoimmune disorder, such as rheumatoid arthritis, they may perform blood tests. Certain antibodies are usually present and can be detected in those with rheumatoid arthritis.  Inner knee pain may be short-term or chronic. In mild cases, a person can treat the pain at home using rest and exercises.  If the cause of knee pain is not known, if it causes distress, or if it gets In the way of daily life, an individual should consult a doctor to find out the best treatment.    
 6 exercises for knee OA pain. (n.d.).  6 exercises for knee OA pain. (n.d.).  Knee injuries. (2015, October).  Knee conditioning program. (2012, October).  Medial collateral ligament tears. (n.d.).  Pes anserine (knee tendon) bursitis. (2014, March).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How to identify and treat inner knee pain."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321065.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, February 27). "How to identify and treat inner knee pain."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  