 Pneumococcal  meningitis  is a rare but very serious illness that can develop into a life-threatening medical emergency. The infection may have long-term consequences and can even be fatal. Prompt treatment is necessary to minimize the risk of adverse outcomes.   Streptococcus pneumoniae (S. pneumoniae)  is a widespread bacteria responsible for many illnesses, including meningitis,  pneumonia , and sinus infections. The bacteria spread easily and quickly from person to person through coughing and sneezing.   S. pneumoniae  is the most common cause of bacterial meningitis in adults. It is also  among the leading causes  of bacterial meningitis in children under 2 years old.  The incidence of severe pneumococcal infection, including meningitis, has decreased significantly since the introduction of the pneumococcal vaccine.  In this article, we take a look at the causes, symptoms, and treatment options for this condition.  Pneumococcal meningitis occurs when  S. pneumoniae  enter a person's bloodstream and infect the fluid surrounding the brain or spine.  When a person has this bacteria in their system, they do not always contract meningitis. However, it causes many other illnesses, including:  According to the Meningitis Research Foundation of Canada, up to  40 percent  of people may carry  S. pneumoniae .  In the majority of these people, the bacteria is not growing or active and will not cause illness. However, anyone who carries this bacteria can transmit it to others, potentially causing any of the illnesses above or pneumococcal meningitis.  The bacteria spread via tiny droplets released from a person's nose or mouth. These droplets may come into contact with another person via:  Certain factors can make a person more susceptible to developing pneumococcal meningitis, including:  According to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , children with conditions affecting the spleen, such as sickle cell,  HIV , or  AIDS , have a much higher risk of developing pneumococcal meningitis.  The CDC also report that children of African-American descent, Alaskan natives, and some American Indian groups are at higher risk of developing the disease.  People who live in close contact with many others may be more likely to contract pneumococcal meningitis. Residing in dorms or other communal living situations may increase a person's risk of developing the condition. Children in day care may also be at higher risk.  Pneumococcal meningitis symptoms start suddenly, usually within 3 days of infection with the bacteria. Symptoms of pneumococcal meningitis include:  Infants with pneumococcal meningitis may have a bulging fontanelle, which means that the soft spot on top of the baby's head is pushing outward.  A doctor will begin a diagnosis by carrying out a physical exam and noting the person's symptoms.  If a doctor suspects pneumococcal meningitis, they will likely order a spinal tap to confirm the diagnosis. A spinal tap involves withdrawing a sample of spinal fluid from a person's spinal column.  A doctor may also order other tests, including:  Prompt diagnosis is essential, as immediate treatment offers the best possible outcome.  People with pneumococcal meningitis will be admitted to the hospital for immediate intravenous  antibiotic  treatment.  Typically, doctors use an antibiotic called ceftriaxone to treat pneumococcal meningitis. Other antibiotics used include:  In some situations, doctors may also prescribe corticosteroids to help reduce swelling around the brain and spinal column.  Pneumococcal meningitis is a very serious condition. As many as  1 out of 5 people  die as a result of pneumococcal meningitis. Young children and adults over 65 are at the greatest risk.  A vaccination is available for those who are most prone to the condition. Those at high risk should discuss this option with their doctor. Vaccination is the only way to reduce the risk of pneumococcal meningitis in high-risk groups. All children in the U.S. are now vaccinated against  S. pneumoniae .  As a result, the CDC  have reported  a dramatic decline in incidence rates. For example, rates of invasive  pneumococcal disease  have fallen from 100 cases in every 100,000 people in 1998 to 9 cases in every 100,000 people in 2015.  Pneumococcal meningitis can leave people with long-lasting problems, such as:  Prompt treatment is necessary for the best outcome — the sooner a person sees their doctor after the first symptoms appear, the better their outlook will be.    
 Bacterial meningitis. (2017, January 25).  Bacterial meningitis. (2017, January 25).  Petrie, C. (2017, September 22). Understanding meningitis.  Pneumococcal. (n.d.).  Pneumococcal disease (includes pneumococcal pneumonia, pneumococcal meningitis and pneumococcal bacteremia). (2015, November).  Pneumococcal disease: Risk factors. (2017, September 6).  Pneumococcal disease: Surveillance and reporting. (2017, September 6).  Pneumococcal meningitis. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is pneumococcal meningitis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321008.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, February 23). "What is pneumococcal meningitis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  