  Gallstones  are a common complaint, affecting  10 to 15 percent  of American adults.  Read on to learn more about popular natural treatments for gallstones, along with some tips to stop them from forming in the first place.  Gallstones vary in shape and size, with some growing to the size of a golf ball.  There are two types of gallstones:  Not all gallstones cause symptoms. When symptoms are present, they include:  Although there is no reliable evidence that these remedies work, the following treatments are popular natural alternatives to medical interventions.  One of the most common treatments for gallstones is a gallbladder cleanse. Proponents of this method claim it breaks down the gallstones and flushes them from the body. A  2009 paper  states that although scientific evidence to support a gallbladder cleanse is minimal, anecdotal reports indicate it may be helpful for some people.  A gallbladder flush involves consuming a blend of apple juice, herbs, and olive oil for 2 to 5 days. Recipes vary, and some procedures allow a person to eat food while others do not.  This diet may be unsafe people with  diabetes  or blood sugar problems, who do not consume solid food during the cleanse.  Some people believe that apple juice softens gallstones, allowing them to be excreted from the body with ease.  One cleanse involves mixing apple cider vinegar into the apple juice before drinking it. Although there is limited evidence to suggest that apple cider vinegar does have some health benefits, no studies support its use as a treatment for gallstones.  Furthermore, people with diabetes, stomach ulcers, and  hypoglycemia  should be wary of consuming large amounts of fruit juice.  Apple cider vinegar is available to buy in health stores and  online .  According to the  National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health , dandelion has been used historically to treat gallbladder, liver, and bile duct problems. Supporters believe that the bitter roots may stimulate bile production in the gallbladder.  People usually drink dandelion teas or coffees to remove their gallstones. However, there is no evidence to suggest this is beneficial. Furthermore, people with gallstones, gallbladder problems, or kidney problems should speak with a doctor before consuming dandelion.  A range of dandelion teas and supplements are available to purchase in health stores and  online .  Milk thistle has been used medicinally to detoxify the liver  for centuries . While it may support the liver and gallbladder, there are no studies evaluating its effects on gallstones.  A person can take milk thistle as a tonic or in a capsule or tablet form. People with diabetes, ragweed allergies, or a history of hormone-sensitive  cancers  should discuss the use of milk thistle with their doctor.  Milk thistle is available to buy in health stores and  online .  Lysimachiae herba or gold coin grass is a popular traditional Chinese remedy for gallstones.  Research  suggests it may be beneficial for treating or preventing cholesterol gallstones.  The supplement is available as a powder or liquid.  Extracts of artichoke have been  shown  to stimulate bile production and aid both gallbladder and liver function.  However, there is no research specifically focusing on the effects of artichoke on gallstones.  Globe artichokes can be cooked and prepared in various ways. But the research is based on artichoke extract supplements, which are probably more potent than the vegetables.  It is essential to speak with a doctor before taking artichoke extract because it may cause a gallbladder attack if a bile duct is obstructed.  Psyllium is a soluble fiber derived from the seeds of the Plantago ovata plant. Research has shown it to benefit the heart, pancreas, and other areas of the body.  A  very old study  found that psyllium husks protected hamsters from the formation of cholesterol gallstones. A more recent  study , from 1999, supports these findings.  Castor oil packs are a popular remedy among naturopaths and natural living enthusiasts for a wide variety of complaints.  To apply a castor oil pack, soak a cloth in warm castor oil and place on the abdomen. Cover with a towel. Some people choose to place a heat source, such as a hot water bottle or heating pad, on top. Leave the pack on the abdomen for up to an hour.  There are no scientific studies to support the use of this treatment for gallstones.   Acupuncture  may relieve gallstone symptoms, although the research is very limited.  In one  study  on 60 people with  cholecystitis  (gallbladder  inflammation ), acupuncture was found to alleviate  back pain , stomachache, and nausea, while also regulating the volume of the gallbladder.  It should be noted that this research does not look specifically at gallstones, and it may only relieve symptoms, rather than helping people to pass the stones.  Some  yoga  poses are said to cure gallstones, although no studies support this claim. The following poses are believed by some to be beneficial for people with gallstones:  If natural remedies do not treat gallstones effectively, then a person might want to consider medications or surgery.  Smaller gallstones may be treated with bile acids such as ursodeoxycholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid.  Potential disadvantages of these medications include:  Gallstones are often treated by removing the gallbladder. This ensures that the gallstones cannot re-form.  Gallbladder removal surgery or cholecystectomy is one of the  most common  operations performed on American adults. There are minimal side effects to gallbladder removal.  Not all  risk factors  for gallstone formation can be modified, such as:  However, other risk factors can be addressed, including:  Therefore, preventative techniques should involve focusing on the factors that can be modified. The following tips may reduce the risk of gallstones for some people.  Women who eat more fruits and vegetables are less likely to have their gallbladders removed than women who eat very little fresh produce, according to a  2006 study . Also, other sources of fiber such as the psyllium husks mentioned earlier may be beneficial for the gallbladder.  Foods that may cause gallbladder problems include:  As obesity increases the risk of gallstones, those who are overweight should aim to achieve and maintain a healthy weight.  However, following a diet that is very low in  calories  (500 per day) can be a risk factor for gallstone formation, according to a  2013 study . However, those who ate between 1200 and 1500 calories a day for 12 weeks lost weight but were much less likely to get gallstones.  Anyone considering trying natural treatment should always consult a doctor first.  Symptoms of a gallbladder problem include:  People who suspect they have had a gallbladder attack should contact a doctor without delay to reduce the risk of future complications.    
 Bergman, F., &amp; Van der Linden, W. (1975, September). Effect of dietary fibre on gallstone formation in hamsters [Abstract].  Zeitschrift für Ernährungswissenschaft ,  14 (3), 218–224.  Bergman, F., &amp; Van der Linden, W. (1975, September). Effect of dietary fibre on gallstone formation in hamsters [Abstract].  Zeitschrift für Ernährungswissenschaft ,  14 (3), 218–224.  Csupor, D., Csorba, A., &amp; Hohmann, J. (2016, October 25). Recent advances in the analysis of flavonolignans of Silybum marianum [Abstract].  Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis ,  130 , 301–317.  Dandelion. (2016, September).  Dekkers, R. (1999, December 18). Apple juice and the chemical-contact softening of gallstones.  The Lancet ,  354 (9196), 2171.  Gaby, A. R. (2009, September). Nutritional approaches to prevention and treatment of gallstones [Abstract].  Alternative Medicine Review ,  14 (3), 258–267.  Gallstones. (2013, November).  Johansson, K., Sundström, J., Marcus, C., Hemmingsson, E., &amp; Neovius, M. (2014, February). Risk of symptomatic gallstones and cholecystectomy after a very-low-calorie diet or low-calorie diet in a commercial weight loss program: 1-year matched cohort study.  International Journal of Obesity ,  38 (2), 279–284.  Rondanelli, M., Monteferrario, F., Perna, S., Faliva, M. A., &amp; Opizzi, A. (2013, March). Health-promoting properties of artichoke in preventing cardiovascular disease by its lipidic and glycemic-reducing action [Abstract].  Monaldi Archives for Chest Disease ,  80 (1), 17–26.  Schwesinger, W. H., Kurtin, W. E., Page, C. P., Stewart, R. M., &amp; Johnson, R. (1999, April). Soluble dietary fiber protects against cholesterol gallstone formation [Abstract].  The American Journal of Surgery ,  177 (4), 307–310.  Stinton, L. M., &amp; Shaffer, E. A. (2012, April). Epidemiology of gallbladder disease: Cholelithiasis and cancer.  Gut and Liver ,  6 (2), 172–187.  Tsai, C.-J., Leitzmann, M. F., Willett, W. C., &amp; Giovannucci, E. L. (2006, September). Fruit and vegetable consumption and risk of cholecystectomy in women [Abstract].  The American Journal of Medicine ,  119 (9), 760–767.  Wen, F. Y., Li, S. C., Wang, G. M., Li, L. X., &amp; Song, Y. Q. (2012, October). Effects of acupuncture of Jianjing (GB 21) on gallbladder volume and symptoms of cholecystitis patients [Abstract].  Acupuncture Research ,  37 (5), 398–402.  Xiong, Y., Wang, J. W., &amp; Deng, J. (2015, June). Comparison between Lysimachiae Herba and Desmodii Styracifolii Herba in pharmacological activities [Abstract].  China Journal of Chinese Materia Medica ,  40 (11), 2106–2111.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What are the natural ways to get rid of gallstones?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321026.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, February 24). "What are the natural ways to get rid of gallstones?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  