 American women aged 20 years and above weigh an average of 170.6 pounds (lbs), according to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) . Height-wise, the average adult female is 5 feet 3.7 inches, and her waist measures 38.2 inches.  While these numbers may be the average, they are not a measure of health. One of the commonly used indicators of well being is a person's  BMI , which stands for body mass index.  The BMI of the average woman in the U.S. is  29.6 , which falls into the category of " overweight ."  Out of all American adults,  more than two-thirds  are deemed to be "overweight" or "obese," which represents a worrying trend for the nation's health.  So, what is the  ideal weight  range for women, how would a person best measure it, and what can women do to achieve their ideal weight?  At 177.9 lbs, the average body mass in North America is the highest of any continent worldwide, according to 2005 statistics  published in 2012  by  BMC Public Health .  North America also has the highest percentage of people who are overweight, with 73.9 percent classed as such.  The following table shows the weight data for different world regions:  In a  2015 review , the U.S. also had the highest rate of childhood  obesity  out of the world's 20 most populated countries, with a rate of 12.7 percent, although Egypt topped the table for adults at 35.3 percent.  An "ideal weight" is where a person is at their healthiest and fittest in terms of what they weigh. There is a variety of different ways to calculate ideal weight ranges:  BMI is the most commonly used system for calculating ideal weight range, as it is relatively easy to work out. An individual can work out their BMI by applying their height and weight to the  following formula :  For those people more familiar with using imperial measurements, there are various  online calculators  for working out BMI scores.  BMI calculations are the same for men and women, and BMI is seen as  correlating fairly well  with a person's percentage of body fat.  Despite this, BMI can give a false picture, as muscle weighs more than fat. Research in the journal   Sports Health  , showed athletes rating as "overweight" or "obese," despite being in peak condition.   One study  also criticizes BMI for underestimating the prevalence of obesity in both sexes and being increasingly inaccurate as women age.  According to the  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute , BMI ranges are as follows:  Fat is spread around a person's body but not all types of fat are equal.  The fat that can build up around someone's midsection and turn into a beer belly or love handles can indicate a higher risk for related diseases that have potential to do harm to your body.  The  World Health Organization (WHO)  note that fat around the midsection is associated with an increased risk of  heart attack ,  stroke , and premature death.  Furthermore, it says calculating a person's waist-to-hip ratio is a better indicator of their fat distribution and disease implications than BMI is.  A person can work out their waist-to-hip ratio by dividing their waist measurement by their hip measurement.  Women should keep their waist circumference at 80 centimeters (cm) or 31.5 inches or less, according to the  WHO . Anything more is associated with increased risk of related health problems, as follows:  Body fat percentage is another way of calculating a person's ideal weight. Unlike BMI, it differentiates between how much of a person's weight is lean tissue and how much is fat.  In theory, body fat percentage is a good way of measuring ideal weight. However, in practice there are drawbacks:  Nonetheless, the  American Council on Exercise  propose the following body fat guidelines for women:  A woman's BMI and waist-to-hip ratio can help decide what is a healthy weight. But there are other factors to consider when finding what the ideal weight is for women.   Research  shows that when people age, the amount of fat in their bodies increases while their muscle decreases. This means that people who want to stay lean may have to work harder on their diets and exercise when they get older compared to when they were younger.  Since BMI takes into account both height and weight, people who have the same BMI score but are of different heights will weigh different amounts.  Here's how a healthy BMI range translates to  different weights at different heights :  Below are seven ways in which women can try to reach or maintain their ideal weight.   1. Do high-intensity interval training   High-intensity interval training (HIIT) involves circuits of exercises that use the maximum effort a person can manage. Each of these is followed by a cooldown period and then repeated.  Doing sprints in intervals is an example of HIIT.  Some  research  suggests that HIIT might fight fat in a variety of ways. It may also improve how the body handles blood glucose.   2. Cut out processed foods   As well as being less healthful than freshly prepared foods, processed foods are often laden with  calories  in the forms of sugar and fat. Cutting out all processed foods is a great way to reduce calorie intake.   3. Stay physically active   Staying active burns calories and positively alters a person's metabolism, helping them to maintain an ideal weight.  The U.S. government recommend that adults get  150 minutes  of moderate exercise per week. This target might include brisk walking or playing tennis. Alternatively, they can choose 75 minutes of vigorous exercise every week, examples being jogging or continuous swimming.   4. Try intermittent fasting   Intermittent fasting means going for a time without food, and doing all your daily eating within a restricted time window, such as within 8 hours.  Some  research  has found that periodic fasting may help to promote greater overall fat loss.   5. Try a ketogenic diet   A ketogenic diet involves eating very few  carbohydrates  and a lot of fat.  Various  studies  show that a ketogenic diet may control hunger and cause the body to burn more fat than a standard diet.   6. Reduce your portion sizes   Reducing portion sizes is one of the easiest ways a person can consume less calories in a day. Simply eating off a smaller plate can do the trick.   7. Stay hydrated   Staying hydrated is essential for overall health and may help to stave off hunger pangs. Sometimes people can mix signals of thirst for those of hunger and have a snack when a glass of water would be satisfying.  Many motivations might fuel a woman striving to achieve their ideal weight, including personal beauty standards, athletic performance, and health.  Weight issues and obesity are significant problems in the U.S. Although not perfect, measures including BMI, waist circumference, and waist-to-hip ratio can help a woman better understand her weight.  If people feel their weight is a health risk, or they have worries, such as raised  blood pressure , it may be a good idea to consult a doctor.  Moderate and intense exercise, portion control, and occasional fasting, among other things, can help encourage weight loss.    
 About adult BMI. (2017, August 29).  About adult BMI. (2017, August 29).  Adults. (2018, February 16).  Afshin, A., Forouzanfar, M. H., Reitsma, M. B., Sur, P., Estep, K., Lee, A., … Murray, C. J. L. (2017, July 6). Health effects of overweight and obesity in 195 countries over 25 years.  The New England Journal of Medicine ,  377 , 13–27.  Boutcher, S. H. (2011). High-intensity intermittent exercise and fat loss.  Journal of Obesity ,  2011 .  Byrne, N. M., Sainsbury, A., King, N. A., Hills, A. P., &amp; Wood, R. E. (2017, August 17). Intermittent energy restriction improves weight loss efficiency in obese men: The MATADOR study.  International Journal of Obesity ,  42 , 129–138.  Calculate your body mass index. (n.d.).  Etchinson, W. C., Bloodgood, E. A., Minton, C. P., Thompson, N. J., Collins, M. A., Hunter, S. C., &amp; Dai, H. (2011, May). Body mass index and percentage of body fat as indicators for obesity in an adolescent athletic population.  Sports Health ,  3 (3), 249–252.  Fryar, C. D., Kruszon-Moran, D., Gu, Q., &amp; Ogden, C. L. (2018, December). Mean body weight, height, waist circumference, and body mass index among adults: United States, 1999–2000 through 2015–2016.  National Health Statistics Reports, 122.   Ho-Pham, L. T., Campbell, L. V., &amp; Nguyen, T. V. (2011, June). More on body fat cutoff points.  Mayo Clinic Proceedings ,  86 (6), 584.  How can I work out my body mass index (BMI)? (2016, July 26).  National health and nutrition examination survey. (n.d.).  Normal weight ranges: Body mass index (BMI). (2016, February 5).  Overweight and obesity statistics. (2017, August).  Paoli, A. (2014, February 19). Ketogenic diet for obesity: Friend or foe?  International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health ,  11 (2), 2092–2107.  Romero-Corral, A., Somers, V. K., Sierra-Johnson, J., Thomas, R. J., Bailey, K. R., Collazo-Clavell, M. L., … Lopez-Jimenez, F. (2010, May 27). Accuracy of body mass index to diagnose obesity in the US adult population.  International Journal of Obesity (London) ,  32 (6), 959–966.  Rothney, M. P., Brychta, R. J., Schaefer, E. V., Chen, K. Y., &amp; Skarulis, M. C. (2009, July 14). Body composition measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry half-body scans in obese adults.  Obesity (Silver Spring) ,  17 (6), 1281–1286.  Shah, N. R., &amp; Braverman, E. R. (2012, April 2). Measuring adiposity in patients: The utility of body mass index (BMI), percent body fat, and leptin.  PLoS ONE ,  7 (4), e33308.  St-Onge, M.-P., &amp; Gallagher, D. (2010, February). Body composition changes with aging: The cause or the result of alterations in metabolic rate and macronutrient oxidation?  Nutrition ,  26 (2), 152–155.  Tools and calculators. (n.d.).  Waist circumference and waist-hip ratio. Report of a WHO expert consultation. (2008, December 8-11).  Walpole, S. C., Prieto-Merino, D., Edwards, P., Cleland, J., Stevens, G., &amp; Roberts, I. (2012). The weight of nations: An estimation of adult human biomass.  BMC Public Health ,  12 (439).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Wessels, Dan. "What is the average weight for women?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Feb. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321003.php&gt;    APA  Wessels, D. (2018, February 22). "What is the average weight for women?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  