 As the main protein in blood plasma, albumin plays a role in many functions, including maintaining pressure in the blood vessels and  transporting substances , such as hormones and medications.  Albumin binds to many of these substances, including hormones and some drugs, to help them travel through the body. So when albumin levels are low, the blood may not be able to transport essential materials effectively.  Albumin levels below 3.4 grams per deciliter (g/dL) are considered low.  A range of health issues can cause hypoalbuminemia.  Determining the cause of hypoalbuminemia is vital for effective treatment.  Some of the most common causes of the syndrome include:  Less frequently, people can develop hypoalbuminemia as a result of a serious burn, a blood infection called  sepsis , allergic reactions,  lupus ,  hypothyroidism , or  diabetes .  While a doctor tries to find out the reason for hypoalbuminemia and start treatment, some strategies can reduce the risk of serious complications.  Some people may need medications to raise their albumin levels. This can include albumin administered via an intravenous needle.  The best option for treating hypoalbuminemia is to address the underlying cause. So people may need to have a variety of tests to determine why there is not enough albumin in their blood.  Treatment may include:  People experiencing hypoalbuminemia due to organ failure may need an organ transplant. People with kidney disease may need dialysis as they await a kidney transplant.  People with hypoalbuminemia may need to be hospitalized and monitored until the condition is corrected.  A person may experience a wide range of symptoms, such as confusion, dizziness, and low energy if they are malnourished, for example.  Some common symptoms of hypoalbuminemia include:  It is impossible to diagnose low albumin by some of the symptoms alone, and many symptoms associated with low albumin are also linked to other conditions.   Albumin is present  in many animal products. These include:  Some nutritional supplements and meat substitutes may also contain albumin.  People who consume enough protein will usually also get sufficient albumin.  Most people need  a minimum of 0.8 grams of protein per kilogram of  body weight  per day.  It is important to note that many cases of hypoalbuminemia occur in people who do eat enough albumin. Even in people who eat a healthy diet, underlying diseases can make it difficult to absorb and use albumin and other nutrients.  Hypoalbuminemia can worsen the effects of other diseases. A  2015 study  found that people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and hypoalbuminemia were more likely to experience respiratory failure.  Other complications include:  Hypoalbuminemia may also decrease the effectiveness of certain medications that need to bind to albumin.  The outlook for people diagnosed with low levels of albumin in the blood depends on the cause.  Prompt diagnosis and treatment can improve long-term outlooks.  The right treatments can be lifesaving.  Some research suggests that low albumin levels may predict worse outcomes in people who have to be hospitalized.   A 2014 study , for example, followed 5,451 people whose albumin levels were tested after being admitted to a hospital emergency department. Those with low albumin tended to be older and remained in the hospital longer.  Overall, 16.3 percent of people with low albumin died in a 30-day period, compared to just 4.3 percent of people with normal albumin.  This suggests that measuring albumin levels and diagnosing the cause of low albumin could improve outcomes in people admitted to the hospital.  Low albumin suggests a person may have a specific health problem but, on its own, it does not provide much information about the reason.  People with low albumin or those who suspect their albumin might be low should work with their doctor to find out what is causing the condition. When someone receives the correct treatment, their low albumin can be reversed.    
 15 kidney-friendly protein foods for keeping albumin up. (n.d.).  15 kidney-friendly protein foods for keeping albumin up. (n.d.).  Acoglu, E. A., Akcaboy, M., Oguz, M. M., Kilic, M., Zorlu, P., &amp; Senel, S. (2016, June). Hypoalbuminemia and malnutrition associated with cow's milk allergy: A case report.  Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal ,  18 (6), e34810.  Albumin (blood). (n.d.).  Bonilla-Palomas, J. L., Gámez-López, A. L., Moreno-Conde, M., López-Ibáñez, M. C., Anguita-Sánchez, M., Gallego de la Sacristana, A., … Villar-Ráez, A. (May, 2014). Hypoalbuminemia in acute heart failure patients: Causes and its impact on hospital and long-term mortality [Abstract].  Journal of Cardiac Failure ,  20 (5), 350–358.  Chen, C.-W., Chen, Y.-Y., Lu, C.-L., Chen, S. C.-C., Chen, Y.-J., Lin, M.-S., … Chen, W. (2015, June 17). Severe hypoalbuminemia is a strong independent risk factor for acute respiratory failure in COPD: A nationwide cohort study.  International Journal of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease ,  10 , 11471154.  Jellinge, M. E., Henriksen, D. P., Hallas, P., &amp; Brabrand, M. (2014, August 22). Hypoalbuminemia is a strong predictor of 30-day all-cause mortality in acutely admitted medical patients: A prospective, observational, cohort study.  PLoS ONE ,  9 (8), e105983.  Levitt, D. G., &amp; Levitt, M. D. (2017, July 17). Protein losing enteropathy: Comprehensive review of the mechanistic association with clinical and subclinical disease states.  Clinical and Experimental Gastroenterology ,  10 , 147–168.  Marcason, W. (2017). Should albumin and prealbumin be used as indicators for malnutrition?  Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,  117 (7), 1144.  Nephrotic syndrome in adults. (2014, February).  Nutrient recommendations: Dietary reference intakes. (n.d.).  Pendick, D. (2015, June 18). How much protein do we need every day?  Serum albumin. (2011, January 28).  Symptoms of liver failure. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What are the effects of low albumin?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 8 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321149.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, March 8). "What are the effects of low albumin?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  