 The thyroid gland plays a major role in metabolism, hormone regulation, and body temperature. When a person has Hashimoto's, their thyroid is chronically inflamed and cannot function as well as a healthy thyroid.  The thyroid often slows or stops the production of essential hormones, which can cause weight gain, dry skin,  hair loss ,  fatigue ,  constipation , and sensitivity to cold.  In this article, learn about what foods to eat and what foods to avoid to help ease symptoms of Hashimoto's disease.  There is no specific diet proven to treat everyone with Hashimoto's. An individualized approach to  nutrition  is necessary.  Some  clinical evidence  has shown that the following diets have helped some people with Hashimoto's:  We take a closer look at some of these diets below.  Many people with Hashimoto's also experience food sensitivities, especially to gluten. There is no current research to support a gluten-free diet for all people with Hashimoto's unless they also have  celiac disease .  However, in a  survey  of 2232 people with Hashimoto's, 76 percent of respondents believed they were sensitive to gluten. Those respondents cited constipation,  diarrhea , cramping, bloating, nausea, reflux, gas,  headaches , fatigue, and brain fog as symptoms of their reactions to gluten.  Of the respondents, 88 percent of those who attempted a gluten-free diet felt better. Many people also reported improvements in digestion, mood, energy levels, and weight reduction.  Gluten-free diets remove all foods with containing gluten, which is a protein found in wheat, barley, rye, and other grains.  Gluten is commonly found in pasta, bread, baked goods, beer, soups, and cereals. The best way to go gluten-free is to focus on foods that are naturally gluten-free, such as vegetables, fruits, lean meats, seafood, beans, legumes, nuts, and eggs.  A grain-free diet is very similar to gluten-free, except grains are also off-limits. These grains include:  There is little evidence, however, that cutting out non-gluten grains is beneficial for health. Cutting out these grains may also eliminate fiber and other sources of essential nutrients, such as  selenium , which are important for people with Hashimoto's.  The Paleo diet attempts to mimic the eating patterns of our early ancestors, with an emphasis on whole, unprocessed foods.  Grains, dairy, potatoes, beans, lentils, refined sugar, and refined oils are not allowed. Cage-free and grass-fed meats are encouraged, as are vegetables, nuts (except peanuts), seeds, seafood, and healthful fats, such as avocado and olive oil.  The Autoimmune Paleo (AIP) diet aims to decrease foods that may cause  inflammation  and damage to the gut. It begins with the basic principals of the Paleo diet but also cuts out nightshade vegetables, such as tomatoes, eggs, nuts, and seeds.  A low glycemic index or low-GI diet is based on an index that measures how each food affects a person's blood sugar levels.  Some people with  type 2 diabetes  use this diet; the diet can also lower the risk of  heart disease  and may help some people lose weight.  For people who do not want to focus on what foods to cut out, opting for a nutrient-dense diet plan may be the best option.  A nutrient dense diet includes variety and focuses on whole foods with a selection of colorful fruits and vegetables, healthy fats, lean proteins, and fibrous  carbohydrates . Foods include:  Having these foods as the primary focus of the diet will leave less room for processed and refined sugar foods.  Anti-inflammatory spices such as turmeric,  ginger , and garlic are also encouraged.  Research suggests that certain nutrients also play a role in Hashimoto's disease. These include:  Several studies have found a link between low  vitamin D  levels and Hashimoto's. In one  study  of 218 people with Hashimoto's, 85 percent had insufficient  vitamin  D levels.  Anyone diagnosed with Hashimoto's disease should be sure to get their vitamin D levels tested. Vitamin D can be produced in the body during sun exposure or consumed through food or supplements.  As many adults now spend most of their days indoors, low vitamin D levels are becoming more common.  According to the  National Institutes for Health (NIH) , "approximately 5–30 minutes of sun exposure between 10 AM and 3 PM at least twice a week to the face, arms, legs, or back without sunscreen usually lead to sufficient vitamin D."  If consistent sun exposure is not possible, it is a good idea to take supplements, since very few foods contain adequate amounts of vitamin D.  The best food sources of vitamin D include:  Low selenium levels are common in many people with Hashimoto's. Selenium is an essential trace mineral important for brain function, immunity, and fertility.  The highest amount of selenium found in the body is stored in the thyroid gland.  Several studies  have shown that selenium supplementation can be beneficial for people with thyroid dysfunction.  Best food sources of selenium:  Every person is different, but some people with Hashimoto's have reported improved symptoms when avoiding:  Anyone thinking about starting a gluten-free diet should talk to their doctor, as they may be able to help determine if a person has a gluten sensitivity.  It is more important for a person to follow a well-balanced diet that works for their lifestyle than to try to put a label on their eating habits. People should focus on whole, unprocessed foods and eat foods that grow in the ground, not foods that come in a box or a bag.  While a gluten-free diet or autoimmune protocol may help alleviate symptoms for one person, it may not work for everyone.  People with Hashimoto's should be open to trying different eating styles until they find the one that makes them feel best. They should also speak to a doctor or dietitian about how to make sure they get all of the essential nutrients.    
 Caturegli P., De Remigis A., &amp; Rose N. R. (2014, April–May). Hashimoto thyroiditis: Clinical and diagnostic criteria [Abstract].  Autoimmunity Reviews ,  13 (4–5), 391–397.  Caturegli P., De Remigis A., &amp; Rose N. R. (2014, April–May). Hashimoto thyroiditis: Clinical and diagnostic criteria [Abstract].  Autoimmunity Reviews ,  13 (4–5), 391–397.  Harris, C. (2012, July). Thyroid disease and diet — nutrition plays a part in maintaining thyroid health.  Today's Dietitian ,  14 (7), 40.  Hashimoto's thyroiditis (lymphocytic thyroiditis). (n.d.).  Mazokopakis, E. E., Papadomanolaki, M. G., Tsekouras, K. C., Evangelopoulos, A. D., Kotsiris, D. A., &amp; Tzortzinis, A. A. (2015, December 5). Is vitamin D related to pathogenesis and treatment of Hashimoto's thyroiditis?  Hellenic Journal of Nuclear Medicine ,  18 (3), 222–227.  Pyzik, A., Grywalska, E., Matyjaszek-Matuszek, B., &amp; Roliński, J. (2015, April 27). Immune disorders in Hashimoto's thyroiditis: What do we know so far?   Journal of Immunology Research ,  2015 , 97916.  Toulis K. A., Anastasilakis A. D., Tzellos T. G., Goulis D. G., &amp; Kouvelas D. (2010, October). Selenium supplementation in the treatment of Hashimoto's thyroiditis: A systematic review and a meta-analysis [Abstract].  Thyroid ,  20 (10), 1163–1173.  Vitamin D [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Vitamin B-12 fact sheet for consumers (2016, February 17).  Wentz, I. (2015). Supporting a patient with Hashimoto's thyroiditis through nutrition.  Dietitians in Integrative and Functional Medicine ,  18 (2), 28–68.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Ware, Megan. "The best diets for Hashimoto's thyroiditis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321197.php&gt;    APA  Ware, M. (2018, March 13). "The best diets for Hashimoto's thyroiditis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  