 However, some lung-related conditions can result in pain in the left lung.  The chest contains several vital organs, including the heart and lungs. Because of this, it is understandable why a person who experiences pain in this area might be worried about what is causing it.  In this article, we take a look at some potential causes of lung pain, and what people should do if they experience this symptom.  The following are examples of some of the more common causes of lung pain, including left lung pain:   Asthma  is a condition that causes airway  inflammation  and lung irritability, which make a person more prone to wheezing and shortness of breath.  Chronic coughing and wheezing associated with asthma can cause feelings of chest tightness.  Typically, this will make a person's chest feel tight on both sides, not just the left.  Costochondritis is an inflammation of the connective tissue that joins a person's ribs to their breastbone. Costochondritis can cause pain that feels like chest pain, which can be one-sided.  Hyperventilation or rapid breathing can be the result of illness or  panic attacks . This condition can affect the natural balance between carbon dioxide and oxygen inside the body.  One of the primary symptoms of hyperventilation is chest pain.  A person may also experience dizziness,  headache , and trouble concentrating.   Lung cancer  does not usually cause symptoms at first. As lung cancer spreads, a person may notice symptoms such as a chronic cough, shortness of breath, and feeling tired or weak with no known reason.  Pneumothorax is when a portion or all of a lung collapses. This can cause sudden and significant chest pain on the affected side of the chest.  A pneumothorax can occur suddenly or after an injury or illness.  Pleural effusion is a condition where excess fluid builds up inside the lining of the lung, known as the pleural space. This buildup can cause difficulty breathing as well as discomfort on the affected side, which could be the left.  This condition occurs when the two membranes of the chest wall become inflamed. When they rub up against each other, pain and shortness of breath can occur.  When a person has  pleurisy , a doctor will do a variety of tests to find the cause. The cause could be a viral infection, trauma, or  lupus , which is an autoimmune disorder that attacks a person's tissues and organs.   Pneumonia  is a condition where a person experiences a severe respiratory infection that can affect one or both lungs. If pneumonia affects the left lung, a person may experience pain in the left lung.  Additional symptoms might include a cough,  fever , chills, and shortness of breath.  A  pulmonary embolism  (PE) is a blood clot or clots in the arteries of the lungs. A PE can occur after a person has had a surgery or been sedentary for some time.  While some causes of left-sided lung pain may be mild, others can be cause for concern. Some signs that left lung pain could be a medical emergency include:  If a person experiences these or other symptoms, they should call 911 or have someone drive them to the emergency room immediately.  Lung cancer signs can include:  If someone experiences these symptoms, they should see a doctor.  Whether the pain is related to the lung or feels as though it is, a person should see their doctor if their pain is interfering with their everyday life.  This is especially true if the pain is worsening instead of improving.  A doctor will diagnose the cause of left lung pain by taking a medical history and carrying out a physical examination.  The doctor will ask questions about what makes the pain worse, what makes it better, and when the pain began. They will also listen to the lungs with a stethoscope.   Imaging tests   A doctor may recommend initial imaging studies, such as a chest X-ray to identify potential abnormalities related to the lungs. If this X-ray does not reveal any problems, but the doctor suspects an underlying problem, they may recommend further testing.  Further tests could include a magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) or computed tomography (CT) scan. These imaging studies can provide different, high-quality pictures of the lungs to aid in a diagnosis.   Blood tests   Other modes of testing may include a complete blood count to identify the number of white blood cells a person has. A high white blood cell count could indicate that an infection is present in the body.  Another test a doctor might use is a cardiac enzyme panel, which is a test to determine whether pain in the left lung is in fact chest pain related to a  heart attack  or another heart problem.  Doctors may also recommend individual tests based upon a person's symptoms in addition to left lung pain.  Resting and taking over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medications can help if the cause is related to muscles around the lung. These medications include acetaminophen or ibuprofen.  Treatments for other possible causes of left lung pain can vary. For example, if a person has a collapsed left lung, a doctor may insert a small tube between the ribs and into the space around the lung to re-inflate it.  Doctors may prescribe  antibiotics  to treat respiratory-related infections caused by bacteria.  The most important thing to do is see a doctor who can begin the diagnostic process so treatment can begin as soon as possible.  Left lung pain is a symptom that has many potential causes. The pain may often be related to nearby organs, such as the heart and stomach.  Anyone experiencing left lung pain should seek prompt medical attention to ensure that the pain is not a symptom of a serious underlying condition.    
 Chest pain. (2017, July).  Chest pain. (2017, July).  Chest pain in young athletes: When you should be concerned (video). (2015, October 26).  How lupus affects the lungs and pulmonary system. (2013, August 11).  Pleurisy (pleuritis). (2017, January).  Pleurisy and other pleural disorders. (n.d.).  Pneumonia symptoms, causes, and risk factors. (2016, October 6).  Signs and symptoms of lung cancer. (2016, February 22).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What does it mean when your left lung hurts?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321183.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, March 12). "What does it mean when your left lung hurts?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  