 There are many factors that can cause a gastritis flare-up. These include:  While there are instances where medical treatment is necessary to treat gastritis, many people find they can manage the symptoms at home.  Not all remedies will work for everyone, so a person may need to try several of these before finding what works best for their case.  Gastritis refers to  inflammation  of the stomach lining, so consuming a diet that helps to minimize inflammation may provide relief over time. However,  research  has not conclusively shown that eating a certain diet causes or prevents gastritis.  By keeping a food diary, people can identify which foods trigger their symptoms. They can then begin to reduce their intake or avoid certain foods altogether.  Foods that commonly contribute to inflammation are:   Some research suggests  that garlic extract can help reduce the symptoms of gastritis. Crushing raw garlic and eating it can also work well.  If a person does not like the taste of raw garlic, they can try chopping the garlic and eating it with a spoonful of peanut butter or wrapped in a dried date. The sweetness of the peanut butter or date will help mask the garlic flavor.  Probiotics can help improve digestion and encourage regular bowel movements. Probiotic supplements introduce good bacteria into a person's digestive tract, which may help stop the spread of  H. pylori .  Eating foods that contain probiotics may also improve the symptoms of gastritis. These foods include:   One study  showed that drinking green or black tea at least once a week could significantly reduce the prevalence of  H. pylori  in the digestive tract.  Manuka honey may also be beneficial, as it contains antibacterial properties that help fight infection.  Some people believe drinking warm water alone can soothe the stomach and aid digestion.  Manuka honey is available to buy in health stores and  online .  Essential oils, such as lemongrass and lemon verbena,  were found  to help increase resistance to  H. pylori  in laboratory tests.  Other oils that can have a positive effect on the digestive system include peppermint,  ginger , and clove.  Essential oils should not be ingested and should always be diluted with a carrier oil if applied to the skin.  People may wish to use the oils in a diffuser or consult a doctor on how to use them safely to help relieve gastritis.  It is important to note that the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not regulate essential oils or alternative medicine.  Eating large, carbohydrate-heavy meals can put a strain on a person's digestive system and aggravate gastritis.  Eating small meals regularly over the course of the day can help ease the digestive process and reduce the symptoms of gastritis.  Smoking can damage a person's stomach lining and also increases a person's risk of developing  stomach cancer .  Taking too many over-the-counter pain medications, such as  aspirin  or ibuprofen, can also damage the stomach lining and make gastritis worse.  Stress can cause gastritis flare-ups, so reducing stress levels is an important way to help manage the condition.  Stress management techniques include:  Although unpleasant, gastritis is not usually thought of as a serious condition.  Symptoms of gastritis include:  While the cause of gastritis varies among individuals, there are some steps people can take to avoid bothersome symptoms.  Steps to prevent gastritis include:  Home remedies can help many people manage gastritis. However, if symptoms do not go away, it is essential to speak to a doctor.  People with gastritis should see a doctor if they experience:  A doctor will ask questions, perform an examination, and may wish to carry out certain tests.  Common medications prescribed for gastritis include:    
 Bergonzelli, G. E., Donnicola, D., Porta, N., &amp; Corthésy-Theulaz, I. E. (2003, October). Essential oils as components of a diet-based approach to management of  Helicobacter  infection [Abstract].  Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy ,  47 (10), 3240–3246.  Bergonzelli, G. E., Donnicola, D., Porta, N., &amp; Corthésy-Theulaz, I. E. (2003, October). Essential oils as components of a diet-based approach to management of  Helicobacter  infection [Abstract].  Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy ,  47 (10), 3240–3246.  Boyanova, L., Ilieva, J., Gergova, G., Vladimirov, B., Nikolov, R., &amp; Mitov, I. (2015, May). Honey and green/black tea consumption may reduce the risk of  Helicobacter pylori  infection [Abstract].  Diagnostic Microbiology and Infectious Disease ,  82 (1), 85–86.  Chey, W. D., Leontiadis, G. I., Howden, C. W., &amp; Moss, S. F. (2017, January 10). Treatment of Helicobacter pylori Infection.  The American Journal of Gastroenterology ,  112 , 212–238.  Gastritis. (2015, July).  Gastritis. (2016, June 23).  Homan, M., &amp; Orel, R. (2015, October 7). Are probiotics useful in  Helicobacter pylori  eradication?  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  21 (37), 10644–10653.  Jensen, P. J., &amp; Feldman, M. (2016, July 14). Acute and chronic gastritis due to Helicobacter pylori.  Keenan, J. I., Salm, N., Hampton, M. B., &amp; Wallace, A. J. (2010, August). Individual and combined effects of foods on  Helicobacter pylori  growth [Abstract].  Phytotherapy Research ,  24 (8), 1229–1233.  Nordenstedt, H., Graham, D. Y., Kramer, J. R., Rugge, M., Verstovsek, G., Fitzgerald, S., ... El-Serag, H. B. (2013).  Helicobacter pylori —negative gastritis: Prevalence and risk factors.  The American Journal of Gastroenterology ,  108 , 65–71.  Ohno, T., Kita, M., Yamaoka, Y., Imamura, S., Yamamoto, T., Mitsufuji, S., ... Imanishi, J. (2003, June). Antimicrobial activity of essential oils against Helicobacter pylori [Abstract].  Helicobacter ,  8 (3), 207–215.  Vakil, N. (2016, December). Overview of gastritis.  Wang, Y.-C. (2014, August 14). Medicinal plant activity on  Helicobacter pylori  related diseases.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  20 (30), 10368–10382.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Natural remedies for gastritis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321138.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, March 7). "Natural remedies for gastritis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  