 Research has shown that using a nasal spray containing a blend of eucalyptus, peppermint, oregano, and rosemary extracts can  improve  a  sore throat , hoarseness, and other cough-related symptoms.  In this article, we look at evidence to support the use of 12 essential oils in treating coughs. We also discuss the best ways to use these oils, risks, and when to see a doctor.  There are many causes for someone to cough, including the common cold,  flu , or chest infection. Essential oils may help to soothe the throat, reduce  inflammation , and clear away mucus.  The medical community tends to view essential oils as a complementary alternative therapy rather than a medical treatment. These oils should be used with caution, as there are no approved guidelines about dosage or strength.  However, there are instructions, and if a person follows them, any of the 12 essential oils below may help to relieve a cough.  Many people use this oil without realizing it. Over-the-counter vapor or chest rubs marketed to suppress coughs often contain eucalyptus oil. Or, they may include the oil's key compound, called eucalyptol or cineole.  A study published in the  Alternative Medicine Review   found that eucalyptol has an  antimicrobial effect  and may fight off bacteria that cause illnesses. Eucalyptol may also help to reduce inflammation, relieve pain, and ease muscle tension that can result from a cold or flu.  Eucalyptus essential oil can be used to calm a cough in several ways. A person may want to try:  Chest rubs containing eucalyptus oil are  available to buy online .  Rosemary is a common garden herb. Like eucalyptus, it contains the compound cineole.  A study published in the journal  Cough  found that cineole may help to  break up mucus  and reduce inflammation.  Natural care products for respiratory conditions often contain this oil.  Menthol is an extract of peppermint. When inhaled, it creates a cooling sensation that can soothe or numb a scratchy throat.  A 2013 study suggests that when a healthy person uses peppermint oil, it can help to  relax the muscles  of the windpipe, known as the bronchial muscles. This may explain why the oil can ease breathing in people with coughs.  Peppermint essential oil can be used by:  Using peppermint essential oil  may not be advisable  in children younger than 8 or people who are pregnant.  Frankincense is dervied from the trees of the genus  Boswellia  and is often used in incense and perfumes.  It has traditionally been valued for its  effect on the respiratory system , and has been used to treat coughs, catarrh,  bronchitis , and  asthma .  Oregano essential oil contains a high level of a potent compound called carvacrol.  Authors of a 2014 study found that carvacrol is a helpful  antimicrobial agent  that can fight off many types of germs.  This oil could, therefore, help to treat viral or bacterial causes of a cough.  Thyme essential oil also contains a high level of carvacrol. It may be helpful in eliminating or protecting against viruses and bacteria.  The essential oils of nutmeg, bergamot, and cypress all contain camphene, a compound similar to camphor.  When inhaled, camphene can have a cooling, refreshing effect. It also has  antioxidant properties , which may help to protect cells from damage and ward off harmful germs.  A review of studies published in   Complementary Medicine Research   reported that a geranium extract called  Pelargonium sidoides  was an effective herbal cough treatment.  Geranium essential oil also has a refreshing floral scent. A person may want to add it to a diffuser or a warm bath.  While a person may not associate this spice with medicinal properties, authors of a 2017 study found that  cinnamon  may  protect against  germs that cause respiratory problems.  Adding a few drops of cinnamon essential oil to a diffuser or including the oil in a topical blend may provide relief from a cough.  Tea tree oil ( Melaleuca ) can  inhibit the growth of bad bacteria  that cause sinus infections and respiratory issues.  Crushed tea tree leaves have been inhaled by Australian Aborigines to treat coughs and colds, and inhaling tea tree oil may also help to ease the effects of a cough.  A person may find that different oils relax them or otherwise help them to feel more comfortable while dealing with symptoms, even if no research exists to support the use of these oils.  The following essential oils may be helpful:  For the most part, aromatherapy involves inhaling essential oils through the nose and mouth.  Essential oils are potent. Use them with care. They should be diluted, in a diffuser or in combination with another topical oil, to avoid reactions or complications. Do not ingest an essential oil.  Depending on preference and the severity of symptoms, a person can use an essential oil in a variety of ways.  Add a few drops of essential oil to a bowl of boiling water and breathe in the steam.  Dilute an essential oil in a carrier oil and apply it to the skin. Essential oils can mix well with any number of natural carrier oils, including:  Add a few drops of essential oil and a small amount of liquid soap to a bowl of warm water. Soak a towel in this mixture and drape it across the head or chest.  Apply one or two drops of essential oil to a handkerchief or tissue. Inhale, holding it close to the mouth and nose. This may provide relief from symptoms, even when a person is outdoors.  If a cough becomes severe, visit a doctor.  Warning signs  that a cough is becoming serious may include:  When used correctly, essential oils can provide a complementary treatment for a cough.  Keep essential oils out of the reach of children. A medical review from 2001 suggests that camphor and eucalyptus oils can be  dangerous when swallowed .  Other sources warn that essential oils can be  toxic or even lethal  when used in large quantities. Always use these oils with caution.  Many essential oils, including those above, can trigger allergies. Test a small amount of any essential oil before applying the full dose.  Do research and talk to a doctor about potential benefits and risks before using essential oils.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.   Article last updated on Tue 13 March 2018.  Visit our  Complementary Medicine / Alternative Medicine  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Complementary Medicine / Alternative Medicine.   
 Aromatherapy and essential oils (PDQ). (2018, February 23).  Aromatherapy and essential oils (PDQ). (2018, February 23).  Ben-Arye, E., Dudai, N., Eini, A., Torem, M., Schiff, E., &amp; Rakover, Y. (2011). Treatment of upper respiratory tract infections in primary care: A randomized study using aromatic herbs.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2011 .  Camphene. (2015, December 23).  Carson, C. F., Hammer, K. A., &amp; Riley, T. V. (2006, January 19).  Melaleuca alternifolia  (Tea tree) oil: A review of antimicrobial and other medicinal properties.  Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 19 (1), 50–62.  Dhifi, W., Bellili, S., Jazi, S., Bahloul, N., &amp; Mnif, W. (2016, December). Essential oils' chemical characterization and investigation of some biological activities: A critical review.  Medicines ,  3 (4), 25.  Dozmorov, M. G., Yang, Q., Wu, W., Wren, J., Suhail, M. M., Woolley, C. L., ... Lin, H.-K. (2014, July 2). Differential effects of selective frankincense ( Ru Xiang ) essential oil versus non-selective sandalwood ( Tan Xiang ) essential oil on cultured bladder cancer cells: A microarray and bioinformatics study.  Chinese Medicine ,  9 (18).  Fischer, J., &amp; Dethlefsen, U. (2013, November 21). Efficacy of cineole in patients suffering from acute bronchitis: A placebo-controlled double-blind trial.  Cough ,  9 , 25.  Flaman, Z., Pellechia-Clarke, S., Bailey, B., &amp; McGuigan, M. (2001, February). Unintentional exposure of young children to camphor and eucalyptus oils.  Paediatrics &amp; Child Health ,  6 (2), 80–83.  Friedman, M. (2014, August 6). Chemistry and multibeneficial bioactivities of carvacrol (4-isopropyl-2-methylphenol), a component of essential oils produced by aromatic plants and spices [Abstract].  Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry ,  62 (31), 7652–7670.  Hamidpour, R., Hamidpour, S., Hamidpour, M., &amp; Shahlari, M. (2013, October-December). Frankincense (乳香 Rǔ Xiāng; Boswellia Species): From the selection of traditional applications to the novel phytotherapy for the prevention and treatment of serious diseases.  Journal of Traditional and Complementary Medicine, 3 (4), 221–226.  Horváth, G., &amp; Ács, K. (2015, May 26). Essential oils in the treatment of respiratory tract diseases highlighting their role in bacterial infections and their anti-inflammatory action: A review.  Flavour and Fragrance Journal ,  30 (5), 331–341.  Kligler, B., &amp; Chaudhary, S. (2007, April 1). Peppermint oil.  American Family Physician ,  75 (7), 1027–1030.  Lechtzin, N. (n.d.). Cough in adults.  Meamarbashi, A., &amp; Rajabi, A. (2013, March 21). The effects of peppermint on exercise performance.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  10 ,15.  Ribeiro-Santos, R., Andrade, M., Madella, D., Martinazzo, A. P., Moura, L. D. G., Ramos de Melo, N., … Sanches-Silva, A. (2017, April). Revisiting an ancient spice with medicinal purposes: Cinnamon [Abstract].  Trends in Food Science &amp; Technology ,  62 , 154–169.  Sadlon, A. E., &amp; Lamson, D. W. (2010, April). Immune-modifying and antimicrobial effects of eucalyptus oil and simple inhalation devices [Abstract].  Alternative Medicine Review ,  15 (1), 33–47.  Tiwari, M., &amp; Kakkar, P. (2009, March). Plant derived antioxidants — geraniol and camphene protect rat alveolar macrophages against t-BHP induced oxidative stress [Abstract].  Toxicology in Vitro ,  23 (2), 295–301.  Wagner, L., Cramer, H., Klose, P., Lauche, R., Gass, F., Dobos, G., … Langhorst, J. (2015, December). Herbal medicine for cough: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  Complementary Medicine Research ,  22 (6), 359–368.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Twelve essential oils to relieve a cough."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321199.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, March 13). "Twelve essential oils to relieve a cough."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  