 This condition is known as benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) or benign prostatic enlargement (BPE). It is not related to  cancer  and is usually harmless, though it can cause unpleasant symptoms.  The prostate is a walnut-sized reproductive gland responsible for producing some of the fluid components of semen. The fluid combines with sperm from the testicles when it enters the urethra during ejaculation.  The most common surgery for BPH is called transurethral resection of the prostate or TURP. During the procedure, surgeons remove the excess prostate tissue through the urethra.  According to the American Urological Association, transurethral resection of the prostate or TURP is the most common type of surgery used to treat BPH. Every year, doctors perform it on around  150,000 American men .  Surgeons perform most TURP procedures when the patient is under general anesthesia and unconscious or asleep.  Alternatively, they use spinal anesthesia, where a needle is placed in the spine to stop any sensation below the waist.  After anesthesia, a surgeon will insert a tool called a resectoscope into the urethra. In some cases, a separate device will be used to flush sterile fluid through the surgical site.  Once the surgeon has positioned the resectoscope, they will use it to cut away abnormal prostate tissues and seal broken blood vessels.  Finally, the surgeon will insert a long plastic tube called a catheter into the urethra and flush destroyed prostate tissues into the bladder where they are excreted through urine.  Most TURP surgeries take between 1 and 2 hours and require several hours recovery under continuous monitoring.  The catheter is usually kept in place for 2 to 3 days after TURP surgeries and removed when the bladder has been completely flushed.  Initially, the urethra and surrounding area will be inflamed, and it will be difficult to urinate. The catheter and flushing process can also be uncomfortable and cause bladder cramping.  The urethra, penis, and lower abdominal area will be tender, red, and swollen for a few weeks after surgery, which can interfere with urination. Most people also feel very weak and tire easily for several weeks.  Common side effects of TURP surgeries include:  The minor side effects associated with TURP surgeries usually go away as the urethra and prostate tissues become less inflamed, usually within a few weeks.  Though TURP surgeries may or may not be associated with  erectile difficulty  in some people, they can decrease the volume of semen produced during ejaculation.  As with any medical procedure, especially those involving anesthesia, the surgery for BPH is associated with some medical complications.  Possible but rare risks associated with TURP procedures include:  In rare cases, post-TURP syndrome occurs. This is where too much of the fluid used for surgical flushing is absorbed by the body, leading to major electrolyte, fluid, and blood  volume imbalances .  Early signs of post-TURP syndrome include:  Signs of severe post-TURP syndrome include:  Though rare, post-TURP syndrome can be fatal if it is not treated early enough.  It is usually safe to return to basic everyday activities 1 to 2 weeks after TURP procedures, and safe to return to strenuous activities after 1 to 2 months.  There are several ways to reduce the risk of complications after TURP surgery.  Common tips include:  Most people begin to feel better and have an improved urine flow within 4 to 6 weeks after TURP surgery.  Overall, the risk of serious complications after TURP surgery is quite low. But as with all surgeries, there are some potential health risks associated with the procedure that require medical attention and intervention.  Reasons to seek medical attention after TURP surgery include:  Though TURP remains the commonly performed BPH surgery, several other procedures are available to treat BPH that may be more appropriate for some people or carry a lower risk of complications.  The TUIP procedure is used in cases where the prostate is fairly small, but urethral constriction is severe.  During TUIP procedures, the surgeon will insert a cystoscope into the urethra and widen the urethra by making tiny cuts in the prostate, and the area where the urethra connects to the bladder.  The TUIP procedure usually relieves urethral pressure immediately, making urination easier.  As with TURP, TUIP surgery takes a few hours, requires a few days of hospitalization, and insertion of a catheter.  Many of the side effects, complications, and risks associated with TUIP are similar to those of TURP.  Laser prostatectomy techniques include holmium laser enucleation of prostate (HoLEP) or photoselective vaporization (PVP).  These procedures are similar to TURP except they use a laser to destroy or vaporize prostate tissues instead of cutting them away with an electrical wire.  Because there is less cutting involved, there are fewer side effects associated with HoLEP surgeries than with traditional TURP surgeries, and less risk of serious complications.  Many HoLEP surgeries also only require one night of hospitalization and catheter use.  In minor cases of BPH, prostatic devices may be inserted into the prostate that helps lift it away from the urethra, reducing urethral pressure and constriction.  A fairly new procedure, TUNA uses fine needles to deliver low-frequency radio waves to target prostate tissues and destroy them. During TUNA procedures the urethra is protected from the radio waves with a shield.  During the TUMT procedure, a urologist inserts a catheter with an attached microwave generator through the urethra and into the prostate. It is then used to heat and destroy prostate tissues.  Both TUNA and TUMT are procedures that can be done in an outpatient setting, such as a clinic, and have short recovery times.  But while the procedures have been shown to be better at reducing BPH symptoms than medications alone, they are not considered as good as TURP or TUIP surgeries.  In severe cases of BPH — usually those that do not respond to any other type of treatment — the prostate may be partially or entirely removed.  Open prostatectomies are associated with a higher rate of side effects and risk of complications. As a consequence, they require longer hospital stays and rehabilitation than most procedures used to treat BPH.    
 Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). (n.d.).  Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). (n.d.).  Choi, S. B., Zhao, C., &amp; Park, J. K. (2010, August 18). The effect of transurethral resection of the prostate on erectile function in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia.  Korean Journal of Urology ,  51 (8), 557–560.  Demirel, I., Ozer, A. B., Bayar, M. K., &amp; Erhan, O. L. (2012, November 19). TURP syndrome and severe hyponatremia under general anaesthesia.  BMJ Case Reports ,  2012 .  Favilla, V., Cimino, S., Salamone, C., Fragalà, E., Madonia, M., Condorelli, R., ... Morgia, G. (2013, December). Risk factors of sexual dysfunction after transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP): A 12 months follow-up.  Journal of Endocrinological Investigation ,  36 (11), 1094–1098.  Michalak, J., Tzou, D., &amp; Funk, J. (2015, April 25). HoLEP: The gold standard for the surgical management of BPH in the 21st Century.  American Journal of Clinical and Experimental Urology ,  3 (1), 36–42.  Roehrborn, C. G. (2005). Benign prostatic hyperplasia: An overview.  Reviews in urology ,  7 (Suppl 9), S3.  Shrivastava, A., &amp; Gupta, V. B. (2012, January-June). Various treatment options for benign prostatic hyperplasia: A current update.   Journal of Mid-Life Health ,   3 (1), 10–19.  Simon, H. B. (2014, September). Prostate enlargement (benign prostate hyperplasia).  Surgery. (n.d.).  Transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP). (2015, June 8).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What happens if you have prostate surgery?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321190.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, March 12). "What happens if you have prostate surgery?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  