 This was  reported by  the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and applies to women over the age of 20. Meanwhile, the average height for men of a similar age in the U.S. is around  5 feet 9 inches .   Nutrition  and other health factors may explain height differences among various populations, and some may have limits to potential height. Immigration may also influence these averages.  Average body shape and size change with time. For example, the average woman in the 1960s stood at  5 feet 3 inches tall and weighed around 140 pounds . The average woman now weighs 168 pounds, showing an increase of 28 pounds.  Average height for women in the U.S. has only increased by an inch over the same period, indicating that weight is increasing much faster than height.  On average, height in the U.S. has increased at a slower rate than the global median.  The average height of a person in the U.S. has also increased more slowly than the height of their counterparts in other high-income countries, according to a  2016 survey .  This has not always been the case. In 1914, men in America were the  third-tallest  in the world and women the fourth-tallest.  A century later, these women were the 42nd-tallest in the world, and men the 37th-tallest.  Among men, the Netherlands had the tallest average, at  6 feet  in 2014. That same year, the tallest average for women — 5 feet 7 inches — was reported in Latvia.  Authors of the 2016 survey noted that slowed increases in height among people in America may be related to worsening nutrition. They also mentioned immigration of people from countries whose people are typically shorter in height, and lower qualities of obstetric and pediatric healthcare as potential factors.  Many unofficial sources report a global average height for women as 5 feet 3 inches or an inch taller.  Here are some worldwide trends in height for women aged 18–40 from the website  World Data :  Some factors are natural, while others relate to the standard of living.  Genetics is the primary influence on height. Around  60 to 80 percent  of height difference is the result of genetic makeup. If both parents are short, a child is likely to be short.  Some genetic conditions affect height and other developmental factors. One example specific to women is  Turner syndrome , which results in below-average height.  Where a person grows up can affect how tall they become. Significant location-based factors include:  Human growth hormone (HGH) helps to determine a person's height and other related factors. Regardless of where a person lives, their height will be inhibited if they lack this hormone.  Research reported in the  International Journal of Pediatric Endocrinology  suggests that  HGH supplements  can help to normalize height in children with unexplained  short stature .  A healthful diet can help to increase a child's height. This diet should include essential nutrients, particularly  calcium ,  vitamin D , and protein.  Sleep helps to promote growth hormones. For normal development, a child should get 8 to 10 hours of sleep every night.  Negative experiences and trauma can harm a child's ability to develop. When a child resides in a place that is not nurturing, they are likely to experience more illness and less growth.  Research shows that a supportive home  environment is particularly important  for adequate growth in pre-adolescent years, especially for girls.  Men tend to be taller than women, and during  puberty  boys typically experience a longer and more rapid period of growth. Girls usually stop growing taller by age 19, while boys continue until age 22. On average, men are up to 6 inches taller than women.  These differences can be linked to chromosomes. Researchers have found that genetic variants on the  X chromosomes are responsible  for a range of distinctions between men and women, including height.  People who possess some of these variants tend to be shorter. Because genetically women tend to have two X chromosomes, they are more likely to have these gene variations.  The average height of women varies around the world. In the U.S., the average woman is around 5 feet 4 inches. While this is the tallest average recorded in the country's history, average weight is increasing faster than height.  Men tend to be about 6 inches taller than women, and genetics plays an important part in this distinction. The environment in which a person is raised also contributes to their height. Access to nutrition and healthcare, nurturing at home, and a certain amount of sleep can help to promote growth and other developmental factors.  If a child is growing at an unusual rate without explanation, a doctor may recommend growth hormone treatment.    
 Amos, J. (2016, July 26). Dutch men revealed as world's tallest.  Amos, J. (2016, July 26). Dutch men revealed as world's tallest.  Body measurements. (2017, May 3).  Dubois, L., Kyvik, K. O., Girard, M., Tatone-Tokuda, F., Pérusse, D., Hjelmborg, J., … Martin, N. G. (2012, February 8). Genetic and environmental contributions to weight, height, and BMI from birth to 19 years of age: An international study of over 12,000 twin pairs.  PLOS One ,  7 (2).  Franco, E. (2016, July 26). A century of trends in adult human height.  eLIFE ,  5 .  Lai, C.-Q. (n.d.). How much of human height is genetic and how much is due to nutrition?  Ogden, C. L., Fryar, C. D., Caroll, M. D. &amp; Flegal, K. M. (2004, October 27). Mean body weight, height, and body mass index, United States 1960–2002.  Roser, M. (2013). Human height.  Soliman, A., De Sanctis, V., Elalaily, R., &amp; Bedair, S. (2014, November). Advances in pubertal growth and factors influencing it: Can we increase pubertal growth?  Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism ,  18 (1).  Soliman, A. T. &amp; De Sanctis, V. (2012, September–October). An approach to constitutional delay of growth and puberty.  Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism ,  16 (5), 698–705.  Sotos, J. F. &amp; Tokar, N. J. (2014, July 16). Growth hormone significantly increases the adult height of children with idiopathic short stature: comparison of subgroups and benefit.  International Journal of Pediatric Endocrinology ,  15 .  Tukiainen, T., Pirinen, M., Sarin, A. P. Ladenvall, C., Kettunen, J., Lehtimäki, T., … Rippatti, S. (2014, February 6). Chromosome X-wide association study identifies loci for fasting insulin and height and evidence for incomplete dosage compensation.  PLOS Genetics ,  10 (2).  Turner syndrome. (2015, May 5).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "What is the average height for women?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321132.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, March 6). "What is the average height for women?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  