 Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is an umbrella term for conditions that affect the heart and blood vessels,  including   heart disease ,  heart attack ,  heart failure , and  stroke .  CVD is the number 1 killer in the United States. Heart disease alone is responsible for around  610,000 deaths  in the country every year.  Previous research suggests that  vitamin D  status may play an important role in cardiovascular health.  A  study  reported by  Medical News Today  in 2016, for example, associated low  vitamin  D levels with greater risk of stroke, heart failure, heart attack, and cardiovascular death.  The  new study  — led by Prof. Jutta Dierkes, of the Department of Clinical Medicine at the University of Bergen in Norway — further investigated the role that vitamin D levels play in the risk of death from CVD.  In order to reach their findings, Prof. Dierkes and colleagues analyzed the blood samples of 4,114 adults who had suspected  angina pectoris , which is chest pain as a result of  coronary heart disease .  Subjects were an average age of 62 at study baseline, and they were followed-up for an average of 12 years.  The team assessed the subjects' blood samples for levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D3, or 25(OH)D, which is the primary circulating form of vitamin D. During follow-up, there were a total of 895 deaths. Of these, 407 were related to CVD.  According to the  National Institutes of Health (NIH) , a 25(OH)D level of 50–125 nanomoles per liter (nmol/l) is "generally considered adequate for bone and overall health in healthy individuals."  In the study, the researchers found that the optimal 25(OH)D blood concentrations for mortality risk were 42–100 nmol/l. Concentrations lower than 42 nmol/l and higher than 100 nmol/l were associated with a greater risk of death from CVD.   In fact, the researchers found that participants with the optimal 25(OH)D concentrations were 30 percent less likely to die of CVD.   "We discovered," says Prof. Dierkes, "that the right amount of vitamin D reduces the risk of death substantially. However, too much or too little increase the risk."  Based on these results, Prof. Dierkes recommends that all people with CVD have their vitamin D levels measured and monitored. If levels are below normal, vitamin D supplementation might be required.  That said, the researchers note that the optimal amount of vitamin D is not the same for everyone. "It depends where you live, and what kind of diet you have," Prof. Dierkes adds.  The primary source of vitamin D is sunlight, but we can also get it from certain foods —  including  salmon, tuna, and eggs — and dietary supplements, which are  available to purchase online .  However, it is worth noting that further studies are needed before vitamin D can be recommended as a beneficial supplement for people with CVD.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.  