 Hip pain is  more common  in women than men and is most prevalent in women aged 40–60 years. It is mainly caused by injury or overuse, although there are some other causes.  In this article, we take a look at these causes, along with available treatment options and tips for preventing hip pain at night.  Hip pain at night can be caused by a variety of different conditions affecting the hip joint, connected muscles, or surrounding tissue.  The muscles around the buttock are called the gluteal muscles. Poor strength in the gluteal muscles can cause the front of the hip to overcompensate to stabilize and support the rest of the joint.  This causes the tendons attaching the gluteal muscles to the hip and pelvis to become squeezed, leading to pain at the hip known as greater trochanteric pain syndrome (GTPS).  GTPS specifically involves the tendons and fluid-filled sacs surrounding the greater trochanter, which is the prominent bony part of a hip. An injury to either the tendons or sacs can cause pain and tenderness to the hip, particularly at night.  Bursae are small fluid-filled sacs that act as cushions, helping to reduce friction at the hip joint.  Bursitis  occurs when the bursae become inflamed.   Inflammation  of the bursae causes pain from the hip that spreads down the side of the thigh. This sharp, intense pain may worsen at night.  Tendinopathy refers to any disease of the tendons. Tendons in the hip attach the gluteal muscles to the hip and pelvis. Together, they work to stabilize the pelvis and support hip mobility during day-to-day tasks, such as walking and going up the stairs.  Tendons in the hip may become inflamed or break down due to compression or overloading without having time to recover. This can cause hip pain at night.  Frequently sitting with legs crossed, or standing with all the weight on one hip can also cause tendinopathy and hip pain.  Osteoarthritis of the hip joint is another common cause of hip pain at night. Osteoarthritis is a result of age-related "wear and tear" of the tissue known as cartilage that surrounds the ends of bones.  As the cartilage at the hip wears away, the bones at the hip rub against each other, which leads to inflammation, swelling, and pain.  Osteoarthritis can present as stiffness and soreness of the hip, which can make everyday tasks difficult and painful over time. Hip pain can move around to the buttocks or down the leg, affecting mobility, and can be painful at night.  Strenuous exercise — such as soccer, running, or dancing — has been  linked  to increased risk of hip pain. This could be due to a range of conditions, including bursitis, tendinopathy, or injury to the iliotibial band, a band of tissue connecting the pelvis and the shin bone.  A recent change to the frequency of exercise may also be a trigger for injury or pain in the hip.  Several other factors could lead to hip pain occurring at night:  A person might be able to treat hip pain at night by making changes to exercise and sleep routines, alongside other lifestyle changes.  If these do not work, several pain management options are available.   Exercise   To improve hip pain at night, people should do the following:  A physio can recommend specific exercises to increase hip strength and flexibility.   Sleep   Changing a regular sleeping position can help improve hip pain. People may want to try the following:  People may also wish to consider a new mattress or foam topper mattress. This can improve support and distribute weight more evenly to minimize pressure on hips.   Lifestyle changes   Some simple lifestyle changes may help reduce hip pain at night:   Pain management   People can relieve and control hip pain in several different ways:  During pregnancy, it is quite common for individuals to experience changes in their body and hormone levels. One potential change is a pain in the hip or pelvis as muscles and ligaments relax and stretch before giving birth.  When pregnant, the best sleeping position is on the side.  Experts recommend  putting a pillow between the legs, which can help support the hips and lower back and prevent rolling over.  Other less common causes of hip pain during pregnancy are:  Anyone who is concerned about hip pain during pregnancy should tell a doctor or midwife, or make an appointment to see a physio.  Here are some steps that people can take to reduce the risk of experiencing hip pain at night:  People should seek medical attention if hip pain at night is persistent, gets worse, or spreads to knees, pelvis, or lower back.  If someone is taking NSAIDs long-term, but the drugs no longer help ease the hip pain, the person should make an appointment to talk with a doctor about alternative medication options.  For a thorough diagnosis of hip pain, it is likely that the doctor will order an imaging test, such as an X-ray, to look more closely at the hip.  In some instances, hip pain is unpreventable and a natural part of aging.  Moderate exercise with appropriate footwear and maintaining a healthy weight helps to protect bones and joints. Doing both of these things will hopefully prevent hip pain from getting worse.  Anyone who is experiencing hip pain at night should see if they can improve their sleeping position and mattress. Adding a foam topper, which can be  purchased online , may make a difference.  If the pain does not improve, the person should make an appointment to see their doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Cross, M., Smith, E., Hoy, D., Nolte, S., Ackerman, I., Fransen, M., … March, L. (2014, July). The global burden of hip and knee osteoarthritis: Estimates from the Global Burden of Disease 2010 study [Abstract].  Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases ,  73 (7), 1323–1330.  Cross, M., Smith, E., Hoy, D., Nolte, S., Ackerman, I., Fransen, M., … March, L. (2014, July). The global burden of hip and knee osteoarthritis: Estimates from the Global Burden of Disease 2010 study [Abstract].  Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases ,  73 (7), 1323–1330.  Greater trochanteric pain syndrome (trochanteric bursitis). (2016, August). Retreived from  https://cks.nice.org.uk/greater-trochanteric-pain-syndrome-trochanteric-bursitis#!topicsummary   Grimaldi, A., Mellor, R., Hodges, P., Bennell, K., Wajswelner, H., &amp; Vicenzino, B. (2015, August). Gluteal tendinopathy: A review of mechanisms, assessment and management [Abstract].  Sports Medicine ,  45 (8), 1107–1119.  Grumet, R. C., Frank, R. M., Slabaugh, M. A., Virkus, W. W., Bush-Joseph, C. A., &amp; Nho, S. J. (2010, May). Lateral hip pain in an athletic population: Differential diagnosis and treatment options.  Sports Health ,  2 (3), 191–196. Retreived from  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3445102/   Kane, A. (n.d.). How fat affects arthritis.  Lustenberger, D. P., Ng, V. Y., Best, T. M., &amp; Ellis, T. J. (2013, June 21). Efficacy of treatment of trochanteric bursitis: A systematic review.  Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine: Official Journal of the Canadian Academy of Sport Medicine ,  21 (5), 447–453.  Reid, D. (2016, March). The management of greater trochanteric pain syndrome: A systematic literature review.  Journal of Orthopaedics ,  13 (1), 15–28.  Segal, N. A., Felson, D. T., Torner, J. C., Zhu, Y., Curtis, J. R., Niu, J., &amp; Nevitt, M. C., (2007, August). Greater trochanteric pain syndrome: Epidemiology and associated factors.   Archives of Physical Medication and Rehabilitation ,  88 (8), 988–992.  Steroid injections. (2017, March 23).  Your pregnancy and baby guide: Pelvic pain in pregnancy. (2016, July 28).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  RNutr, Jo Lewin. "What can cause hip pain at night?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 8 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321144.php&gt;    APA  RNutr, J. (2018, March 8). "What can cause hip pain at night?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  