 According to the  National Sleep Foundation,  90 million American adults snore sometimes, and 37 million people snore on a regular basis.  The causes of snoring are usually not serious. However, it may indicate that changes to lifestyle would improve a person's health.  The following lifestyle changes and tips may reduce or stop a person's snoring.   1. Losing weight   Overweight individuals are  more likely to snore . Fatty tissue and poor muscle tone, particularly around the throat, contribute to snoring.  Eating a calorie-controlled, healthful diet and regularly exercising are the best ways to lose weight.   2. Sleeping on one side   A person is more likely to snore if they  lie on their back , which can cause the tongue to move to the back of the throat. This makes breathing harder and can cause the vibrations of snoring.  Sleeping on one side may allow the air to flow more smoothly, reducing the vibrations. This may either stop the sound of a snore or make it quieter.   3. Quitting smoking   In addition to harming overall health, smoking irritates the airways, and this can make snoring worse.  If a person smokes, quitting may help them to snore less, if at all.   4. Avoiding alcohol   Drinking a significant amount of alcohol relaxes the throat muscles. When these muscles relax, they are more likely to vibrate.  Avoiding alcohol before bed may reduce or stop snoring.   5. Avoiding sleeping pills   Sedative medications, or sleeping pills, can lead to very deep sleep. This may have a relaxing effect on the throat muscles and cause snoring.  A doctor can recommend healthful ways to ensure a good night's sleep.   6. Elevating the head   Elevating the head using additional pillows may help to open the airways, reducing or eliminating snoring.  Marketers offer pillows designed to prop up the body and prevent snoring. These are  available to buy online .   7. Treating allergies   An allergic reaction may lead to congestion and blocked airways. This can make snoring worse.  If a person's snoring is caused by allergies, getting effective treatment can help.   8. Mandibular advancement device   If a person's tongue is partially blocking the back of the throat during sleep, this can cause snoring.  A mandibular advancement device is worn in the mouth, to bring the tongue forward, which may reduce snoring.   9. Vestibular shield   A vestibular shield is also worn in the mouth.  Snoring can be caused by the mouth falling open during sleep, and this device encourages a person to breathe through their nose, which may prevent snoring.   10. Nasal dilators or strips   Blocked or narrow airways may also cause snoring, and a nasal dilator or strip can help.  They are designed to keep a person's nose open while they sleep. This helps them to breath more easily and may stop or reduce snoring.   11. Nasal sprays   When blocked or narrow airways cause snoring, a nasal spray may also be useful.  Nasal sprays can help to reduce  inflammation  in the nose and airways, opening them up.  If a person is looking for a long-lasting snoring remedy, they may consider surgery. Several types of prevention surgery are available.   12. Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty   Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP) requires a general anesthetic. It entails removing all or part of the:  UPPP helps to widen the middle part of the throat. If this area is too narrow, it can cause snoring.   13. Laser-assisted uvulopalatoplasty   Laser-assisted uvulopalatoplasty (LAUP) is a less extreme surgical intervention than UPPP. A person may require local or general anesthetic.  LAUP involves the use of a laser to reduce the size of the soft palate and uvula. This also helps to widen the middle part of the throat. A person may want to consider LAUP if snoring is caused by the narrowness of this area.   14. Palatal stiffening operation   A palatal stiffening operation, also called electrical cautery, involves burning the soft palate to stiffen it.  This is effective when snoring is caused by the soft palate blocking the airway.   15. Radio frequency ablation   This surgical procedure is also known as somnoplasty.  Radio frequencies are used to create controlled lesions on the soft palate, shrinking any excess tissue nearby.  If the soft palate is blocking the airway, causing a person to snore, this procedure can help.   16. Injection snoreplasty   A  2014 study  found injection snoreplasty to be a safe and effective way to treat snoring caused by the soft palate.  This procedure involves injecting a chemical into the soft palate, to break down tissue and reduce its size. It is much less invasive than other surgical options aimed at stopping snoring.   17. Septoplasty   Septoplasty is surgery to correct a deviated septum.  A deviated septum can affect the passage of air through the nose and cause snoring.   18. Pillar procedure   This minor surgery entails the insertion of tiny implants into the soft palate. The goal is to stiffen it, reducing its ability to vibrate as a person snores.  There is little or no evidence to suggest that the following remedies are effective in stopping snoring:  Snoring can disturb the sleep of those nearby.  To avoid relationship difficulties, the person who snores may ask their partners or roommates to do the following:  A person who snores may want to consider a surgical procedure if other prevention remedies have failed.  When a person falls asleep, their tongue, mouth, throat, and airways relax. Breathing can cause these areas to vibrate, which leads to the sound of snoring.  A person is more likely to snore if they:  Sleep apnea, a condition where the airways are temporarily blocked, can also cause snoring.  Sleep apnea can cause difficulties breathing. Speak to a doctor if any of the following symptoms are present:  Apnea is more serious than snoring. It can put tremendous strain on the heart, and other organs, so prompt treatment is necessary.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Clinical guideline for the evaluation, management and long-term care of obstructive sleep apnea in adults. (2009, June 15)  Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine ,  5 (3), 263–276.  Clinical guideline for the evaluation, management and long-term care of obstructive sleep apnea in adults. (2009, June 15)  Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine ,  5 (3), 263–276.  Jaimanti, B., Ashok, G. K., Anil, D. K., &amp; Gaurav, K. (2014, July 3). Injection snoreplasty: A simple way to treat habitual snoring.  British Journal of Medicine &amp; Medical Research ,  4 (30), 4946–4955.  Laser-assisted uvuloplatoplasty (LAUP). (n.d.).  Palatal stiffening (CAPSO). (n.d.).  Radio-frequency ablation (somnoplasty). (n.d).  Ravesloot, M. J. L., van Maanen, J. P., Dun, L., &amp; de Vries, N. (2013, March) The undervalued potential of positional therapy in position-dependent snoring and obstructive sleep apnea—a review of the literature.  Sleep &amp; Breathing = Schlaf &amp; Atmung ,  17  (1), 39–49.  Sleep apnea: Symptoms &amp; risk factors. (2016, June 22).  Snoring and sleep. (n.d.).  Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP). (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What is a home remedy for snoring?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321174.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, March 10). "What is a home remedy for snoring?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  