 Prescription  antibiotics , such as  penicillin , have helped people to recover from otherwise fatal diseases and conditions since the 1940s.  However, people are also turning to natural antibiotics for treatment.  According to the NHS,  1 in 10 people  experiences side effects that harm the digestive system after taking antibiotics. Around  1 in 15 people  are allergic to this type of medication.  In this article, we look at the evidence behind seven of the best natural antibiotics. We also discuss which to avoid, and when to see a doctor.  The scientific jury is still out concerning natural antibiotics. While people have used remedies like these for hundreds of years, most treatments have not been thoroughly tested.  However, some show promising results under medical review, and further studies are underway.  With an ongoing increase in drug-resistant bacteria, scientists are looking to nature when developing new medications.  Here, we examine the science behind seven natural antibiotics.  Cultures across the world have long recognized garlic for its preventive and curative powers.  Research has found that garlic can be  an effective treatment  against many forms of bacteria, including  Salmonella  and  Escherichia coli  ( E. coli ). Garlic has even been considered for use against multi-drug resistant  tuberculosis .  Since the time of Aristotle, honey has been used as an ointment that helps wounds to heal and prevents or draws out infection.  Healthcare professionals today have found it helpful in treating chronic wounds, burns, ulcers, bedsores, and skin grafts. For example, results of a  study from 2016  demonstrate that honey dressings can help to heal wounds.  The antibacterial effects of honey are usually attributed to its hydrogen peroxide content. However, manuka honey fights off bacteria, though it has a lower hydrogen peroxide content.  A 2011 study reported that the best-known type of honey inhibits approximately  60 kinds  of bacteria. It also suggests that honey successfully treats wounds infected with methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus  ( MRSA ).  Antibacterial properties aside, honey may help wounds to heal by providing a protective coating that fosters a moist environment.  The scientific community also recognizes  ginger  as a natural antibiotic. Several studies, including one published in  2017 , have demonstrated ginger's ability to fight many strains of bacteria.  Researchers are also exploring ginger's power to combat seasickness and nausea and to lower blood sugar levels.  Native American and other traditional healers have used  echinacea  for hundreds of years to treat infections and wounds. Researchers are beginning to understand why.   A study  published in the  Journal of Biomedicine and Biotechnology  reports that extract of  Echinacea purpurea  can kill many different kinds of bacteria, including  Streptococcus pyogenes  (S. pyogenes).  S. pyogenes is responsible for  strep throat , toxic shock syndrome, and the "flesh-eating disease" known as  necrotizing fasciitis .  Echinacea may also fight  inflammation  associated with bacterial infection. It is available to purchase in health stores or  online .   Goldenseal is usually consumed in tea or capsules to treat respiratory and digestive problems. However, it may also combat bacterial  diarrhea  and  urinary tract infections .  In addition, results of a  recent study  support the use of goldenseal to treat skin infections. In a lab, goldenseal extracts were used to prevent MRSA from damaging tissue.  A person taking prescription medications should check with a doctor before taking goldenseal, as this supplement can cause interference.  Goldenseal also contains berberine, an important component of natural antibiotics. This alkaloid is not safe for infants, or women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.  Goldenseal capsules are available to purchase in health stores or  online .  Clove has traditionally been used in dental procedures. Research is now finding that clove water extract  may be effective  against many different kinds of bacteria, including  E. coli .  Some believe that oregano boosts the immune system and acts as an  antioxidant . It may have anti-inflammatory properties.  While researchers have yet to verify these claims, some studies show that oregano is among the  more effective  natural antibiotics, particularly when it is made it into an oil.  Just because something is labeled natural, it is not necessarily safe.  The amounts and concentrations of active ingredients vary among brands of supplements. Read labels carefully. A person should also inform their healthcare provider if they plan to take these supplements.  While cooked garlic is usually safe to consume, research suggests that taking concentrated garlic may  increase  the risk of bleeding. This can be dangerous for people facing surgery or taking blood thinners.  Garlic concentrates may also reduce the usefulness of  HIV  medications.  Certain products should be avoided, including colloidal silver. This substance consists of microscopic pieces of silver suspended in water.  Colloidal silver has been recommended as a treatment for a variety of diseases, including the bubonic plague and HIV. However, according to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, it can be dangerous, and  no credible studies  back up these uses.  Taking colloidal silver supplements may interfere with the effectiveness of antibiotics and medication used to treat an underactive thyroid gland.  Silver can also build up in the body and turn the skin bluish-gray. This condition is called argyria and is permanent in most people.  Due to the current increase in drug-resistant diseases, most doctors do not prescribe antibiotics unless they are effective and necessary.  Antibiotics are most often prescribed to:  If a person is prescribed antibiotics, they should take the entire dosage as directed. This is especially encouraged in people with a higher risk of bacterial infection, or who face greater risks if they become ill, such as people who are:  When an individual is allergic to prescription antibiotics or suffers side effects, they may want to discuss other options with a doctor.  According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), each year more than  2 million  Americans become unwell from drug-resistant bacteria, resulting in 23,000 annual deaths.  These bacteria constitute a growing threat, and the key to developing new and effective medications may lie in treatments of the past — natural antibiotics.  While natural antibiotics may present opportunities, they also carry risks. Still, research into these treatments is growing, and an increasing number of substances are being tested. Natural antibiotics traditionally used for centuries may contribute to the lifesaving drugs of tomorrow.    
 Antibiotics. (2016, June 9).  Antibiotics. (2016, June 9).  Antibiotic resistance threats in the United States, 2013. (2013, April 23).  Bayan, L., Koulivand, P. H., &amp; Gorji, A. (2014, January–February). Garlic: A review of potential therapeutic effects.  Avicenna Journal of Phytomedicine ,  4 (1), 1–14.  Cech, N. B., Junio, H. A., Ackermann, L. W., Kavanaugh, J. S., &amp; Horswill, A. R. (2012, September). Quorum quenching and antimicrobial activity of goldenseal ( Hydrastis Canadensis ) against methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA).  Planta Medica ,  78  (14), 1556–1561.  Colloidal silver. (2017, August 10).  Garlic. (2016, November 30).  Goharshenasan, P., Amini, S., Atria, A., Abtahi, H., &amp; Khorasani, G. (2016). Topical application of honey on surgical wounds: A randomized clinical trial.  Complementary Medicine Research ,  23 , 12–15.  Goldenseal. (2016, November 30).  Hudson, J. B. (2011, October 26). Applications of the phytomedicine  Echinacea purpurea  (purple coneflower) in infectious diseases.  Journal of Biomedicine and Biotechnology .  Liu, Q., Meng, X., Li, Y., Zhao, C.-N., Tang, G.-Y., &amp; Li, H.-B. (2017, June 16). Antibacterial and antifungal activities of spices.  International Journal of Molecular Sciences ,  18 (6), 1283.  Mandal, M. D., &amp; Mandal, S. (2011, April). Honey: Its medicinal property and antibacterial activity.  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  1 (2), 154–160.  The history of antibiotics. (n.d.).  Using dietary supplements wisely. (2016, June 13).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "Top seven safe, effective natural antibiotics."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321108.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, March 3). "Top seven safe, effective natural antibiotics."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  