  Hay fever  is widespread, experienced by an estimated  40 to 60 million  Americans.  There are two primary types of hay fever. They are distinguished by the duration, timing, and cause of symptoms.  Seasonal hay fever causes symptoms only at certain times of the year. This tends to be in the spring and fall, when plants, fungi, and molds are releasing reproductive spores.  Perennial hay fever usually leads to year-round symptoms, because of continual exposure to environmental allergens.  If a person is not a medical professional, they likely cannot distinguish between a hay fever cough and one caused by other conditions, such as a cold or  flu .  However, below are a list of factors that can help when identifying a hay fever cough.  Common traits of a hay fever cough include:  Sometimes, a hay fever cough will last for as long as a person is exposed to the allergen. For example, a person may only have the cough when around a friend's pet.  A hay fever cough may be accompanied by:  This cough usually does not occur with:  The cough may occur with aches, pains, and stiffness if the hay fever is complicated by  asthma  or other respiratory conditions, however.  Hay fever occurs when natural allergens enter the body and cause an allergic response.  Some people with hay fever develop sensitivities because of over-exposure or recurrent exposure to an allergen. Many others are born with sensitivities, or have conditions that increase the likelihood of sensitivities developing.  Seasonal hay fever tends to be caused by a different group of allergens from those that cause perennial hay fever, though some people experience both conditions.  Any foreign material can cause an allergic response. While most people are only sensitive to one allergen, others are sensitive to several, and these allergens are usually related.  Common allergens associated with seasonal hay fever include:  Fungal and mold spores are also allergens that can lead to hay fever.  Allergens often associated with perennial hay fever include:  Also, the excrement, saliva, and shells of cockroaches are highly common allergens. An estimated  63 percent  of households in the United States contain cockroach allergens. In urban areas, the rates can reach  98 percent .  A 2015 study found that roughly  18 percent  of children aged under 17 in the U.S. have been diagnosed with hay fever, especially in southwestern and southeastern states.  If a primary care doctor suspects that a person has hay fever, they will usually refer the person to an allergist, a doctor who specializes in allergies.  An allergist will ask questions about lifestyle habits, home and work environments, medical history, and symptoms, then perform a physical exam of the nose and throat.  Coughs tend to have similar symptoms, because all coughs are caused by the body attempting to clear away foreign particles, using mucus.  Also, the range, severity, and duration of all hay fever symptoms vary from person to person. This makes it hard to establish a firm set of distinguishing symptoms.  Common symptoms of hay fever include:  A range of medications and home remedies can treat hay fever and an associated cough.  Useful home remedies may include:  If a person has an allergy to pollen, it may help to take a supplement of local bee pollen.  Medical options for treating hay fever coughs include:  The best way to prevent hay fever is to avoid exposure to known or suspected allergens. Lifestyle changes can reduce risk and limit the severity of symptoms.  Cleaning the home frequently and extensively can help to eliminate allergens. Tips include:  If allergies are caused by animals, it may be helpful to:  A person can prevent insect and rodent infestations by keeping counters free of food crumbs, storing food in sealed containers, and fixing leaky pipes. It may also help to avoid piling items such as clothes, newspapers, and logs.  The following machines can help to eliminate allergens in the home:  Tips for preventing hay fever while outdoors include:  Hay fever, also known as  allergic rhinitis , is extremely common.  It leads to many of the same symptoms as a cold or flu, including sneezing, nasal congestion, and itchy, watery eyes.  Hay fever can also cause chronic coughing, especially in people with respiratory conditions such as asthma.  Speak with a doctor about coughs that last for longer than 10 days, do not respond to over-the-counter medications, or are painful. It may also help to discuss coughs that occur only in specific settings or seasons.    
 Allergic rhinitis. (n.d.).  Allergic rhinitis. (n.d.).  Choi, S. Y., &amp; Park, K. (2016, March 13). Effect of inhalation of aromatherapy oil on patients with perennial allergic rhinitis: A randomized controlled trial.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2016 .  Cockroach allergy. (n.d.).  Cold, flu, or allergy? (2014, October).  Silverberg, J. I., Braunstein, M., &amp; Lee-Wong, M. (2015, February). Association between climate factors, pollen counts, and childhood hay fever prevalence in the United States.  The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology ,  135 (2), 463–469.  What does that cough really mean? (2016, September 12).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What is a hay fever cough?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321182.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, March 12). "What is a hay fever cough?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  