 People often find masturbation difficult to discuss, which may explain why this topic attracts so many myths.  This myth that masturbation causes  hair loss  may come from theories about protein loss or changes in  testosterone .  However, these myths rarely hold water, and masturbation is a regular part of life for many people — in a survey of more than 2,000 adults,  80 percent  of men and women reported masturbating.  In this article, we take a closer look at why people think that masturbation might cause hair loss. We also investigate other masturbation myths and facts, and look at real causes of hair loss.  In a word, no — there is no scientific evidence that masturbating causes hair loss.  This myth may come from the idea that semen contains high levels of protein, and so with each ejaculation, the body is losing protein that it could use for hair growth.  While it is true that semen is high in protein — with approximately  5.04 grams (g) of protein per 100 milliliters  (mL) of semen — each ejaculation contains just  3.3 to 3.7mL  of semen, which is a comparatively small amount.  Another theory is that masturbation increases testosterone, which in turn increases the levels of a hormone linked to hair loss, called  DHT  (dihydrotestosterone).  However, a study from 2001 showed that adult males actually had an  increase  in testosterone levels after abstaining from masturbation for 3 weeks. This means that testosterone levels might actually rise if a person avoids ejaculating.  In either case, there is no evidence to suggest that masturbation increases DHT levels.  Many myths exist about masturbation, but modern science has not proven it as the cause of any specific physical ailments.  Alongside hair loss, there is no evidence that masturbation will:  Many people find masturbation difficult to talk about, which means that myths about masturbation can be very persistent.  Masturbation may have many benefits, including:   Understanding the body   Masturbation may help a person to become more familiar and comfortable with their body, helping them understand their sexual sensations and what gives them pleasure.  Studies  have reported  that women who masturbate early in life may be more likely to have positive sexual experiences as an adult, and a healthy self-image.   Physical health   Orgasms, whether achieved alone or with a partner,  support and strengthen  the circulatory, nerve, and muscular systems of the genitals in men and women.  For men, orgasms may help to keep sperm and semen healthy. A study published in  2016  reports that frequent ejaculation may reduce a man's risk of developing  prostate cancer .   Stress relief   Many people use masturbation as a way to relieve  stress  or help with sleep. It may be considered a risk-free way to experience sexual pleasure, since it cannot lead to pregnancy or  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs).  Although many people find it difficult to talk about, there are few risks associated with masturbation. It may become a problem if it begins to:  If a person is worried that masturbation is becoming a problem, a doctor or sex therapist will be able to advise on the best course of action.  The actual cause of hair loss is most often a combination of heredity and hormones, not masturbation.  Common causes of hair loss include:   Male pattern baldness   Androgenetic alopecia or pattern  baldness  is a genetic disorder and is the  most common  cause of hair loss.  An individual with androgenetic alopecia has a genetic sensitivity to DHT. When exposed to DHT, the hair follicles shrink, which prevents them from generating strong, healthy hair.  According to the  American Hair Loss Organization , male pattern baldness (MPB) causes over 95 percent of hair loss in men and may affect 85 percent of men by the time they are 50.  Although women have lower levels of testosterone than men, androgenetic alopecia can also affect females. According to the British Association of Dermatologists, about  50 percent  of women over the age of 65 will experience androgenetic alopecia.   Alopecia areata   This form of alopecia typically results in bald patches developing on the head or elsewhere. The hairless areas may stay contained and hair may re-grow, or the hair loss can spread to include the entire scalp, facial area, and body.   Alopecia areata  is considered to be an autoimmune condition. It can affect men, women, or children.  This condition affects about  2 percent  of people. For about  30 percent  of people with this condition, hair loss is recurring or can become permanent.   Chemotherapy   While  chemotherapy  typically focuses on  cancer  cells, some of the cancer-fighting compounds in chemotherapy drugs can cause as much as  90 percent  of a person's hair to fall out. This hair loss is temporary, and the hair should regrow following treatment.   Major bodily stress   Major stress to the body, such as childbirth, serious infection, or  malnutrition , can result in a significant loss of hair.  This form of hair loss usually resolves on its own, but it may also be persistent.   Traction alopecia   This form of alopecia occurs when the hair is pulled too tightly for a long time, resulting in damage to the hair follicles.  Traction alopecia occurs when a person wears cornrows, extensions, tight braids, or ponytails for an extended period.  In its early stages, this hair loss is temporary. However, if a person continues to wear the same hairstyle for months or years, the hair loss can become permanent.   Medication   Some medications, including  birth control  pills and certain  antidepressants , can cause hair loss as a side effect.  Masturbation is a common activity that will not affect a person's health or lead to hair loss.  Anyone who wants to talk about the benefits or problems associated with masturbation should speak to their doctor, or a sex therapist. Likewise, anyone worried about hair loss should discuss it with a healthcare professional.    
 Androgenetic alopecia. (2015, June).  Androgenetic alopecia. (2015, June).  Exton, M. S., Krüger, T. H., Bursch, N., Haake, P., Knapp, W., Schedlowski, M., &amp; Hartmann, U. (2001, November). Endocrine response to masturbation-induced orgasm in healthy men following a 3-week sexual abstinence.  World Journal of Urology ,  19 (5), 377–382.  Herbenick, D., Bowling, J., Fu, T.-C., Dodge, B., Guerra-Reyes, L, &amp; Sanders, S. (2017, July 20). Sexual diversity in the United States: Results from a nationally representative probability sample of adult women and men.  PLOS One, 12  (7).  Kaestle, C. E., &amp; Allen, K. R. (2011, October). The role of masturbation in healthy sexual development: Perceptions of young adults [Abstract].  Archives of Sexual Behavior ,  40 (5), 983–994.  Levin, Roy J. (2007, February 19). Sexual activity, health, well-being — the beneficial roles of coitus and masturbation [Abstract].  Journal of Sexual and Relationship Therapy ,  22  (1), 135–148.  Masturbation. (n.d.).  Men's hair loss. (n.d.).  Owen, D. H., &amp; Katz, D. F. (2005, July–August). A review of the physical and chemical properties of human semen and the formulation of a semen simulant.  Journal of Andrology ,  26 (4), 459-469.  Rider, J. R., Wilson, K. M., Sinnott, J. A., Kelly, R. S., Mucci, L. A., &amp; Giovannucci, E. L. (2016 December). Ejaculation frequency and risk of prostate cancer: Updated results with an additional decade of follow-up [Abstract].   European Urology ,   70 (6), 974–982.  Robbins, C. L., Schick, V., Reece, M., Herbenick, D., Sanders, S. A., Dodge, B., &amp; Fortenberry, D. (2011, December). Prevalence, frequency, and associations of masturbation with partnered sexual behaviors among US adolescents.  JAMA Pediatrics ,  165  (12), 1087–1093.  Shine, R., Peek, J., &amp; Birdsall, M. (2008, December 12). Declining sperm quality in New Zealand over 20 years.  The New Zealand Medical Journal ,  121 (1287), 50–56.  Types of hair loss. Alopecia areata. (n.d.).  Types of hair loss. Causes of hair loss. (n.d.). Retrieved from  http://www.americanhairloss.org/women_hair_loss/causes_of_hair_loss.asp   Types of hair loss. Introduction. (n.d.).  Women's hair loss. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "Can masturbation cause hair loss?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321153.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, March 9). "Can masturbation cause hair loss?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  