 But too much mucus, or mucus that has changed in color or consistency, can signify an underlying condition that may need addressing.  Read on to learn more about mucus in the urine and discover what is and is not normal.  There are many reasons why mucus may be present in the urine, including:  As the mucus moves through the urinary tract, it flushes out germs that may otherwise cause infection.  Mucus in urine is thin and fluid-like and is typically clear, white, or off-white. The amount of mucus in urine can vary. However, large amounts of mucus, or mucus that changes color might indicate an infection or other problem.  Sometimes, women may think that they are producing more mucus in their urine, but this mucus may be coming from the vagina.  Vaginal mucus varies in amount, color, and thickness at different stages of the menstrual cycle, as well as during pregnancy.  UTIs are among the most common types of infection treated by doctors every year. Both men and women can get UTIs, although they are much more common among females. According to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, at least  40 to 60 percent  of women will experience at least one UTI in their lifetime.  Symptoms of a UTI include:  STIs are more common than many people think, with  20 million  new infections being contracted every year in the United States. Young people are most at risk, and the  American Sexual Health Association  reports that half of all sexually active people will get an STI by the age of 25.  Both  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea  are known to cause excess mucus in the urine. This symptom is particularly noticeable in men.  Other symptoms of these STIs include:   Chlamydia:    Gonorrhea:   IBS is considered a functional digestive disorder. This means that the digestive tract appears normal and does not show damage or inflammation, but it does not function normally. IBS is the most common functional gastrointestinal disorder, affecting  10 to 15 percent  of people worldwide.  One possible symptom of IBS is mucus in the digestive tract. Although mucus is present in the large intestine (colon) and leaves the body through the anus, it may mix with urine in the toilet bowl — leading people to think the mucus is in their urine.  Other common IBS symptoms include:  UC is a form of inflammatory bowel disease. Up to  907,000  Americans have UC.  To combat damage to the colon, the body may produce excess mucus, which passes from the body in the stool. Again, it can mix with urine in the toilet, giving the impression that there is too much mucus in the urine.  Additional symptoms of UC are:   Kidney stones  are hard deposits that form inside the kidneys. They comprise various minerals and salts. A man's  lifetime risk  of getting kidney stones is 19 percent, while a woman's risk is 9 percent.  Stones that remain in the kidneys do not cause symptoms, but if they move into the urinary tract they can cause increased mucus, as well as:  In cases of bladder cancer,  other signs  and symptoms usually show up first, including:  It is more likely that mucus in the urine is related to an infection, digestive condition, or one of the other causes discussed above.  The only way to be sure is to see a doctor.  Anyone who experiences excessive amounts of mucus in the urine or a general increase in mucus production should see a doctor. While there is typically a certain amount of mucus in the urine, too much might suggest an underlying condition that requires medical treatment.  To test for mucus in the urine, a doctor may perform a urinalysis, which involves checking a urine sample under a microscope. The procedure is straightforward and noninvasive, and a person will just need to provide a container of urine.  Many doctors will carry out a urinalysis as part of a routine checkup. A doctor may also carry out tests if they suspect an individual has a UTI.  Common treatments for these conditions may include:  Doctors will prescribe  antibiotics  for UTIs that are caused by a bacterial infection. It is also important to drink lots of water to flush the bacteria from the system.  People who experience recurrent UTIs may require a 6 month or longer course of low-dose antibiotics to prevent a new UTI developing. If a person develops a UTI that is caused by sexual activity, they will typically require a single antibiotic dose.  Doctors will treat both gonorrhea and chlamydia with prescription antibiotics. There are no home remedies or over-the-counter treatments proven effective for  sexually transmitted infections . Sexual partners will also require treatment for the STI.  Use condoms to prevent future STIs.  Because IBS is a chronic condition, there is no cure. However, several treatments are available to help reduce symptoms and improve quality of life.  Medications include:  Dietary and lifestyle changes may also help, such as:  As with IBS, there is no cure for UC, although there are medicines that may alleviate symptoms. Such medications include:  Severe cases of UC may require surgery to remove the colon and rectum.  Smaller kidney stones may not require any treatment as they can pass from the body through the urine. Drinking more water can aid this process. Symptoms will resolve once the stone is removed.  Larger stones may be treated with extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy — a procedure that breaks up the kidney stone into smaller pieces so that they can be passed more easily.  Surgery may be needed to remove very large kidney stones.  As discharge is part of a healthy urinary system, moderate amounts are not cause for alarm. However, excessive amounts of mucus in the urine will need to be investigated so that a doctor can determine the underlying cause.  Once a cause is identified, it can usually be treated with medication, lifestyles changes, or other appropriate interventions.    
 Definition &amp; facts: What is a bladder infection? (2017, March).  Definition &amp; facts: What is a bladder infection? (2017, March).  Incidence, prevalence, and cost of sexually transmitted infections in the United States [Fact sheet]. (2013, February).  Kidney stones: How common are kidney stones? (2016, January 25).  Signs and symptoms of bladder cancer. (2016, May 23).  Statistics. (2016, May 10).  Statistics: STIs. (n.d.).  What is ulcerative colitis? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What can you do about mucus in urine?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321112.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, March 5). "What can you do about mucus in urine?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  