 Many women experience thick, white discharge before a period. This is considered healthy unless the discharge is lumpy or accompanied by a strong odor.  Read on to discover more about changes in discharge throughout the menstrual cycle, and why white discharge can appear before a period.  Normal vaginal discharge is called leukorrhea. It comprises fluid and bacteria from the cells in the vagina. Most women produce just under a teaspoon, or  4 milliliters , of white or clear discharge every day.  Discharge before a period tends to be cloudy or white, due to the increased presence of  progesterone , a hormone involved in both the menstrual cycle and pregnancy.  In other phases of the cycle, when the body has higher levels of  estrogen , vaginal discharge tends to be clear and watery.  Discharge helps with lubrication and the removal of bacteria from the vagina. It can also be a convenient way for women to track their menstrual cycle.  The following factors may result in white discharge.  White discharge is common at the beginning and end of menstruation. It is usually thin and stretchy, and should not be accompanied by itching or an odor.  Using these types of  birth control , including the birth control pill, can lead to more discharge, because hormone levels may be affected. The increase is not usually a cause for concern unless there are any other symptoms.  Also known as  candidiasis , yeast infections are a common complaint among women. It is estimated that nearly  75 percent  of women will experience at least one yeast infection in their lifetime.  Discharge associated with a yeast infection tends to resemble cottage cheese — it is thick, white, and lumpy. Other symptoms include itching and burning in and around the vagina.  Around  30 percent  of women of childbearing age have  bacterial vaginosis  (BV), an infection caused by bacterial imbalances in the vagina.  BV is linked to douching and having more than one sexual partner. The discharge tends to be grayish-white and has a fishy odor.  Several  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs) cause changes in vaginal discharge. The infections can include  chlamydia ,  gonorrhea , and trichomoniasis.  Discharge caused by chlamydia or gonorrhea may be closer to yellow than white, although not everyone has symptoms. Trichomoniasis can cause a fishy odor, yellow-green discharge, and itching.  In some cases, a pregnant woman will experience an increase in discharge just before her period is due. This can be one of the earliest signs of pregnancy.  It is not always easy to distinguish this type of discharge from normal discharge, but it may be thicker in texture.  Vaginal discharge changes throughout the cycle. A person can usually see differences at each stage, including:  Discharge that is not white may be:  It is important to note that hormonal changes, which can be triggered by birth control or pregnancy, can cause light spotting.  Vaginal discharge tends to change in color and consistency throughout the menstrual cycle. Discharge that appears before a period is usually white.  However, if a certain type of discharge persists throughout the month, it may be a good idea to see a doctor.  Consult a doctor if any of the following symptoms are present:  Normal vaginal discharge does not require any treatment. Abnormal discharge and discharge accompanied by pain or itching may be managed with medication, home remedies, or a combination of both.  In the event of infection, a doctor will prescribe medication or recommend an over-the-counter product.  Yeast infections, for example, are treated with antifungal drugs that can be inserted into the vagina or taken orally.   Antibiotics  are usually prescribed for BV, chlamydia, gonorrhea, and trichomoniasis.  The following lifestyle changes can ensure a healthy vaginal environment:  White discharge, especially when it appears before a period, is usually a normal part of the menstrual cycle.  However, most women will experience a vaginal infection at some point, so take note of any unusual changes in discharge. The majority of these infections can be managed, especially with prompt medical intervention.  Plenty of home remedies and lifestyle changes can prevent and treat vaginal infections.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Cribby, S., Taylor, M., &amp; Reid, G. (2009, March 29). Vaginal microbiota and the use of probiotics.  Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Infectious Diseases .  Cribby, S., Taylor, M., &amp; Reid, G. (2009, March 29). Vaginal microbiota and the use of probiotics.  Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Infectious Diseases .  How many women are affected/at risk? (2016, December 1).  Vaginal discharge. (2013, October).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What causes white vaginal discharge?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321116.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, March 5). "What causes white vaginal discharge?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  