  Acne  commonly affects the face but can also affect the neck, chest, and back.  While acne is usually not a serious condition,  pimples  can be painful and bothersome and can have a severe impact on a person's self-esteem.  In this article, we look at how to use baking soda for acne and whether it has any adverse side effects.  Baking soda may help reduce acne breakouts and manage pain and  inflammation  of the skin due to its anti-inflammatory and antiseptic properties,  However, using baking soda on the skin is not widely recommended by healthcare professionals, as it can irritate the skin and remove important protective oils.  If people choose to use baking soda to treat acne, it is best not to use it every day and to only use minimal amounts.  People can use baking soda for acne several different ways, including the following:  Baking soda can dry out the skin, so apply a hydrating moisturizer immediately afterwards to help prevent dry skin and tightness.  Whenever using baking soda as a skincare product, open a fresh box. Baking soda from a packet that has already been opened might be contaminated by other substances, which may harm the skin.  Some people use baking soda to target specific pimples that appear on the face.  To do this, a person can make a paste by mixing 2 teaspoons of baking soda with a little water. This paste can be directly applied to pimples or other acne lesions and left on for 20 minutes before thoroughly washing off.  Applying a moisturizer immediately afterwards will reduce the risk of the skin drying out.  There is little research on whether baking soda works as an acne treatment, and many healthcare professionals advise against using it.  The skin has a natural pH level of between 4.5 and 5.5, meaning it is acidic. Remaining within this range means the skin can continue to produce healthy oils that keep it moisturized and protected against bacteria and pollution.  Baking soda has a pH level of 9, meaning it is alkaline and can do more harm to the skin than good. Baking powder can affect the skin's pH level, stripping it of healthful oils and causing some unpleasant side effects.  Side effects include:  Baking soda is just one of many home remedies people with acne can try. Many other natural treatments are safer and have fewer side effects.  Alternatives to baking soda for acne include:  Baking soda is one possible home remedy to treat acne. However, because of its alkaline properties, it can affect the pH balance of the skin and cause dryness and sensitivity.  Skin doctors (dermatologists) do not recommend using baking soda as an acne treatment and instead advise sticking to prescribed medicines, over-the-counter products, and milder home remedies.  If a person chooses to use baking soda as an acne treatment, they should limit both the quantity and frequency of use, and moisturize their skin after each application.    
 Acne. (2016, January 9).  Acne. (2016, January 9).  Acne: Treatment. (2016, April 28).  Baking soda reviews. (n.d.).  Carson, C. F., Hammer, K. A., &amp; Riley, T. V. (2006, January 1).  Melaleuca alternifolia  (tea tree) oil: A review of antimicrobial and other medicinal properties.  Clinical Microbiology Reviews ,  19   (1), 50–62.  Khalil, Z., Pearce, A. L., Satkunanathan, N., Storer, E., Finlay-Jones, J. J., &amp; Hart, P. H. (2004, October). Regulation of wheal and flare by tea tree oil: Complementary human and rodent studies.  Journal of Investigative Dermatology ,  123 (4), 683–690.  Lambers, H., Piessens, S., Bloem, A., Pronk, H., &amp; Finkel, P. (2006, October). Natural skin surface pH is on average below 5, which is beneficial for its resident flora [Abstract].  International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,  28   (5), 359–370.  Melnik, B. C., &amp; Schmitz, G. (2009, October). Role of insulin, insulin‐like growth factor‐1, hyperglycaemic food and milk consumption in the pathogenesis of acne vulgaris.  Experimental Dermatology ,  18   (10), 833–841.  Reuter, J., Merfort, I., &amp; Schempp, C. M. (2012, August 26). Botanicals in dermatology [Abstract].  American Journal of Clinical Dermatology ,  11   (4), 247–267.  Smith, R. N., Mann, N. J., Braue, A., Mäkeläinen, H., &amp; Varigos, G. A. (2007, August). The effect of a high-protein, low glycemic–load diet versus a conventional, high glycemic–load diet on biochemical parameters associated with acne vulgaris: A randomized, investigator-masked, controlled trial.  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  57   (2), 247–256.  Sodium bicarbonate. (2018, March 3).  Spencer, E. H., Ferdowsian, H. R., &amp; Barnard, N. D. (2009, March 19). Diet and acne: A review of the evidence.  International Journal of Dermatology ,  48 (4), 339–347.  Vinegar (as a topical) reviews. (n.d.).  Yosipovitch, G., Tang, M., Dawn, A. G., Chen, M., Goh, C. L., Chan, Y. H., &amp; Seng, L. F. (2007, March). Study of psychological stress, sebum production and acne vulgaris in adolescents.  Acta Dermato-Venereologica ,  87   (2), 135–139.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Can you use baking soda to treat acne?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321137.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, March 7). "Can you use baking soda to treat acne?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  