  Shingles  is a viral infection that affects approximately  1 in 3 adults  in the United States. Around half of all shingles cases occur in adults over 60 years old.  It can occur in anyone who has had  chickenpox , as both shingles and chickenpox are caused by the varicella-zoster virus (VZV). This virus remains in the body after chickenpox has cleared and can reactivate at any time, leading to shingles.  Shingles symptoms tend to develop on one side of the face or body. They often affect just a small area. The most common location is on the side of the waist, although they can occur anywhere.  Several days before a rash appears, shingles may cause skin sensitivity or pain. Further early symptoms include:  Within the next 1 to 5 days, a red rash will normally form around the sensitive area. A few days later, fluid-filled blisters will develop at the site of the rash.  The blisters will ooze before drying up, typically within 10 days of appearing. At this point, scabs will form on the skin, tending to heal within 2 weeks.  There may be other symptoms accompanying the skin sensitivity and rash, including:  A person's vision may be affected if the shingles occurs near the eyes.  It should be noted that shingles symptoms range from mild to severe, with some people experiencing itching and mild discomfort and others having intense pain.  Most cases of shingles resolve without causing long-term effects. However, potential complications include:  Post-herpetic  neuropathy  (PHN) is a common complication of shingles. It refers to nerve damage that causes pain and burning that persists after the shingles infection is gone.  Some  sources  suggest that up to 20 percent of people who get shingles develop PHN with older adults thought to be especially at risk.  Treating PHN is difficult, and the symptoms can last  for years . However, most people fully recover within 12 months.  It is not known why some people who have shingles go on to develop PHN. The risk factors for PHN include:  According to some  research , older women who get severe pain and rash symptoms may have a 50 percent chance of developing PHN.  Other potential complications of shingles include:  It is important to see a doctor as soon as a person notices the symptoms of shingles.  The National Institute on Aging recommend that people seek medical treatment  no later than 3 days  after the rash appears. Early treatment can limit pain, help the rash heal quicker, and may reduce scarring.  Once a doctor confirms shingles, they may suggest the following treatments:  These ease symptoms, speed up recovery, and may prevent complications. A course of antiviral medications is usually prescribed for 7 to 10 days. Options include:  Antiviral drugs are most effective when taken  within 3 days  of the rash onset, although they may still be prescribed within the first 7 days of the rash appearing.  Over-the-counter (OTC) or prescription medications may reduce pain and skin irritation. Options include:  Some of these medications are available for purchase online, including  ibuprofen ,  antihistamines , and  lidocaine .  Certain  antidepressant  drugs have been  proven effective  in reducing shingles pain, as well as symptoms of PHN.  Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) are most commonly prescribed for shingles pain, including:  It can take several weeks or months before antidepressants work for nerve pain.  Although typically used to treat  epilepsy , some anticonvulsant drugs may reduce nerve pain. Again, these can take several weeks to take effect. Commonly prescribed anticonvulsants for shingles include:  In addition to seeking medical treatment, people can take other steps to alleviate their symptoms and reduce discomfort. These include:  People should avoid scratching the rash and blisters as much as they can. Breaking the skin or bursting the blisters can cause infection and further complications.  Shingles is not contagious but is the reactivation of a virus already present in the body.  However, a person with shingles can give chickenpox to someone who has never had the VZV infection before.  Therefore, people with shingles should avoid contact with those who have never had chickenpox until their rash has completely healed. To catch the virus, someone must have direct contact with the rash.  To avoid spreading VZV, people with shingles should:  There is a vaccination available to reduce the risk of developing shingles and experiencing long-term complications, such as PHN.  The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  recommends that adults aged 60 years and older have this vaccination, as it is believed to reduce the risk of shingles by 50 percent and PHN by 67 percent.  People who have already had shingles can have the vaccine to prevent future occurrences. Each vaccination protects for approximately 5 years.  Up to a third of the population in the U.S. is affected by shingles. Symptoms vary in their severity and duration. Early intervention is key in reducing symptom severity and avoiding complications, such as PHN.  Therefore, people should see their doctor, as soon as possible, if they have heightened skin sensitivity or develop a rash or blisters. Several home remedies can alleviate shingle symptoms when used in conjunction with medical treatments.  People should consider having the shingles vaccination to reduce their risk of getting shingles and long-term nerve pain.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Cohen, K. R., Salbu, R. L., Frank, J., &amp; Israel, I. (2013, April). Presentation and management of herpes zoster (shingles) in the geriatric population.  Pharmacy and Therapeutics ,  38 (4), 217–224.  Cohen, K. R., Salbu, R. L., Frank, J., &amp; Israel, I. (2013, April). Presentation and management of herpes zoster (shingles) in the geriatric population.  Pharmacy and Therapeutics ,  38 (4), 217–224.  Post-herpetic neuralgia. (2017, October 12).  Shingles. (2016, December 31).  Shingles. (2017, December 22).  Shingles: Diagnosis and treatment. (n.d.).  Shingles (herpes zoster). (2018, January 19).  What everyone should know about Zostavax. (2018, January 25).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to expect when you have shingles."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321198.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, March 13). "What to expect when you have shingles."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  