 A neck spasm caused by the sudden tightening of the neck muscles may cause:  Dizziness or tingling in the base back of the neck may occur if neck muscles pull on the scalp when they spasm.  Neck spasms have several common causes:  There may also be a more serious reason for neck spasms, such as:  The following medical treatments may help:  A doctor may also recommend  physical therapy .  A  2017 study  suggests an over-the-counter expectorant called guaifenesin may prove effective in treating neck spasms. More research is needed before doctors can recommend this treatment.  A good way to treat neck spasms is with stretching exercises. The following may help:  To do a basic neck stretch:  To do a scalene stretch:  To do a neck curl and head lift:  In addition to anti-inflammatory medication, pain relief, and stretching, the following home remedies may help:  Stress may trigger neck spasms. Taking regular breaks from work and exercising as often as possible may help a person better manage stress.  Deep breathing,  yoga , and meditation may also help.  A  2008 study  found workers who participated in stress-relieving activities experienced less neck, shoulder, and  back pain  than those who did not.  Ice may help reduce neck spasms. Using an ice pack for 20 minutes a time, every 3 to 4 hours may help relax the neck muscles.  Applying moist heat to the affected area may also help with recurring neck spasms. Apply moist heat using heating pads or a damp, warm cloth.  Self or partner massage may help relieve muscle spasms. Try to use gentle to firm pressure on the neck and move fingers in circular motions.  A  2014 study  found that classic massages could reduce neck pain.  To prevent neck spams:   Meningitis  can cause a stiff neck. Meningitis can be extremely dangerous, and anyone who suspects they may have meningitis should contact emergency services. The symptoms of meningitis include:  Most neck spasms have a common cause. If caused by an injury, it is essential to speak to a doctor straight away.  A person should also speak to a doctor if their symptoms are very severe or last longer than a week.    
 Bakar, Y., Sertel, M., Oztürk, A., Yümin, E. T., Tatarli, N., &amp; Ankarali, H. (2014, July–August). Short term effects of classic massage compared to connective tissue massage on pressure pain threshold and muscle relaxation response in women with chronic neck pain: A preliminary study [Abstract].  Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics ,  37 (6), 415–421.  Bakar, Y., Sertel, M., Oztürk, A., Yümin, E. T., Tatarli, N., &amp; Ankarali, H. (2014, July–August). Short term effects of classic massage compared to connective tissue massage on pressure pain threshold and muscle relaxation response in women with chronic neck pain: A preliminary study [Abstract].  Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics ,  37 (6), 415–421.  Collaku, A., Yue, Y., &amp; Reed, K. (2017, March 21). Efficacy and safety of guaifenesin for upper back, neck, and shoulder pain: A phase II proof-of-concept, multicenter, placebo-controlled, repeat-dose, parallel-group study.  Journal of Pain Research ,  10   , 669–678.  Schell, E., Theorell, T., Hasson, D., Arnetz, B., &amp; Saraste, H. (2008, March). Stress biomarkers' associations to pain in the neck, shoulder and back in healthy media workers: 12-month prospective follow-up.  European Spine Journal ,  17 (3), 393–405.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "How do you relieve neck spasms?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321180.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, March 12). "How do you relieve neck spasms?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  