 This article explores how to get rid of yellow teeth and looks at 11 remedies to try at home. We also include the scientific studies that support each of the remedies.  Here are 5 natural remedies that may help to get rid of yellow teeth at home. These are an alternative to teeth whitening options that a dentist may offer:  Using a toothpaste containing baking soda and hydrogen peroxide may help reduce yellowing of the teeth.  It is possible to make a paste at home by mixing 1 tablespoon of baking soda with 2 tablespoons of hydrogen peroxide.  A  2012 study  found that using a toothpaste containing baking soda and hydrogen peroxide reduces tooth staining and improves whiteness.  A  2007 study  found that  vitamin  C deficiency may worsen peridontitis, which is a buildup of bacteria on the teeth and gums. This buildup contributes to discoloration.  It follows that keeping topped up on vitamin C may reduce discoloration of the teeth. More research is needed into whether vitamin C consumption may have a whitening effect on the teeth.  When added to toothpaste, certain fruit enzymes may combat discoloration.  A  2012 study  found toothpaste that contains papain enzyme from the  papaya  fruit and bromelain enzyme from pineapples helps remove tooth stains.  When it is used in small quantities, apple cider vinegar may reduce staining on the teeth and improve whiteness.  A  2014 study  found that apple cider vinegar has a whitening effect on teeth. It should be noted, however, that this was a study on animals.  Apple cider vinegar may damage the surface of the teeth if used too often. More research is needed into the use of apple cider vinegar, as a tooth whitener. In the meantime, it should be used sparingly and with caution.  A  2015 study  found that oil pulling or swishing in the mouth with  coconut oil  could be an effective way to reduce plaque buildup on the teeth. As plaque buildup can contribute to yellowing, it follows that coconut oil pulling may reduce discoloration.  More research is needed into coconut oil pulling to establish the extent to which it may help whiten the teeth.  Here are 6 dental remedies that may help to get rid of yellow teeth at home. These are more traditional methods of care that dentists often recommend:  This is most important after consuming food or drink that may discolor the teeth, such as:  Here are some tooth brushing, best practice tips:  Whitening toothpaste may help reduce yellowing of the teeth and improve whiteness. These products contain stronger ingredients than standard toothpaste, helping to remove tough food stains.  Whitening toothpaste does not contain bleach but may contain a small amount of carbamide peroxide or hydrogen peroxide. These chemicals help to lighten tooth color.  According to a  2014 study , whitening toothpaste typically lightens tooth color by one or two shades.  Some dentists offer tray-based tooth whitening, but home versions are also available over-the-counter. Tray-based tooth whiteners can lighten the teeth by  one or two shades .  This tooth whitening method involves wearing a fitted tray over the teeth. The tray contains a bleaching gel and is worn for  2 to 4 hours a day or overnight .  It is important to look for products that contain  10 percent  carbamide peroxide. These are recommended as safe by the  American Dental Association (ADA) .  Whitening strips deliver a thin layer of peroxide gel on plastic strips. These are shaped to fit onto the surface of the teeth.  There is a range of  whitening strip products available online  and instructions for them vary. Most suggest they should be applied twice a day for 30 minutes.  Strips can lighten the teeth by  one or two shades . That said, a  2016 study  notes there is no evidence whitening strips are any more effective than 10 percent carbamide peroxide gel. The use of carbamide peroxide gel is the  ADA recommended method .  Whitening rinses are another way to get rid of yellow teeth. They contain oxygen sources such as hydrogen peroxide. These react with the compounds staining the teeth, helping to lift them.  Using a rinse twice a day for 1 minute at a time can lead to a  one to two shade  improvement in tooth color within 3 months.  Toothpaste that contains activated charcoal may help to reduce staining on the teeth.  A  2017 review  found that charcoal toothpastes may help remove external staining on teeth. Further studies are needed into the extent or rate of stain removal that can be expected.  Charcoal toothpastes should be used with caution, as they can cause staining. The charcoal may be hard to remove from the crevices of the teeth and around restorations.  As a person gets older, the white enamel on their teeth becomes worn. When this happens, the calcified tissue underneath starts to show through. This tissue is called dentin, and it has a yellowish color.  Teeth can become yellow for the following reasons:  The last cause is hard to prevent, as it is a natural part of the aging process. However, staining can be reduced by avoiding:  Plaque buildup can be reduced by:  It is natural for teeth to become slightly yellow as a person ages and their enamel becomes worn.  Discoloration from plaque buildup can be reduced by regular brushing. Avoiding foods that may stain the teeth is also a good idea.  To lighten the appearance of teeth, trying the home remedies explored above may help. The best way to keep teeth healthy is through diet and a good oral hygiene routine.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Amaliya, Timmerman, M. F., Abbas, F., Loos, B. G., Van der Weijden, G. A., Van Winkelhoff, A. J., … Van der Velden, U. (2007, April). Java project on periodontal diseases: The relationship between vitamin C and the severity of periodontitis [Abstract].  Journal of Clinical Peridontology ,  34 (4), 299–304.  Amaliya, Timmerman, M. F., Abbas, F., Loos, B. G., Van der Weijden, G. A., Van Winkelhoff, A. J., … Van der Velden, U. (2007, April). Java project on periodontal diseases: The relationship between vitamin C and the severity of periodontitis [Abstract].  Journal of Clinical Peridontology ,  34 (4), 299–304.  Carey, C. M. (2014, June). Tooth whitening: What we now know.  Journal of Evidence-Based Dental Practice ,  14 Suppl , 70–76.  Chakravarthy, P. K., &amp; Acharya, S. (2012, October–December). Efficacy of extrinsic stain removal by novel dentifrice containing papain and bromelain extracts.  Journal of Young Pharmacists ,  4 (4), 245–249.  Ghassemi, A., Hooper, W., Vorwerk, L., Domke, T., DeSciscio, P., &amp; Nathoo, S. (2012). Effectiveness of a new dentifrice with baking soda and peroxide in removing extrinsic stain and whitening teeth [Abstract].  Journal of Clinical Dentistry ,  23 (3), 86–91.  Greenwall, L., &amp; Wilson, N. H. F. (2017, August). Charcoal toothpastes: What we know so far.  Clinical Pharmacist ,  9 (8), 34.  Peedikayil, F. C., Sreenivasan, P., &amp; Narayanan, A. (2015, March–April). Effect of coconut oil in plaque related gingivitis — A preliminary report.  Nigerian Medical Report ,  56 (2), 143–147.  Serraglio, C. R., Zanella, L., Dalla-Vecchia, K. B., &amp; Rodrigues-Junior, S. A. (2016, January). Efficacy and safety of over-the-counter whitening strips as compared to home-whitening with 10 % carbamide peroxide gel--systematic review of RCTs and metanalysis [Abstract].  Clinical Oral Investigations ,  20 (1), 1–14.  Statement on the safety and effectiveness of tooth whitening products. (2012, April).  Zheng, L. W., Li, D.-Z., Lu, J. Z., Hu, W., Chen, D., &amp; Zhou, X. D. (2014, November). [Effects of vinegar on tooth bleaching and dental hard tissues in vitro] [Abstract].  Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban ,  45 (6), 933–936, 945.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Home remedies to get rid of yellow teeth."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321172.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, March 10). "Home remedies to get rid of yellow teeth."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  