 In this article, we will look at the evidence for clove oil as a treatment for a toothache, as well as whether it has any possible side effects.  We will also investigate commons causes of a toothache and suggest tips to prevent tooth pain in the future.  Clove oil has been used in traditional Indian and Chinese medicine for centuries to relieve tooth pain.  Clove oil contains a chemical called eugenol. In 1837, eugenol and  magnesium  oxide were combined to create a filling material.  Later, zinc oxide replaced the magnesium oxide to create ZOE (zinc oxide eugenol), which is still widely used as a temporary filling cement.  Since the 19th century, eugenol has been one of many essential oil components to be used in root canal therapy, periodontal therapy, and to treat abscesses.  Clove oil contains a chemical called eugenol, which acts as an anesthetic and antibacterial agent. Clove oil is anti-inflammatory and antifungal.  It is available from many supermarkets, drug stores, and health food shops, or can be  bought online . It has a strong, warm, and spicy taste.  To use it for a toothache, dip a clean tissue, cotton swab, or cotton ball into the oil and wipe it over the gums at the point of the pain.  People can also use whole cloves. Simply place them on the affected area for several minutes at a time.  Clove oil has long been applied directly to the gums to ease toothache. There is  evidence  that the eugenol in clove oil is effective at fighting several known oral bacteria. Medicines containing eugenol are widely used in dentistry.   Some research  suggests that clove gel may reduce the pain of needle insertion in dentistry. More work needs to be done before this is conclusive.  The United States Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) rate the effectiveness of certain treatments based on the available evidence. It has recently downgraded the classification of clove oil.  The FDA  now believe  there is not enough evidence to suggest it is effective for toothache, and that more research is needed.  While clove oil is usually safe when applied to the skin, repeated use inside the mouth and on the gums can have side effects.  Side effects may include damage to the:  Using dried cloves inside of the mouth can cause sensitivity and irritation, as well as damage the dental tissues.  Consuming clove oil can be dangerous for children and may lead to seizures, liver damage, and fluid imbalances.  Pregnant women are advised against using this remedy, as it is not known whether clove oil is safe for the growing baby.  Over-the-counter pain medications, such as acetaminophen and ibuprofen, may reduce the pain and discomfort while a person is waiting for a dentist appointment.  An over-the-counter dental gel containing local anesthetic can also be used to numb the pain. This method is not suitable for children under the age of 12.  If a toothache lasts for more than 1 or 2 days, a person should make an appointment to see their dentist. If it is left untreated, it may get worse.  Most cases of toothache are caused by:  If the toothache is not treated, the tooth may become infected and lead to worse pain.  To determine the cause of a toothache, the dentist will carry out a physical examination and may suggest an X-ray. The type of treatment will depend on the underlying cause but may include:  The best way to prevent a toothache is to keep the teeth and gums healthy. Some best practices include:  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Clove. (2017, December 26).  Clove. (2017, December 26).  Dagli, N., Dagli, R., Mahmoud, R. S., &amp; Baroudi, K. (2015, September–October). Essential oils, their therapeutic properties, and implication in dentistry: A review.  Journal of International Society of Preventive &amp; Community Dentistry ,  5 (5), 335–340.  Jesudasan, J. S., Wahab, P. U., &amp; Sekhar, M. R. (2015, November). Effectiveness of 0.2% chlorhexidine gel and a eugenol-based paste on postoperative alveolar osteitis in patients having third molars extracted: A randomised controlled clinical trial.  British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery ,  53 (9), 826–830.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26188932?_ga=2.239385091.1414869700.1521040984-1515228612.1521040984   Toothache. (2015, April 21).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "Is clove oil effective for toothache?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321256.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, March 19). "Is clove oil effective for toothache?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  