 Also known as devil's itch or fire ant itch, some people describe it as an unrelenting itch that can keep them awake at night and persist for days while the skin heals.  Read on to learn how to treat hell's itch and what to avoid while the skin is healing.  Most treatments for hell's itch are home remedies. People can take a variety of steps at home to help soothe the itch and enable the skin to heal itself as quickly as possible.  The following treatments may be helpful:  Many of these treatments are available for purchase online, including  ibuprofen ,  Benadryl ,  colloidal oatmeal ,  aloe vera gel , and  cortisol cream .  Some things may make hell's itch worse or cause further skin injury. People with hell's itch should avoid:  Hell's itch follows sunburn, though scientists do not know why it occurs in some people and not others.  If a person stays in the sun for extended periods without proper protection, the sun's powerful UV rays can damage the skin. The top layers of the skin can burn, causing redness, pain, and blistering.  Mild itching is a common symptom of sunburn, but severe itching is uncommon. The skin contains nerve endings that send signals to the brain about pain and itching. One theory about hell's itch is that these nerve endings become damaged or aggravated, sending rapid itching signals to the brain as the skin goes through its healing process.  While people with lighter skin and eyes may burn more quickly in the sun, they are not necessarily more prone to hell's itch. Anyone with a severe sunburn can experience hell's itch.  No one can predict whether a sunburn will cause hell's itch. However, people can avoid developing hell's itch by taking proper precautions against sunburns, such as:  A range of sunscreen is available for  purchase online .  Hell's itch can be painful and even excruciating in some cases. However, the itching will usually resolve within a few days as the skin heals.  People should see a doctor if any of these problems occur:  Treating hell's itch with home remedies and avoiding sunburn in the future is often the best course of action.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 5 ways to treat a sunburn. (2016, May 27).  5 ways to treat a sunburn. (2016, May 27).  Bauer, M., Schwameis, R., Scherzer, T., Lang-Zwosta, I., Nishino, K., &amp; Zeitlinger, M. (2015, February 11). A double-blind, randomized clinical study to determine the efficacy of benzocaine 10% on histamine-induced pruritus and UVB-light induced slight sunburn pain.  Journal of Dermatological Treatment ,  26 (4), 367–372.  How to apply sunscreen. (n.d.).  Ngan, V. (2005). Sunburn.  Radha, M. H., &amp; Laxmipriya, N. P. (2015, January). Evaluation of biological properties and clinical effectiveness of  Aloe vera : A systematic review.  Journal of Traditional and Complementary Medicine ,  5 (1), 21–26.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "Sunburn and hell's itch: How to get relief."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321249.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, March 19). "Sunburn and hell's itch: How to get relief."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  