 There are many reasons why someone might develop a dry throat. Most of the causes are minor, but sometimes a dry throat may be the result of a more serious underlying condition.  This article explores the causes, medical treatments, and home remedies for a dry throat.  The different causes and associated symptoms of a dry throat are explored below:  Around  30 to 40 percent  of the world's population is affected by allergies. When a person has seasonal allergies, substances in their environment cause their immune system to overreact.  Common triggers include:  For a person with seasonal allergies, these allergens cause the immune system to release a chemical called histamine.  As well as a dry throat, the histamine released in an allergic reaction may cause:  If a person falls asleep with their mouth open, they may wake up with a dry throat. This also happens if a person starts breathing through their mouth when they are asleep.  When the mouth is left open, air dries the saliva a person produces to keep their mouth moist. As a result, their throat and mouth may feel dry when they wake up.  Someone can also snore and end up with  bad breath  if they keep their mouth open when sleeping.  When a person is dehydrated, they may get a dry throat. Other signs of  dehydration  include:  Dehydration is caused by not drinking enough water.  A dry throat may be a symptom of the common cold. The common cold is a term for an infection that is caused by one of several different viruses.  According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), an adult will get  2 to 3  colds each year, on average. A cold may make a person's throat feel dry, scratchy, or sore. The underlying infection may also cause:  A dry, scratchy, or a  sore throat  may be a symptom of  influenza , otherwise known as the  flu .  The flu is a respiratory illness caused by an influenza virus. According to the CDC, flu symptoms usually begin an average of  2 days  after a person has been exposed to the flu virus.  The flu is more serious than the common cold, and a person with the flu may need bed rest.  A dry, scratchy throat may be a symptom of mononucleosis. This is a disease that is usually caused by an infection by the Epstein-Barr virus. It is  most frequently  passed on through a person's bodily fluids, with saliva transmission being very common.  Mononucleosis is commonly known as mono or the "kissing disease." It most often affects teenagers and those of college age, but a person may catch it at any time in their life.  As well as a dry, scratchy, or a sore throat, the symptoms of mono include:  Mono typically lasts  2 to 4 weeks , but for some, their body may take longer to recover.  A dry throat may be a symptom of  acid reflux . The acid in the food pipe causes a burning, dry throat, as well as:  The proper name for this condition is gastroesophageal reflux disease, abbreviated to  GERD . It causes acid to come up from the stomach into the food pipe.  A dry throat may be a symptom of tonsilitis. This is  inflammation  of the tonsils, which is commonly caused by infection with a virus but can also be caused by bacteria. The tonsils are fleshy lumps at the back of the throat that help fight infections.  As well as a dry, scratchy, or a sore throat, symptoms of  tonsillitis  include:  A dry throat may be a symptom of  strep throat . This is a throat infection that leads to a very sore, dry throat. It is caused by the bacterium,  Streptococcus pyogenes .  Other symptoms of strep throat include:  The best treatment for a dry throat depends on the underlying cause, as follows:  Medical treatments for hayfever include the following:  Immunotherapy involves gradually increasing exposure to allergens in controlled conditions. This aims to help the immune system become tolerant of them, reducing allergy symptoms over time.  Dietary home remedies for hayfever include eating more of the following:  Mouth breathing while asleep may be caused by nasal congestion, which can be treated with:  An adhesive strip that is worn over the bridge of the nose may also reduce mouth breathing.  If a person is feeling dehydrated, they should drink fluids to rehydrate. By drinking more fluid, someone will be less fatigued, increase their urine output, and their urine will be lighter in color.  A person should drink an ample amount of water during the day to stay hydrated. Alcohol,  coffee , and other caffeinated drinks should be drunk in moderation, as they may lead to dehydration.  The following medical and home treatments may help relieve symptoms of the common cold and flu:  The following treatments may help relieve the symptoms of mono:  The following medical treatments and lifestyle may help relieve acid reflux:  Treatments for tonsillitis include:  A doctor will prescribe an antibiotic to treat strep throat as it is a bacterial infection. To relieve symptoms, the following may also help:  A person should also speak to their doctor if they experience:  Additionally, a doctor should give a medical evaluation if a dry throat continues for more than 1 to 2 weeks.    
 About infectious mononucleosis. (2016, September 14).  About infectious mononucleosis. (2016, September 14).  Common colds: Protect yourself and others. (2018, February 12).  Influenza (flu). (2017, October 3).  Kawamoto, Y., Ueno, Y., Nakahashi, E., Obayashi, M., Sugihara, K., Qiao, S., … Takeda, K. (2016, January). Prevention of allergic rhinitis by ginger and the molecular basis of immunosuppression by 6-gingerol through T cell inactivation [Abstract].  The Journal of Nutritional Biochemistry ,  27 , 112–122.  Satomura, K., Kitamura, T., Kawamura, T., Shimbo, T., Watanabe, M., Kamei, M., … Tamakoshi, A. (2005, November). Prevention of upper respiratory tract infections by gargling: A randomized trial [Abstract].  American Journal of Preventative Medicine ,  29 (4), 302–307.  Xie, H., &amp; He, S.-H.. (2005, May 21). Roles of histamine and its receptors in allergic and inflammatory bowel diseases.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  11 (19), 2851–2857.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "How do you cure a dry throat?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321201.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, March 14). "How do you cure a dry throat?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  