 Endometritis is different from  endometriosis , though both conditions affect the lining of the uterus. Another related condition is called endomyometritis, where  inflammation  happens in the inner layer of the uterus, called the myometrium.  In this article, we give an overview of endometritis, including causes, symptoms, diagnosis, and complications. We also look at its relationship with endometriosis and fertility.  Symptoms of endometritis may include:  Anyone experiencing these symptoms should see their doctor to find out the cause.  An infection of the uterine lining causes endometritis.  The cervix, which is the opening to the uterus, usually keeps bacteria out of the uterus. However, when the cervix is open, such as during childbirth or surgery, bacteria can get into the womb.  Both the bacteria normally found in the vagina and abnormal bacteria can be the cause of endometritis.  Possible risk factors for endometritis include:  Endometritis is different from endometriosis, though both conditions affect the lining of the uterus.  Endometritis is where the uterus lining becomes inflamed from infection. Endometriosis is where the lining of the uterus grows outside of it, causing abdominal and pelvic pain. Endometriosis is not caused by an infection.  Endometritis is likely to be a shorter-term condition that is easier to treat than endometriosis.  Endometritis has been found to have an impact on the ability of a woman to get or stay pregnant. Inflammation of the uterus can cause scarring, which prevents an embryo from implanting and developing normally within the uterine wall.   Research  published in 2016 reports that chronic endometritis can affect fertility in the following ways:  However, the same study reports that  antibiotic  treatment can lead to a significant improvement in fertility and successful pregnancies.   A study  from 2018 worked with 95 women who had fertility issues. They found that over half of these women had chronic endometritis, and that antibiotic therapy improved their symptoms by more than 80 percent. With successful treatment, these women had increased pregnancy and childbirth rates.  Fertility specialists sometimes suggest that women be tested or treated for endometritis, especially with multiple failed in vitro fertilization (IVF) cycles, when the embryos were good quality, or with repeated pregnancy loss.  When diagnosing endometritis, a doctor will start by taking a medical history and performing a physical exam. The latter will probably include the doctor performing a pelvic exam to evaluate the internal reproductive organs. The doctor is looking for tenderness in the uterus and possible discharge from the cervix.  A doctor will often want to rule out other causes for the symptoms. This process may include:  Anytime someone is experiencing pelvic pain or discomfort or has unusual discharge or abnormal bleeding, they should see their doctor.  Some pelvic infections can have very serious complications, and it is important to start treatment quickly.  When doctors treat endometritis, they aim to remove the infection and inflammation from the uterus. This may involve:  If the infection is sexually transmitted, a woman's sexual partner may need to be treated also.  When a person is at risk of developing endometritis, such as before a scheduled pelvic procedure or surgery, a doctor may prescribe antibiotics to prevent this from occurring. A person must be sure to take these exactly as prescribed.  Antibiotics can also be provided after the internal procedure. It is important to take those, as ordered, as well, even if there are no symptoms of sickness or infection.  After childbirth, procedures, or surgery on the pelvis, the doctor or nurse should also provide instructions about the signs and symptoms of infection to look out for. The individual being treated must ensure that the instructions are understood and not hesitate to ask questions if necessary.  Because endometritis can also be caused by an STI, it is crucial to maintain good sexual health behaviors, especially with non-monogamous partners. These include regular screening for sexually transmitted infections and consistently using barrier  contraception , such as condoms.  Endometritis, if it is left untreated, may cause the following complications:  The outlook for a woman with endometritis is very good, especially if she is treated with antibiotics. Seeing the doctor and starting treatment early will significantly reduce the risk of complications.    
 Moldenhauer, J. S. (2016, January). Puerperal endometritis.  Moldenhauer, J. S. (2016, January). Puerperal endometritis.  Park, H. J., Kim, Y. S., Yoon, T. K., &amp; Lee, W. S. (2016, December). Chronic endometritis and infertility.  Clinical and Experimental Reproductive Medicine ,  43 (4), 185–192.  Takebayashi, A., Kimura, F., Kishi, Y., Ishida, M., Takahashi, A., Yamanaka, A., ... Murakami, T. (2014, February 18). The association between endometriosis and chronic endometritis.  PLoS ONE ,  9 (2), e88354.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "What to know about endometritis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321298.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, March 23). "What to know about endometritis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  