 The liver typically filters bilirubin out of the blood, so  jaundice  is usually related to liver disease or failure.  A majority of jaundice cases occur in newborns, young children, and immune-compromised adolescents and adults.  In most cases, a bilirubin blood levels of 2 to 3 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) or higher will cause visible symptoms.  A person's diet plays a significant role in jaundice recovery and prevention.  During digestion, the liver produces bile that helps the intestine break down fats.  The liver is also responsible for processing or metabolizing most digested nutrients, toxins, and medications.  All foods and drinks require the liver to do a certain amount of work. But different nutrients and chemicals are digested and metabolized differently, making some more liver-friendly than others.  The amount of work the liver has to do increases when foods are difficult to digest. This is especially true for large amounts of refined sugars, salt, and saturated fats.  Toxins, such as alcohol and some medications, can also damage liver cells during metabolism.  People with jaundice are usually advised to eat foods and drinks that help improve digestion and metabolism, protect the liver from further damage, and detoxify the liver.  A doctor will provide an individualized treatment plan, including dietary suggestions, to a person recovering from jaundice.  These suggestions will vary depending on the severity of the case and any underlying medical conditions. But there are certain foods and drinks most people with jaundice are advised to add to their diet.  Foods and drinks to consume during jaundice recovery include:  Staying hydrated is one of the best ways to help the liver recover from jaundice. Water not only helps ease digestion, but it also helps the liver and kidneys flush out toxins.  Most people should drink at least 64 ounces or just under 2 liters of water daily.  If people find the taste bland, they can try adding a teaspoon or more of fresh lemon, lime, or grapefruit juice to water for an extra dose of  antioxidants .  Fresh fruits and vegetables contain powerful antioxidants and fiber that can help limit liver damage during metabolism and ease digestion.  All fruits and vegetables contain some level of liver-friendly nutrients, but some varieties are especially beneficial for liver conditions. These include:  For optimal health benefits, people should eat whole fruits and vegetables and avoid high-calorie, low-fiber products, such as fruit juices and blends.  It is also  advised  to limit or avoid highly processed and refined sugars, such as high fructose corn syrup (HFCS).   Coffee  and herbal teas contain high doses of antioxidants, as well as caffeine, which can help stimulate digestion. A range of herbal teas is available for  purchase online .  In moderation, coffee  has been shown  to help reduce the risk of liver conditions, including  cancer  and fibrosis (scarring), and slow their progression.  Whole grain foods contain high amounts of liver-friendly nutrients, including healthy fats, fiber, antioxidants, and minerals.  A  2013 study  confirmed that subjects who ate oats, which are rich in beta-glucan, improved liver function after 12 weeks of consumption.  Most nuts and legumes are rich in antioxidants, including  vitamin  E and phenolic acid.  Whole nuts and legumes are also usually rich in fiber and healthy fats.  Studies show  that walnuts and other tree nuts are beneficial to liver function when consumed regularly.  Lean proteins, including tofu, legumes, and fish, put less  stress  on the liver than red meat. Oily species of fish, such as salmon and mackerel, contain  omega-3  and zinc, which help metabolize fatty acids, alcohols,  carbohydrates , and proteins.  Foods and drinks to avoid or limit during jaundice recovery include:  Alcohol is toxic to most internal bodily tissues, including the liver. Excessive alcohol use can cause chronic  inflammation , reduce liver function, and lead to fibrosis.  Most people with jaundice or other liver conditions should try to avoid alcohol completely.  Soda, baked goods, white bread, and pasta all contain high amounts of refined sugar.  Too much sugar has been linked to a number of health conditions that impair liver function, including  type 2 diabetes  and  obesity .  Many packaged, canned, or smoked foods, especially deli meats and canned vegetables, contain high levels of preservatives.  These preservatives are usually forms of salt, such as nitrates and sulfates. Salt dehydrates the body, making digestion and metabolism more difficult, and putting stress on the liver.  Food items with 1.5 grams (g) salt per 100 g (or 0.6 g sodium) or higher are considered high in salt.  Fried, oily, and fast foods contain high amounts of saturated and trans fats that are difficult to digest, particularly those prepared with partially hydrogenated vegetable oils.  Some dairy products, including cheeses, whole milk, and full-fat yogurts, also contain high levels of saturated fat.  Researchers are not entirely sure why, but  studies indicate  that people who consume large amounts of saturated and trans fat undergo liver changes and an increase in  insulin resistance .  Insulin  helps control blood sugar levels and helps digest sugar.  Large intakes of saturated and trans fats have also been linked to obesity and  malnutrition , which are both risk factors for liver conditions, including jaundice.  It is recommended to limit saturated fat intake to  5 to 6 percent  of total  calories , and try to limit or avoid trans fats altogether.  Raw or undercooked fish and shellfish may contain toxins that can damage the liver and other digestive organs.  There is also a risk that they contain viruses, bacteria, and parasites that can infect the liver.  Rich meats, such as beef and pork, contain high levels of animal amino acids and fats that can be difficult to digest and put a strain on a damaged liver.  Most studies suggest lean meats, such as poultry and fish, as well as plant-based proteins, such as legumes and tofu, are more liver-friendly protein sources.  People in a high-risk category for jaundice are often advised to eat certain liver-healthy foods to help reduce their chances of developing the condition.  People who may benefit from liver-healthy foods and supplements include:  However, most children and adults who eat a healthy, balanced diet are at a low-risk of developing jaundice and do not need to make any dietary changes unless advised to do so by a doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Chang, H. C., Huang, C. N., Yeh, D. M., Wang, S. J., Peng, C. H., &amp; Wang, C. J. (2013, January 31). Oat prevents obesity and abdominal fat distribution, and improves liver function in humans [Abstract].  Plant Foods for Human Nutrition ,  68 (1), 18–23.  Chang, H. C., Huang, C. N., Yeh, D. M., Wang, S. J., Peng, C. H., &amp; Wang, C. J. (2013, January 31). Oat prevents obesity and abdominal fat distribution, and improves liver function in humans [Abstract].  Plant Foods for Human Nutrition ,  68 (1), 18–23.  Eating saturated fat has immediate effect on your liver. (2017, January 23).  Gupta, V., Mah, X.-J., Garcia, M. C., Antonypillai, C., &amp; van der Poorten, D. (2015, October 7). Oily fish, coffee and walnuts: Dietary treatment for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  21 (37), 10621–10635.  Jaundice. (n.d.).  Li, S., Tan, H.-Y., Wang, N., Zhang, Z.-J., Lao, L., Wong, C.-W., &amp; Feng, Y. (2015, November 2). The role of oxidative stress and antioxidants in liver diseases.  International Journal of Molecular Sciences ,  16 (11), 26087–26124.  Looking after the liver: Lifestyle, coffee and caffeine. (2017, November).  Shahidi, F., &amp; Ambigaipalan, P. (2015, October). Phenolics and polyphenolics in foods, beverages and spices: Antioxidant activity and health effects — A review [Abstract].  Journal of Functional Foods ,  18 , 820–897.  The skinny on fats. (2017, September 19).  The toxic truth: Too much fructose can damage your liver, just like too much alcohol. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Diet for jaundice: What to eat for a healthy liver."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321257.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, March 20). "Diet for jaundice: What to eat for a healthy liver."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  