 Benign prostatic enlargement or BPE is also commonly called benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH.  An enlarged prostate can cause frustrating and uncomfortable symptoms, most commonly urinary and sexual difficulties.  These problems may decrease an individual's overall quality of life. However, BPH is not associated with  cancer  and usually not a serious health threat.  There are several treatment options, including a wide range of natural remedies and lifestyle changes, which may help ease symptoms of BPH.  Home remedies for an enlarged prostate include:   1. Pygeum (African plum extract)   Pygeum has also been shown to contain a wide range of fatty acids, alcohols, and sterols such as beta-sitosterol that have an  antioxidant  and anti-inflammatory effect on the urogenital tract.  A few  studies  indicate that consuming between 100 and 200 mg of pygeum extract daily or splitting this into two 50 mg doses twice daily may help reduce BPH symptoms.   2. Saw palmetto   Saw palmetto is one the most studied and popular herbal supplements used to treat BPH.  Several  studies  have linked saw palmetto to reduced BPH symptoms. This is most likely because it inhibits the production of  testosterone  and reduces the size of the inner lining of the prostate.  However,  other studies  have not been able to establish whether saw palmetto supplement use has any impact on BPH symptoms compared to a  placebo .   3. Zi-Shen Pill (ZSP)   The Zi-Shen Pill (ZSP) contains a mixture of three plants, including Chinese  cinnamon .  The formula comes from ancient Chinese medicine dating back to the 13th century.  Researchers  have shown that rats given the Zi-Shen formula have reduced rates of BPH.  More research is needed on humans to determine whether it is effective.   4. Cernilton   Some people use herbal supplements made from rye-grass pollen to treat BPH symptoms. These troublesome symptoms may include being unable to empty the bladder fully and the need to urination frequently at nighttime.  Under the brand name Cernilton, rye-grass pollen is included in the formula of several registered pharmaceutical supplements targeted at easing symptoms of BPH.  Despite its popularity, Cernilton  has never been shown  to impact BPH symptoms in any large-scale scientific studies. However, some indicate it may help reduce the overall size of the prostate.  Further research is needed to establish if it works or not.   5.  Orbignya speciosa  (babassu)   Babassu or  Orbignya speciosa  is a species of palm tree native to Brazil. Several indigenous Brazilian tribes and communities use the dried or ground kernels from the tree to treat urogenital symptoms and conditions.  Oil from babassu nuts has also  been shown  to inhibit the production of testosterone, while other parts of the nut contain compounds with anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties.   6. Stinging nettle   Stinging nettle contains similar antioxidant and anti-inflammatory compounds as pygeum and saw palmetto.  Nettle root is sometimes used in combination with saw palmetto.  More research  is needed, however, to determine whether it is effective.   7. Cucurbita pepo (pumpkin seed)    Pumpkin  seeds contain beta-sitosterol, a compound similar to  cholesterol  and found in some plants.  Preliminary studies  have shown that beta-sitosterol may improve urine flow and reduce the amount of urine left in the bladder after urination.  Some studies recommend taking 10 g of pumpkin seed extract daily for BPH symptoms.   8. Lycopene   Lycopene is a naturally occurring pigment found in many fruits and vegetables.  One study  found that it may help slow the progression of BPH.  Tomatoes are the richest source of lycopene available to most people. But a few other fruits and vegetables contain lower levels of this antioxidant.  Usually, the deeper pink or red the fruit or vegetable is in color, the higher its lycopene content.  Other sources of lycopene include:   9. Zinc   Chronic zinc deficiencies  have been shown  to potentially increase the likelihood of developing BPH. Taking zinc supplements, or increasing dietary intake of zinc may help reduce urinary symptoms associated with an enlarged prostate.  Zinc is found in poultry, seafood, and several types of seeds and nuts, such as sesame and pumpkin.   10. Green tea    Green tea  has a lot of antioxidants called catechins  that have been  shown to enhance the immune system and potentially slow the progression of  prostate cancer .  It is important to keep in mind that green tea contains caffeine. Caffeine can stimulate the bladder and cause a sudden urge to urinate, potentially worsening BPH symptoms.  Lifestyle tips that may help someone manage the symptoms of an enlarged prostate include the following:  In a vast majority of cases, BPH is idiopathic, meaning it has no known cause. Doctors and researchers are still trying to figure out exactly how and why some people's prostate cells start to divide abnormally.  But most cases of BPH impact men of at least 40 years of age, most commonly those 50 years of age and older. So most studies suggest that BPH is related to hormonal changes, specifically those that occur naturally with age.  As men grow older, their hormone levels change, especially levels of testosterone,  estrogen , and a by-product of testosterone called dihydrotestosterone ( DHT ).  A few studies have shown that changes in the balance of these hormones may trigger some prostate cells to abnormally grow and divide.  Potential risk factors of an enlarged prostate include:  Most men have a  50 percent  chance of having BPH by the age of 60 years old, and a 90 percent chance by the age of 85 years old.  Several types of foods and nutrients can reduce or trigger BPH and its associated symptoms.  Foods that may be beneficial to BPH include:  Foods people with BPH, or those at risk of developing it, should avoid or limit include:  Making dietary changes may help manage or prevent an enlarged prostate and any resulting symptoms.    
 Benign prostate enlargement. (2017, March 31).  Benign prostate enlargement. (2017, March 31).  Enlarged prostate. (n.d.).  Enlarged prostate. (2017, December).  Espinosa, G. (2013, January). Nutrition and benign prostatic hyperplasia.  Current Opinion in Urology ,  23 (1), 38–41.  Keehn, A., &amp; Lowe, F. C. (2015, October 1). Complementary and alternative medications for benign prostatic hyperplasia.  The Canadian Journal of Urology ,  22 (Suppl 1), 18–23.  MacDonald, R., Ishani, A., Rutks, I., &amp; Wilt, T. J. (2000, May). A systematic review of Cernilton for the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia.  BJU International ,  85 (7), 836–841.  Pagano, E., Laudato, M., Griffo, M., &amp; Capasso, R. (2014, July). Phytotherapy of benign prostatic hyperplasia: A minireview.  Phytotherapy Research ,  28 (7), 949–955.  Prostate cancer, nutrition, and dietary supplements (PDQ®). (2017, October 31).  Shrivastava, A., &amp; Gupta, V. B. (2012, January). Various treatment options for benign prostatic hyperplasia: A current update.  Journal of Mid-Life Health ,  3 (1), 10–19.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "How to shrink the prostate naturally."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321231.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, March 17). "How to shrink the prostate naturally."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  