 A jammed finger is most commonly caused by an injury to the joint in the middle of the finger, where it bends in half. This joint is called the proximal interphalangeal joint (PIP).  Small ligaments called the collateral ligaments support the PIP joint. A jammed finger may occur when then these ligaments are overstretched or strained.  This damage can happen when the hands absorb too much force, such as when someone catches a ball when playing sports.  A jammed finger can be uncomfortable, but it is not usually a serious injury. At-home and medical treatments can help the finger heal without complications.  A jammed finger causes swelling, difficulty moving the finger, and pain. The duration of the swelling will depend upon how severe the injury is.  Other signs of a jammed finger include:  Jammed fingers are a common sports injury, especially in sports where the hand absorbs the impact of the ball, such as basketball, baseball, and volleyball.  A jammed finger occurs when the tip of a person's finger presses forcefully against the hand. This action can cause the ligaments in a person's finger to become overstretched or strained.  Other potential causes include:  Any action that puts extra strain on the PIP joint can result in a jammed finger.  A broken finger will cause severe pain and swelling that lasts for hours or even days. While a jammed finger is painful, it is not usually severe.  A doctor can usually tell the difference between a jammed finger and a broken finger based on a visual examination.  A broken finger may have a bone either visibly sticking out of the skin or will be protruding toward the skin. A person may hear a cracking or popping noise with finger movement if they have a broken finger.  A doctor will also ask the person to try to move their finger. A jammed finger will usually have some range of motion, but if a person has a broken finger, they will hardly be able to move it.  If it is still not clear whether the finger is jammed or broken, a doctor may take an X-ray to confirm the diagnosis.  Doctors commonly treat a jammed finger with a splint, which is a brace that keeps the finger straight and stable while the damaged ligaments heal.  Another option is known as buddy taping or wrapping, where the injured finger is taped securely to a non-injured finger for support. Buddy wrapping helps to stabilize the injured finger.  There is a useful at-home treatment for jammed fingers known as PRICE. It stands for:  Taking over-the-counter pain relief medications, such as acetaminophen and ibuprofen, can also help reduce pain and inflammation.  If a person injures their finger and it appears crooked, they should not attempt to straighten it themselves. Instead, they should see their doctor to examine and treat the injury.  A person should seek immediate medical attention if the finger starts to feel numb and turns white or very pale. These are signs that there is not enough blood flowing to the area.  A person should see their doctor as quickly as possible when:  If a person's symptoms continue to get worse instead of better, they should see their family doctor or a doctor that specializes in the skeletal system called an orthopedist. Some orthopedists offer walk-in clinics to assess sports-related injuries.  If left untreated, a jammed finger can lead to complications including prolonged stiffness or difficulty fully straightening the finger.  Once the joint has had time to heal, a doctor may recommend exercises to reduce stiffness in the joint. These may include squeezing an exercise ball or stretching the fingers in a tub of warm water.  With proper care, a jammed finger will regain both the strength and flexibility it had before the injury.    
 Carruthers, K., Skie, M., &amp; Jain, M. (2016, July 15). Jam injuries of the finger [Abstract].  Sports Health: A Multidisciplinary Approach ,  8 (5).  Carruthers, K., Skie, M., &amp; Jain, M. (2016, July 15). Jam injuries of the finger [Abstract].  Sports Health: A Multidisciplinary Approach ,  8 (5).  Jammed finger. (n.d.).  Should I worry about a jammed finger? (2017, January 26).  Sparks, D. (2017, April 7). Home remedies: Just jammed your finger.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Jammed finger vs. broken finger: What to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321288.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, March 22). "Jammed finger vs. broken finger: What to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  