 Several types of yeast and bacteria can build up in the vagina. A yeast infection happens when one type of yeast multiplies too much. This yeast is a fungus called  Candida .  In this article, we explain the science behind yogurt as a treatment for a vaginal yeast infection. We also discuss the most effective ways to use it.  Use plain, natural yogurt that contains  Lactobacillus . It is important that this yogurt includes no natural sweeteners.  The following methods may help to apply yogurt inside the vagina:  Applying yogurt to the vulva or into the vagina may soothe symptoms.  Some women prefer natural remedies for a yeast infection because:  Yogurt may be an effective remedy because it contains  Lactobacillus  bacteria. This healthful type of bacteria lives in the gut, urinary tract, and vagina without irritating these areas.  It is believed that using yogurt containing good bacteria restores a healthful yeast balance in the vagina.  Lactobacillus  releases hydrogen peroxide, which kills  Candida , combatting infection.  Applying cold yogurt may also sooth itching or burning sensations.  A combination of yogurt and honey worked well as an alternative to antifungal treatment in pregnant women with vaginal yeast infections, according to a  2012 study .   Another study  suggested that therapeutic effects of yogurt may be more effective than clotrimazole (Canesten), an antifungal cream.  The  Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database  classifies yogurt containing  Lactobacillus  as a "possibly effective" treatment for yeast infections.  It is important to note that evidence supports the use of yogurt for internal or topical treatment, as opposed to dietary use.  A  2006 review  found that probiotics, microorganisms that provide health benefits to their host, have shown promise in preventing yeast infections. However, it concluded that more research is needed before probiotics can be recommended as treatment.  Plain yogurt that contains  Lactobacillus  and no natural sweeteners is an effective treatment.  Other kinds of yogurt tend to contain added sugar. Using this will likely make the infection and symptoms worse because sugar causes yeast to multiply.  Also, while yogurt is effective, it may not provide relief as quickly as traditional antifungal treatments.  Many women prefer to use plain yogurt as an alternative to standard antifungal tablets, creams, or suppositories.  When a healthful balance of bacteria and yeast is disrupted, too much  Candida  will grow, causing a yeast infection.  The following factors can disrupt the vagina's natural balance:  While sex can sometimes lead to an overgrowth of  Candida , a yeast infection is not a  sexually transmitted infection  (STI).  Symptoms of a vaginal yeast infection include:  Vaginal yeast infections are common, treatable, and not usually a cause for concern.  It may be difficult to identify this infection when experiencing it for the first time, and it is essential to seek a professional diagnosis. A doctor can also advise people who experience frequent yeast infections or those that do not improve with treatment.  However, people who have continued pain or other vaginal symptoms may want to arrange a sexual health screening. All sexually active people should be screened for STIs regularly.    
 Abdelmonem, A. M., Rasheed, S. M., &amp; Mohamed, A. S. (2012, July). Bee-honey and yogurt: A novel mixture for treating patients with vulvovaginal candidiasis during pregnancy [Abstract].  Archives of Gynaecology and Obstetrics ,  286 (1), 109–114.  Abdelmonem, A. M., Rasheed, S. M., &amp; Mohamed, A. S. (2012, July). Bee-honey and yogurt: A novel mixture for treating patients with vulvovaginal candidiasis during pregnancy [Abstract].  Archives of Gynaecology and Obstetrics ,  286 (1), 109–114.  Darvishi, M., Jahdi, F., Hamzegardeshi, Z., Goodarzi, S., &amp; Vahedi, M. (2015, November). The comparison of vaginal cream of mixing yogurt, honey and clotrimazole on symptoms of vaginal candidiasis.  Global Journal of Health Science ,  7 (6), 108–116.  Falagas, M. E., Betsi, G. I., &amp; Athanasiou, S. (2006, August). Probiotics for prevention of recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis: A review.   Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy ,  58 (2), 266–272.   Lactobacillus . (2017, November 30).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Can yogurt treat a yeast infection?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321254.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, March 19). "Can yogurt treat a yeast infection?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  