  Influenza  viruses are always changing, which means that the  flu  vaccine is updated every year. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  recommend that  everyone over 6 months of age (with some exceptions) should have a flu vaccine each year.  Different forms of flu vaccine can have slightly different ingredients. For instance:  Many vaccines for flu and other viruses contain similar ingredients. The purpose of each ingredient is to either make the vaccine effective or ensure that it is safe.  Many studies over the years have shown that flu vaccines are safe. The CDC say that it is the  best way  to avoid getting the flu and spreading it to other people.  The following list looks at seven ingredients in vaccines, including flu shots, and why vaccines need them:  The flu vaccine contains tiny amounts of the viruses it protects against. The presence of these viruses in the vaccine triggers the body's natural defense mechanism to produce antibodies to fight them. This means that the body quickly recognizes them when exposed to the disease in "real life."  Different influenza viruses contained in a flu shot are:  Traditional flu shots are trivalent (three-component) vaccines because they protect against three viruses: two influenza A viruses (H1N1 and H3N2), and one influenza B virus.  A person can also get a quadrivalent (four-component) vaccine, which protects against an additional B virus.  Formaldehyde is toxic and potentially lethal in high doses. However, it is present in such small amounts in a flu vaccination that it is harmless.  Formaldehyde's role in the flu shot is to inactivate toxins from viruses and bacteria that may contaminate the vaccine during production, as well as the viruses naturally present in the vaccine.  Formaldehyde is typically present in the human body and is a product of healthy digestive function.  Aluminum has been used in vaccines for  over 70 years .  Aluminum salts are adjuvants, meaning that they help the body to develop a stronger immune response against the virus in the vaccine. Because they boost the body's response, this means that the vaccine can contain smaller amounts of the virus.  Similar to formaldehyde, and to most ingredients in the flu shot, the amount of aluminum present in the vaccine is extremely small.  This compound is not always present in flu vaccines, some of which are aluminum-free.  Thimerosal is a preservative that keeps the vaccine free from contamination by bacteria and fungi. Without this, the growth of bacteria and fungi is common when a syringe is in a multi-dose vial (a vial that contains more than one dose).  Thimerosal is made of an organic form of mercury known as ethylmercury, a safe compound that usually only stays in the blood for a few days.  It is different from the standard mercury that can cause illness in large doses, and from the mercury found in seafood (called methylmercury), which can stay in the body for years.  Flu shots will only contain thimerosal when they are in a multi-dose vial. Single-dose vials, pre-filled syringes, and nasal sprays  do not need  to include this preservative because contamination is not an issue.  Proteins from chicken eggs help viruses to grow before they go into the vaccine.  Influenza viruses used in vaccines are usually grown inside fertilized chicken eggs, where the virus makes copies of itself. After that, the viruses are separated from the egg and placed in the vaccine; this means that the finished vaccine may contain small amounts of egg proteins.  The CDC say that the flu shot is  typically safe  for people with egg allergies, but those who have an egg allergy must mention it to the doctor before receiving the shot. A person with a severe egg allergy may require monitoring by a doctor following the injection.  Egg-free flu shots are also available.  Gelatin is present in the flu shot as a stabilizer. Stabilizers keep the vaccine effective from the point of production to the moment of use.  Stabilizers also help to protect the vaccine from the damaging effects of heat or freeze-drying.  Most flu vaccines use pork-based gelatin as a stabilizer.   Antibiotics  are present in the flu vaccine to keep bacteria from growing during the production and storage of the vaccine.  Vaccines do not contain antibiotics that may cause severe reactions, such as  penicillin . Instead, vaccines contain other forms of antibiotics, such as gentamicin or neomycin. Neomycin is also an ingredient in many topical medications, such as lotions, ointments, and eye drops.  Having the flu vaccine has several benefits, including:  The CDC recommends that everyone over the age of 6 months should receive the flu vaccine every year, though they also provide  guidelines  of who should avoid the vaccine or take precautions.  Age, current and past health, and allergies to the flu vaccine or its components are factors to consider.  The following people should avoid or be cautious of the flu vaccine:  The flu vaccine  cannot cause flu  because it is made with inactivated ("dead") or weakened viruses, which are not infectious, or with synthetic, lab-made variants of the flu virus.  However, a flu shot may cause slight flu-like symptoms that can last for a few days, such as:  However, the most common side effect is a slight soreness or redness in the arm at the site of the injection.  In rare situations, the flu vaccine can cause serious side effects, such as allergic reactions. These usually occur within  a few minutes to a few hours  after vaccination and can be treated.    
 Ahmed, A. H., Nicholson, K. G., Nguyen-van Tam, J. S., &amp; Pearson, J. C. (1997, February). Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in reducing hospital admissions during the 1989-90 epidemic.  Epidemiology and Infection ,  118 (1), 27–33.  Ahmed, A. H., Nicholson, K. G., Nguyen-van Tam, J. S., &amp; Pearson, J. C. (1997, February). Effectiveness of influenza vaccine in reducing hospital admissions during the 1989-90 epidemic.  Epidemiology and Infection ,  118 (1), 27–33.  Baxter, D. (2016). Evaluating the case for trivalent or quadrivalent influenza vaccines.  Human Vaccines &amp; Immunotherapeutics ,  12 (10), 2712–2717.  Benowitz, I., Esposito, D. B., Gracey, K. D., Shapiro, E. D., &amp; Vázquez, M. (2015, December 15). Influenza vaccine given to pregnant women reduces hospitalization due to influenza in their infants.  Clinical Infectious Diseases ,  51 (12), 1355–1361.  Clapp, T., Siebert, P., Chen, D., &amp; Jones Braun, L. (2011, February). Vaccines with aluminum-containing adjuvants: Optimizing vaccine efficacy and thermal stability.  Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences ,  100 (2), 388–401.  Erbelding, E. J., Post, D., Stemmy, E., Roberts, P. C., Augustine, A. D., Ferguson, S., …, Fauci, A. S. (2018, February 28). A universal influenza vaccine: The strategic plan for the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases [Abstract].  The Journal of Infectious Diseases .  Grohskopf, L. A., Sokolow, L. Z., Broder, K. R., Walter, E. B., Bresee, J. S., Fry, A. M., &amp; Jernigan, D. B. (2017, August 25). Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with vaccines: Recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices — United States, 2017–18 Influenza Season.  Recommendations and Reports ,  66 (2), 1–20.  Flu vaccine and people with egg allergies. (2017, December 28).  Flu vaccine safety information. (2017, October 5).  Hannoun, C. (2013, September). The evolving history of influenza viruses and influenza vaccines [Abstract].  Expert Review of Vaccines ,  12 (9), 1085–1094.  Ingredients of vaccines [Fact sheet]. (2011, February 22).  Key facts about seasonal flu vaccine. (2017, October 30).  Krammer, F. (2015, May). Emerging influenza viruses and the prospect of a universal influenza virus vaccine [Abstract].  Biotechnology Journal ,  10 (5), 690–701.  Misconceptions about seasonal flu and flu vaccines. (2017, October 3).  Offit, P. A., &amp; Jew, R. K. (2003, December). Addressing parents' concerns: Do vaccines contain harmful preservatives, adjuvants, additives, or residuals?  Pediatrics ,  112 (6), 1394–1397.  Thimerosal in flu vaccine. (2017, November 2).  Vaccination: Who should do it, who should not and who should take precautions. (2017, October 3).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "What are flu vaccines made of and why?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321207.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, March 14). "What are flu vaccines made of and why?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  