 Earlobe  cysts , otherwise known as epidermoid cysts or epidermal inclusion cysts, grow slowly. A doctor will usually recommend removal only if there is pain, discomfort, bursting, or infection.  Cysts commonly form on adults in areas that are not heavily covered with hair, such as on the face, neck, or trunk.  Here we discuss what a person can expect when they discover an earlobe cyst, as well as symptoms and treatment.  A cyst is a sac-like pocket of tissue that contains fluid, air, or another substance.  When skin cells multiply or grow instead of shedding, they can form cysts within the innermost layer of the skin. These epidermoid cysts can also form if the outermost layer of a hair follicle becomes irritated or injured.  Men are at a  higher risk  for developing these cysts, but anyone at any age can have by them. Factors that increase the likelihood of a person developing an epidermoid cyst include:  Cancerous cells rarely develop within epidermoid cysts. However, some  cancers  have a stronger link to these cysts than others. They include:  The following are some symptoms associated with an epidermal cyst on the earlobe:  At times, an earlobe cyst can become infected and require medical attention. Signs of an infection may include:  Epidermal earlobe cysts are diagnosed by examination and do not require treatment in most cases.  Sometimes, a doctor will take a sample of a cyst, in a procedure known as a biopsy, and examine the sample under a microscope.  When necessary or desired, treatment usually involves removing the cyst with a simple cut and local anesthetic. Surgical removal may also prevent a cyst from reforming.  Otherwise, a doctor can make a small cut in the cyst and drain the contents. This option is quick and simple, but cysts are more likely to return.  A doctor may recommend  antibiotics  in the event of infection. They may also inject a steroid into the cyst to reduce inflammation.  While earlobe cysts cannot be prevented, they can be managed at home if there are no signs of infection.  Do not squeeze a cyst, as this can cause scarring and lead to infection.  A person may want to place a warm compress over the cyst, to promote drainage and healing.  Earlobe cysts are usually not a cause for concern. However, certain complications may require medical intervention.  These complications may include:  If a cyst seems to have burst or is infected, see a doctor.  Earlobe cysts are usually benign and tend to form in middle-aged adults.  Cysts can occasionally be a symptom of a genetic abnormality. People, particularly those with a history of Gardner syndrome or another genetic condition, may want to speak to a doctor about the appearance of a cyst.  Medical treatment is not needed to treat most earlobe cysts. Some may even go away on their own.  However, if a person suspects that a cyst has burst or is infected, it is important to seek medical attention.    
 Dermis. (n.d.).  Dermis. (n.d.).  Epidermoid cysts: Diagnosis &amp; treatment. (2018, March 6).  Epidermoid cysts: Symptoms &amp; causes. (2018, March 6).  Epidermoid and pilar cysts. (2017, March).  Higgins, J. C., Maher, M. H., &amp; Douglas, M. S. (2015, October 1). Diagnosing common benign skin tumors.  American Family Physician ,  92 (7), 601–607.  Oakley, A. (2016, February). Cutaneous cysts and pseudocysts.  Zuber, T. J. (2002, April 1). Minimal excision technique for epidermoid (sebaceous) cysts.  American Family Physician ,  65 (7), 1409–1412.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. "What causes a cyst in your earlobe?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321247.php&gt;    APA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. (2018, March 18). "What causes a cyst in your earlobe?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  