  Diarrhea  occurs when digested food material and water pass through the intestines too quickly. Instead of having time to form a solid mass, the material passes through in a liquid form.  Red diarrhea may be alarming, but stool color can help a person determine the cause of their symptoms. In this article, we look at the possible causes and treatment, as well as what other stool colors mean.  Six causes of red diarrhea:  Looking at stool color can often help a person determine what is causing their gastrointestinal symptoms.  Stool can come in a range of colors and have a variety of causes:  When a person has diarrhea, they can lose a significant amount of fluid via their stool. When this happens, a person can become dehydrated.  A person should drink small sips of water or an electrolyte-replacement beverage regularly to help replace the lost water. Electrolyte powders are available for  purchase online .  Diarrhea is often a way in which the body gets rid of an unwanted virus. Instead of prescribing medications that would slow the intestines and cause the body to retain the bacteria for longer, doctors may encourage a person to allow the diarrhea to run its course.  However, prolonged diarrhea may require additional treatments, such as intravenous fluids and medications to reduce cramping in the bowels.  In more severe cases of dysentery, a person may be given antibiotics or amoebicidal medications, or both if the exact cause is unknown.  If a person's red diarrhea is due to GI bleeding, they may require a blood transfusion until the body can produce more blood. This procedure takes place in the hospital, and the person will need to remain there until their blood count is within a normal range.  If a person thinks red diarrhea is due to their medication, they should speak to a doctor about possible alternatives.  If red diarrhea is the result of dysentery or infection, a person can take steps to prevent it in the future.  Ways to help prevent red diarrhea include:  Bloody diarrhea may be a sign of a medical emergency, so a person should see a doctor as soon as possible.  A person should also see a doctor if they have the following symptoms in addition to red diarrhea:  While diarrhea is not always a cause for concern, severe or persistent bleeding may be a medical emergency. Anyone who is concerned about their red stool should speak to a doctor as soon as possible.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 E. coli infection. (2014, April 1).  E. coli infection. (2014, April 1).  Parasites – Amebiasis –  Entamoeba histolytica  infection. (2015, December 16).  Picco, M. F. (2016, October 6). Stool color: When to worry.   Shigella  – shigellosis: Sources of infection and risk factors. (2017, July 25).  Stools – blood in. (2018, March 19).  Stools – unusual color. (n.d.).  What are the symptoms of GI bleeding? (2016, July).  What can your child's poop color tell you? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Why do I have red diarrhea? Six causes."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321283.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, March 22). "Why do I have red diarrhea? Six causes."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  