 These data were recently presented at the American Heart Association's (AHA) 2018 scientific sessions on Epidemiology and Prevention | Lifestyle and Cardiometabolic Health, held in New Orleans, LA.  The AHA's 2018  Heart and Stroke Statistical Update  claims that 2.7 million people in the United States have  atrial fibrillation  (A-fib).  A-fib occurs when the upper chambers of the heart spasm, which therefore prevents them from moving blood into the 
heart's lower chambers. When blood collects in the heart's upper chamber it can clot, which may 
lead to  stroke .  Figures from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) show that, across the U.S.,  more than 16 million adults  experience  depression . And, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), during any 2-week period,  7.6 percent  of people over the age of 12 have depression.  The causes of depression are not well understood, but scientists believe that psychosocial, environmental, behavioral, and genetic factors all play a role.  In the  recent study , researchers from the Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles analyzed data from the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) project.  More than 6,600 U.S. citizens from a variety of ethnic groups took part in the MESA, and they were followed for 13 years. The participants were aged 62, on average, and they were free from  heart disease  at the start of the study.   Those who took antidepressants and who had the highest scores on a clinical screening test for depression were found to be at more than 30 percent increased risk for A-fib, compared with participants with low scores for depression and who did not take antidepressants.   The study was unable to pinpoint exactly how heart function may be disrupted by depression. But, the researchers hypothesize that  inflammation  and increased levels of some hormones could prevent the heart from being able to maintain a regular rhythm.  "Our findings," explains lead investigator Dr. Parveen Garg, "identify a large portion of Americans who may be at an increased risk for developing atrial fibrillation and who may benefit from more targeted efforts to prevent this  arrhythmia ."   " If our findings are affirmed in future studies, especially those that formally assess for clinical depression, then we will need to see if treating depression may, in fact, lower the risk for atrial fibrillation."  Dr. Parveen Garg  Dr. Garg and colleagues suggest that their findings bolster the conclusions of previous studies 
that have demonstrated a close link between  mental health  and heart health.   They recommend that both clinicians and patients who are affected by these illnesses should be made aware that evidence shows that people with depression are at increased risk of heart disease in general.   For instance, in 2016,  Medical News Today  reported on a  study  that found that treating participants with depression resulted in a reduced risk of heart disease in that group.  In that study, individuals who had been treated for depression had approximately the same level of cardiovascular risk as people who did not have depression.  And, last year, we looked at a  study  that suggested that people with both depression and a type of heart disease called  coronary heart disease  (CAD) are at increased risk of premature death.  The authors of that study found that being diagnosed with depression at any point after being diagnosed with CAD doubles the risk of premature death.  