 Read on to learn more about  back pain  after eating and a variety of treatments.  The following issues can lead to back pain after eating:  People with allergies or intolerances to certain foods may experience  inflammation  after eating them. If they already have back pain, the inflammation can make symptoms worse.  Examples of foods that may trigger inflammation and back pain include:  Some foods can aggravate underlying conditions, resulting in back pain. For example, very spicy foods can cause  heartburn , making back pain worse.  The gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ that sits below the liver. It stores and releases bile, a fluid that helps the body to digest fats.  The gallbladder can become inflamed, especially if hard deposits known as  gallstones  are present. Eating fatty foods can trigger a gallbladder attack, in which the organ becomes inflamed and causes pain.  Typical symptoms of a gallbladder attack include nausea and severe pain in the upper abdomen. This pain may radiate to the back.  Back pain can signal a  heart attack , especially if accompanied by symptoms such as:  According to the  American Heart Association , women are more likely than men to experience atypical heart attack symptoms. These may include:  It should be noted that women do not always have chest pain when experiencing heart problems.  Back pain after eating may result from  heartburn , a digestive condition characterized by burning pain in the chest. It is estimated that over  15 million Americans  experience heartburn every day.  Other symptoms may include a sour taste in the mouth, a  sore throat , and a cough. Certain foods may trigger heartburn symptoms, including:  Experiencing heartburn more than twice a week may indicate gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ), which can lead to ulcers if not properly managed.  A  kidney infection  can cause back pain, as well as:  Symptoms are typically present throughout the day, though some people may notice them more after eating. Anyone who suspects that they have a kidney infection should seek medical attention to prevent complications.  The pancreas is an organ that participates in digestion and blood sugar regulation. Inflammmation of the pancreas is known as  pancreatitis . Symptoms include:  Authors of a 2013 study report that approximately  70 percent  of pancreatitis cases are caused by long-term, heavy alcohol consumption.  Bad posture is a common cause of back pain. A person who is hunched over during meals may experience this pain after eating.  Poor posture while sitting, standing, or working at a desk can also lead to back pain at any time of the day.  An  ulcer  in the stomach or esophagus may lead to pain that radiates to the back. Other ulcer symptoms include:  Infection with  Helicobacter pylori  ( H. pylori ) often causes ulcers. They may also be caused by long-term use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) or naproxen sodium (Aleve).  Spicy or acidic foods can make ulcer symptoms worse.  Treatment for back pain after eating depends on the underlying cause. Common treatments are listed below.  If back pain results from heartburn, ulcers, or food intolerances, it may be helpful to remove trigger foods from the diet.  Trigger foods vary from person to person, but common culprits include:  To identify trigger foods, it may be helpful to keep a food diary or work with a dietitian.  Medications used to treat back pain after eating will vary significantly, depending on the problem. For example:  Physical therapists are able to correct poor posture. They may recommend stretches and exercises to help strengthen the core muscles and support the back and spine.  Exercises practiced in  yoga , Pilates, and tai chi may be particularly beneficial.  If a doctor cannot identify the cause of back pain after eating, try common remedies for generalized back pain. These include resting, applying ice and taking pain relievers.  Here are some tips to prevent back pain after eating:  Anyone with persistent or worsening back pain should speak to a doctor.  Seek prompt medical treatment if the pain is accompanied by symptoms such as:  Contact emergency services if back pain is accompanied by any of the following symptoms of a cardiac event:  Back pain after eating is usually the result of referred pain from another area of the body, and it is not always a cause for concern.  However, if the pain persists or is accompanied by other symptoms, it is important to see a doctor.  Most causes of back pain after eating can be easily treated with medication, lifestyle changes, and dietary modifications.    
 Acid reflux. (n.d.).  Acid reflux. (n.d.).  Heart attack symptoms in women. (2017, December 5).  Herreros-Villanueva, M., Hijona, E., Bañales, J. M., Cosme, A., &amp; Bujanda, L. (2013, February 7). Alcohol consumption on pancreatic diseases.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  19 (5), 638–647.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Why do I get a pain in my back after eating?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321204.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, March 14). "Why do I get a pain in my back after eating?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  