 Doctors classify trigger points as either active or latent. With active trigger points, a person does not have to touch the trigger point itself for it to be painful. Latent trigger points are only painful if someone presses them.  Myofascial trigger points can cause pain and affect range of motion, so the individual should always aim to treat them early. Learn more about treatment and prevention in this article.  Muscle knots can develop almost anywhere on the body where muscle or fascia is present.  The knots feel as if they are small, hard lumps or nodules. A person may have to press deep into their connective tissue to feel the knots or trigger points.  Trigger points often cause what doctors call referred pain. When a person presses on the trigger point, the pain spreads from the trigger point to nearby muscles.  Sometimes, the muscle may twitch or move when the knot is pressed. This symptom helps differentiate a trigger point from a tender point. A tender point is an area that hurts only in the pressed location, and the pain does not radiate to other muscles.  Places where muscle knots commonly occur include:  The  most common  source of muscle knots is the trapezius muscle. This muscle makes a triangle-like shape from the neck to the middle of the back and the shoulder.  Tension and knots in the trapezius muscles often occur due to  stress  and poor posture.  Muscle knots can also cause additional symptoms, including:  Common causes of muscle knots include:  A person who spends a significant amount of time sitting at work may develop muscle knots due to staying in the same position for prolonged periods.  Doctors have identified several risk factors for people more likely to experience trigger points. These include:  People who play sports or work with their hands may also be at risk because they engage in repetitive activities. Repeatedly, doing the same motion can cause tension and knots over time.  People may want to try home remedies, which are often the first line of treatment for muscle knots. The individual should begin by evaluating why their muscle knots might have occurred.  If someone's muscle knots are due to prolonged sitting or a prior muscle injury, engaging in regular stretching breaks may help reduce muscle tension.  People can also try:  A person may be able to push or rub out the knot by applying steady pressure to the pressure point. With enough pressure, the knot will start to feel softer to the touch and may begin to release.  A person can also place a tennis ball between their back and the wall or floor and roll gently on the ball to massage the muscles.  People can also use a foam roller to massage the muscle and work out knots. A variety of foam rollers are  available here .  If home remedies do not reduce the symptoms of muscle knots, professional treatments are available. These are aimed at smoothing out the muscle knots and reducing pain.  Examples include:  Less commonly, a doctor may recommend using a "stretch and spray" method. This involves spraying a cold solution onto the affected muscle. The cold temperature can temporarily reduce pain and any swelling, allowing a person to press and stretch the muscle knot.  Practicing good posture and engaging in regular physical activity are excellent ways to prevent muscle knots.  Many knots develop from repeated muscle trauma, so a person may wish to engage in different activity types to prevent overuse of the same muscles. Activities might include swimming one day and walking the next.  A doctor or physical therapist can help ensure a person is practicing the right postures when exercising or working.  Evaluating ways to practice better posture and form can help a person prevent muscle injuries and muscle knots.  Muscle knots or myofascial trigger points can often be treated with simple home remedies and stretching.  However, some knots can be painful enough to interfere with a person's everyday life and activities.  When this is the case, a person should see their doctor for treatment. When someone corrects the underlying cause, they will be able to improve their posture, reduce tension, and prevent muscle knots in the future.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Alvarez, D. J., &amp; Rockwell, P. G. (2002, February 15). Trigger points: Diagnosis and management.  American Family Physician ,  65 (4), 653–661.  Alvarez, D. J., &amp; Rockwell, P. G. (2002, February 15). Trigger points: Diagnosis and management.  American Family Physician ,  65 (4), 653–661.  Bron, C., &amp; Dommerholt, J. D. (2012, October). Etiology of myofascial trigger points.  Current Pain and Headache Reports ,  16 (5), 439–444.  Coleman, C. (2017, April 18). Triggers points and physical therapy: Striking a nerve in a polarized profession.  Knot in your neck? 4 ways to relieve trigger point pain. (2014, May 22).  Myofascial trigger point therapy — what is it? (n.d.).  Shah, J. P., Thaker, N., Heimur, J., Aredo, J. V., Sikdar, S., &amp; Gerber, L. H. (2016, July 1). Myofascial trigger points then and now: A historical and scientific perspective.  PM&amp;R ,  7 (7), 746–761.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How to treat muscle knots."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321224.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, March 16). "How to treat muscle knots."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  