 A buildup of food and bacteria form a film on the teeth. The term for this is plaque. If plaque is not removed, it will cause tooth decay.   Streptococcus mutans  is a type of bacteria known to play a role in this decay.  Plaque builds up more easily in places such as:  Over time, decay reaches the tooth's inner layer, called the dentin. At this point, a cavity starts to develop.  It is possible to prevent a cavity using home remedies when decay is at the pre-cavity stage. This is when decay has made holes in a tooth's enamel but has not yet reached the dentin.  Once the dentin decays and a cavity starts to form, professional treatment is necessary.  Cavities must be treated by a dentist.  However, several home remedies can strengthen tooth enamel at the pre-cavity stage. This process is known as remineralizing, and it prevents a cavity from forming.  Brushing the teeth twice daily with fluoride toothpaste is a tried-and-tested way to remineralize tooth enamel and prevent cavities.  Results from a  2014 study  indicate that high-fluoride toothpaste significantly hardens enamel; giving teeth the protection they need to fight off decay.  However, some people prefer to use natural home remedies, rather than products containing fluoride. Some of these remedies include:  Oil pulling originated in an ancient system of alternative medicine called Ayurveda. It involves swishing a tablespoon of sesame or  coconut oil  around in the mouth for a prescribed period, then spitting it out.  While some claims about oil pulling are not scientifically supported, research indicates that it can improve tooth health. A  2009 study  found that using sesame oil in the pulling technique reduced the amount of plaque and bacteria to the same extent as mouthwash.  If oil pulling reduces plaque, this may help to remineralize enamel and prevent cavities. More studies are needed to confirm these effects.  Aloe vera tooth gel may help to fight off bacteria that cause cavities. The antibacterial effect of this gel kills harmful bacteria in the mouth, according to a  2015 review .  While more research is needed, aloe vera gel may help to remineralize enamel at the pre-cavity stage.  Phytic acid may damage tooth enamel, and some believe that cutting it out of the diet can prevent tooth decay and cavities.  A  study  from the 1930s linked cavities to a diet high in phytic acid. However, there is a lack of recent evidence to support this.  A  2004 study  found that phytic acid affected the mineral absorption from food. Some online articles use this study to draw further conclusions. They suggest that phytic acid may also break down minerals in enamel and lead to tooth decay. It is worth noting that the study involved fewer than 20 participants, however.  Phytic acid is most  commonly found  in cereals and legumes, including the following:  More research is needed to determine whether phytic acid affects the minerals in tooth enamel.  A  2013 review  concluded that  vitamin D  supplements helped to reduce the incidence of dental cavities significantly.  The  vitamin  may have a mineralizing effect, which helps to strengthen tooth enamel.  Consumption of sugar is among the leading causes of cavities. Sugar mixes with bacteria in the mouth and forms an acid, which wears down tooth enamel.  The World Health Organization (WHO) recommend that people prevent cavities by consuming fewer sugary foods and drinks, this  2016 review  notes.  The antibacterial properties of licorice root may target the bacteria that cause cavities, according to a  2011 trial .  A small  study  from the same year suggested that sucking on a lollipop containing licorice extract might help to prevent cavities.  However, more research is needed before dentists can recommend these lollipops for cavity prevention.  Results of a  2015 study  indicate that chewing sugar-free gum after meals reduced levels of bacteria that damage enamel.  Having less of this bacteria may lead to stronger enamel that is better equipped to withstand decay.  Home remedies may reduce the risk of cavities or reverse damage to enamel in the pre-cavity stage.  These remedies should be used alongside dentist-recommended techniques, such as brushing, preferably with fluoride toothpaste.  Not all cavities cause pain, so it is essential to see a dentist regularly.  Dentists can detect cavities at an early stage and recommend preventive action. They may also provide a filling, crown, or other treatment for advanced cases of decay.    
 Asokan, S., Emmadi, P., &amp; Chamundeswari, R. (2009). Effect of oil pulling on plaque induced gingivitis: A randomized, controlled, triple-blind study.  Indian Journal of Dental Research ,  20 (1), 47–51.  Asokan, S., Emmadi, P., &amp; Chamundeswari, R. (2009). Effect of oil pulling on plaque induced gingivitis: A randomized, controlled, triple-blind study.  Indian Journal of Dental Research ,  20 (1), 47–51.  Bohn, T., Davidsson, L., Walczyk, T., &amp; Hurrell, R. F. (2004, March). Phytic acid added to white-wheat bread inhibits fractional apparent magnesium absorption in humans.  American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  79 (3), 418–423.  Emamieh, S., Khaterizadeh, Y., Goudarzi, H., Ghasemi, A., Baghban, A. A., &amp; Torabzadeh, H. (2015, May 19). The effect of two types chewing gum containing casein phosphopeptide-amorphous calcium phosphate and xylitol on salivary  Streptococcus mutans .  Journal of Conservative Dentistry ,  18 (3), 192–195.  Gafner, S., Bergeron, C., Villinski, J. R., Godejohann, M., Kessler, P., Cardellina, J. H., … Grenier, D. (2011, December 27). Isoflavonoids and coumarins from  Glycyrrhiza uralensis : Antibacterial activity against oral pathogens and conversion of isoflavans into isoflavan-quinones during purification [Abstract].  Journal of Natural Products ,  74 (12), 2514–2519.  Hu, C.-H., He, J., Eckert, R., Wu, X.-Y., Li-na, L., Tian, Y., … &amp; Shi, W.-Y. (2011). Development and evaluation of a safe and effective sugar-free herbal lollipop that kills cavity-causing bacteria.  International Journal of Oral Science ,  3 , 13–20.  Hujoel, P. P. (2013). Vitamin D and dental caries in controlled clinical trials: Systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE): Quality-assessed Reviews .  Mangaiyarkarasi, S. P., Manigandan, T., Elumalai, M., Cholan, P. K., &amp; Kaur, R. P. (2015, April). Benefits of  Aloe vera  in dentistry.  Journal of Pharmacy and Bioallied Sciences ,  7 (1), 255–259.  Mellanby, M., &amp; Pattison, L. (1932, March 19). Remarks on the influence of a cereal-free diet rich in vitamin D and calcium on dental caries in children.  British Medical Journal ,  3715 (1), 507–510.  Moynihan, P. (2016, January 7). Sugars and dental caries: Evidence for setting a recommended threshold for intake.  Advances in Nutrition ,  7 (1), 149–156.  Schlemmer, U., Frølich, W., Prieto, R. M., &amp; Grases, F. (2009). Phytate in foods and significance for humans: Food sources, intake, processing, bioavailability, protective role and analysis.  Molecular Nutrition and Food Research ,  53 , S330–S375.  Srinivasan, M., Schimmel, M., Riesen, M., Ilgner, A., Wicht, M. J., Warncke, M., … &amp; Noack, M. J. (2014, August). High-fluoride toothpaste: A multicenter randomized controlled trial in adults.  Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology ,  42 (4), 333–340.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Are there natural ways to prevent cavities?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321259.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, March 20). "Are there natural ways to prevent cavities?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  