 In this article, we look at the definition and causes of pinpoint pupils, as well as possible treatment options.  In normal conditions, the pupils change size to let in the right amount of light. In the dark, they open wider or dilate to let in more light; in bright light, they get smaller or constrict to prevent too much light from getting in.  However, some medical conditions and the use of certain drugs can cause the pupils to shrink to a pinpoint size.  The medical term for pinpoint pupils is miosis or myosis, from an ancient Greek word  muein , meaning "to close the eyes."  Several conditions and drugs can cause pinpoint pupils, including:  Some medications have opioids or narcotics in them. Opioids, including morphine, are drugs commonly used for pain relief. Opioids can affect a person psychologically and are highly addictive.  People often take prescription opioids in pill form to treat severe post-surgical pain, such as from dental surgery, or for long-term pain, as with some  cancers .  Prescription opioids that may cause pinpoint pupils include:  Methadone is often used to help a person who has an opioid dependency recover from their  addiction  slowly and with manageable withdrawal symptoms.  As well as pinpoint pupils, symptoms of an opioid overdose include:   Treatment   Opioid overdoses can be fatal if left untreated, so anyone with a suspected overdose needs emergency medical attention.  A person experiencing an overdose will be given naloxone, which blocks the effects of opioids. A doctor might also refer them to a treatment and recovery program if they have a drug dependency.  Some medications prescribed for  high blood pressure  (hypertension) can also cause pinpoint pupils. These include:   Treatment   Anyone who thinks their  hypertension  medication may be causing pinpoint pupils should speak to their doctor. The doctor may be able to prescribe a different form of medicine.  Pinpoint pupils are one of the signs of heroin use. Heroin is a highly addictive recreational opioid.  It causes the body to slow down and is a potent painkiller, making a person very relaxed and sleepy.  Other symptoms of heroin use and addiction include:  People using heroin are at risk of contracting blood infections by sharing needles. Injecting heroin can also damage the veins and arteries and may cause  gangrene .  Heroin can also cause respiratory failure (when a person stops breathing) or death by inhaling vomit, as it limits a person's ability to cough properly.   Treatment   A person with a heroin dependency should speak to their family doctor or a local drug treatment center.  A healthcare professional will ask about their drug use, family and housing situation, and any other contributing factors the person may wish to disclose. The doctor may request a urine or saliva sample.  There is a range of treatment options available, depending on the person's individual needs. These include:  Horner syndrome is a rare condition caused by a  tumor , a  stroke , or damage to the central trunk of the brain (brainstem). It affects a type of nerve called the sympathetic nerve. Symptoms include:   Treatment   Horner syndrome can be a sign of  life-threatening complications  in the neck or upper body, so it is essential to seek medical attention.  Anterior  uveitis  is  inflammation  of the middle layer of the eye, including the iris. While many people who have anterior uveitis are otherwise healthy, it can be associated with:  It occurs mostly in young or middle-aged people and can appear in one or both eyes. Symptoms include:   Treatment   Treatments for pinpoint pupil caused by anterior uveitis include:  A doctor or eye specialist (ophthalmologist) may refer a person for further testing if they suspect an underlying medical condition to be the cause.  A  2014 study  assessed the importance of how the pupils react to light when there are possible injuries to the  central nervous system .  For people who have sustained head injuries in road-traffic or other accidents, pinpoint pupils can be a sign of  serious internal problems .  Head injuries can cause severe and even life-threatening complications, even if the effects are not immediately apparent. Anyone who has suffered a head injury should seek immediate medical attention.   Research suggests  that accidental exposure to pesticides (organophosphates) can cause pinpoint pupils in some cases. The person may also show signs of:  In 2016, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that  3 million  people are poisoned by pesticides each year.   Treatment   Anyone who thinks they or someone else has been poisoned by a pesticide, household cleaner, or other toxic product requires immediate medical attention.  If a person is unconscious or vomiting, it is important to roll them onto their side if possible and keep their head tilted slightly downward. This position will ensure any vomit can escape without the person choking on it.  Medical treatments for poisoning include:  Pinpoint pupils are not a disease on their own, but they can indicate an underlying medical problem.  Anyone experiencing pinpoint pupils with no apparent cause should see a doctor as soon as possible.  Many of the causes of pinpoint pupils are serious medical conditions, such as opioid dependency or pesticide poisoning. Early intervention can help prevent life-threatening complications.  Even anterior uveitis can cause permanent eye damage and blindness if left untreated.  However, the outlook for conditions that cause pinpoint pupils improves when people seek treatment quickly and follow a doctor's advice for a complete recovery.    
 Hamad, M. H., Adeel, A. A., Alhaboob, A. A. N., Ashri, A. M. &amp; Salih, M. A. (2016). Acute poisoning in a child following topical treatment of head lice (pediculosis capitis) with an organophosphate pesticide.  Sudanese Journal of Paediatrics ,  16 (1), 63–66.  Hamad, M. H., Adeel, A. A., Alhaboob, A. A. N., Ashri, A. M. &amp; Salih, M. A. (2016). Acute poisoning in a child following topical treatment of head lice (pediculosis capitis) with an organophosphate pesticide.  Sudanese Journal of Paediatrics ,  16 (1), 63–66.  Heroin addiction: Get help. (2017, April 30).  Martin, T. J. (2018, February 21). Horner syndrome: A clinical review.  ACS Chemical Neuroscience ,  9 (2), 177–186.  Prescription pain medications (opioids). (2018, February 14).  Rollins, M. D., Feiner, J. R., Lee, J. M., Shah, S., &amp; Larson, M. (2014, November). Pupillary effects of high-dose opioid quantified with infrared pupillometry.  Anesthesiology ,  121 , 1037–1044.  Sharma, B., Gupta, R., Anand, R. &amp; Ingle, R. (2014, August). Ocular manifestations of head injury and incidence of post-traumatic ocular motor nerve involvement in cases of head injury: A clinical review [Abstract].  International Ophthalmology ,  34 (4), 893–900.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Weaver, Bryony. "Seven causes of pinpoint pupils."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321209.php&gt;    APA  Weaver, B. (2018, March 15). "Seven causes of pinpoint pupils."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  