 The right side of the heart is responsible for pumping blood to the lungs to collect oxygen in a process called oxygenation, while the left side pumps blood to the rest of the body.  Several heart problems can cause the left atrium to swell. When this happens, it is called left atrial enlargement. It is linked to several conditions, including  atrial fibrillation  and  heart failure .  In this article, learn about the causes of left atrial enlargement and the symptoms of conditions related to left atrial enlargement, as well as the treatment options.  Health conditions associated with left atrial enlargement do not always cause symptoms, and someone may only discover it during a test for another problem.  When people have symptoms associated with other heart conditions, these symptoms include:  The size of the left atrium depends on the size of the individual and may change as a person ages.  Conditions that may cause left atrial enlargement include:  Left atrial enlargement can help doctors predict cardiovascular events, such as  heart attacks .   Research  has found a link between left atrial enlargement and both treated and untreated  high blood pressure  or  hypertension .  Diagnosing left atrial enlargement can help doctors determine the risk of a heart attack in people with high blood pressure.  Oxygenated blood passes through the mitral valve from the left atrium to the left ventricle. Problems with the mitral valve can lead to left atrial enlargement.  Possible conditions include:  If mitral stenosis or regurgitation is severe, it may be difficult for the blood to pass to the ventricle. The left atrium will enlarge to compensate for the increased pressure it is under.  Problems with the left ventricle may mean it is unable to take the blood passed from the left atrium.  Again, the increased pressure that this creates in the left atrium can cause it to enlarge.  A doctor will use an echocardiogram to look for left atrial enlargement. This test uses high-frequency sound waves or  ultrasound  to produce pictures of the heart.  To do this test, a person will lie on a table, and a specially trained technician will attach small metal disks called electrodes to their chest. The technician will pass a small probe over the chest that produces sound waves. These sound waves bounce off the heart and echo back to the probe, making images.  An echocardiogram does not hurt, causes no internal harm, and has no side effects.  A doctor may also recommend magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) or a computed tomography (CT) scan for diagnosis.  Left atrial enlargement is associated with the following complications:  Atrial fibrillation or A-fib refers to frequent irregular heartbeats, which is called  arrhythmia . It affects around  2.7 million Americans .  A-fib can lead to blood clots,  stroke , heart failure, and other heart problems.   Several studies  have identified the link between left atrial enlargement and atrial fibrillation. In general, the larger the left atrium grows, the higher a person's chances are of experiencing A-fib.  Stroke is the  third leading cause of death  in the United States. It can also cause severe complications and disability.  While the link between left atrial enlargement and stroke is complex, having A-fib increases someone's chance of having a stroke.  There is also  some evidence  of an enlarged left atrium being a predictive marker of stroke without any signs of A-fib.  When someone has left atrial enlargement, it can also be a sign of congestive heart failure.  Heart failure occurs when a person's heart cannot pump enough blood to meet the needs of the body.  It can lead to fatigue, weight gain, and a buildup of fluid in the lungs, liver, and the legs. As it progresses, it can cause shortness of breath and an irregular heartbeat.  There is no treatment for left atrial enlargement. However, doctors will focus on identifying and treating the underlying cause.  Treatment for hypertension may include:  Treatment for mitral stenosis may include:  Treatment for mitral regurgitation may include:  Treatment for left ventricle dysfunction may include:  An ICD is a battery-powered device implanted under the skin with thin wires to the heart. It tracks a person's heart rate and uses an electric shock to correct any dangerous heart rhythms.  Some lifestyle changes may lower the risk of developing conditions that are associated with left atrial enlargement. These include:  While many people who have left atrial enlargement experience no symptoms, it may be a sign of an underlying heart condition.  Treatment of the heart conditions associated with left atrial enlargement can vary from simple lifestyle changes to surgery, so it is essential to receive a proper diagnosis.    
 Ajello, L., Coppola, G., Corrado, E., La Franca, E., Rotolo, A., &amp; Assennato, P. (2013, January 30). Diagnosis and treatment of asymptomatic left ventricular systolic dysfunction after myocardial infarction.  ISRN Cardiology , 2013 .  Ajello, L., Coppola, G., Corrado, E., La Franca, E., Rotolo, A., &amp; Assennato, P. (2013, January 30). Diagnosis and treatment of asymptomatic left ventricular systolic dysfunction after myocardial infarction.  ISRN Cardiology , 2013 .  Cuspidi, C., Rescaldani, M., &amp; Sala, C. (2013, April 1). Prevalence of echocardiographic left-atrial enlargement in hypertension: A systematic review of recent clinical studies.  American Journal of Hypertension ,  26 (4), 456–464.  Echocardiogram – echo. (2017, October 13).  Heart failure signs and symptoms. (n.d.).  Patel, D. A., Lavie, C. J., Milani, R. V., Shah, S., &amp; Gilliland, Y. (2009, winter). Clinical implications of left atrial enlargement: A review.  The Ochsner Journal ,  9 (4), 191–196.  Problem: Mitral valve regurgitation. (2017, September 7).  What is atrial fibrillation (AFib or AF)? (2017, February 6).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seymour, Tom. "What is a left atrial enlargement?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321242.php&gt;    APA  Seymour, T. (2018, March 18). "What is a left atrial enlargement?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  