 In serious cases, medical procedures or surgery can help to remove blockages from within the arteries. A doctor may also prescribe medication, such as  aspirin , or cholesterol-reducing drugs, such as statins.  In this article, we take a close look at how to prevent plaque buildup, along with risk factors and complications when someone's arteries are clogged.  Plaque is a mixture of fat,  calcium ,  cholesterol , and waste from the cells in the body. This mix can stick to the walls of the arteries, making these blood vessels narrower. When this happens, it is called  atherosclerosis .  Clogged or blocked arteries can stop fresh blood from reaching parts of the body, which can put a person at risk of a  heart attack ,  heart failure , or  stroke .  In many cases, people can prevent a plaque buildup and atherosclerosis. Some medical treatments are available to help clear the arteries, but they are invasive.  The best treatment is usually prevention, as removing plaque is much more difficult than preventing it from occurring.  Eating a heart-healthful diet and regularly exercising can be powerful tools for preventing clogged arteries. These disciplines also make a person feel better as time goes on.  People can prevent clogged arteries with the following lifestyle changes:  The type of fat a person eats can affect plaque in the arteries. The American Heart Association (AHA)  recommend  that a person limits their intake of saturated fats and trans fats. This is because these kinds of fats contain high levels of LDL cholesterol, which is the main material of plaque in the arteries.  Foods that are high in trans fats include:  Along with trans fats, saturated fats may also affect heart health, though the evidence for this is mixed. Saturated fats are mostly found in animal products, such as beef, pork, and dairy, but also in  coconut oil  and palm oil.  One review of scientific studies found there was  a small but possibly important  reduction in the risk of cardiovascular issues when people cut down on saturated fats and replaced them with unsaturated fats.  Another review study suggests that people  should avoid saturated fats  because they increase LDL cholesterol in the body, which is a direct cause of heart issues.  Unsaturated fats are the good fats. They contain HDL cholesterol, which can help to take bad cholesterol from the arteries before it turns into plaque.  According to the AHA, unsaturated  fats may help  improve blood cholesterol when eaten instead of trans or saturated fats.  Unsaturated fats are mainly found in plants and fatty fish. Sources include:  The  AHA  recommend that people aiming to lower their LDL cholesterol eat a diet rich in:  They also recommend limiting sugary foods, red meat, and sugar-sweetened beverages.  Drinking teas, such as green or black tea, rooibos tea, or  ginger  tea may be good heart-healthy substitutes for other beverages.  A study from 2011 found that drinking 6 cups of rooibos tea per day for 6 weeks helped to  lower the amount  of LDL cholesterol in the blood in adults who were at risk for heart diseases.   Green tea  can also help. A 2011 review reported that green tea and its extracts could  lower LDL cholesterol  in the blood, though this did not affect HDL cholesterol.  Ginger supplementation  may also improve  significant markers that can lead to cardiovascular events, according to a 2016 study. Ginger root can be found as a supplement, but people can also brew it in hot water, and drink it as a tea.   Obesity  is a risk factor for plaque buildup and  heart disease . In addition to eating a healthful diet, regularly exercising may help a person to lose weight and reduce their risk of heart problems.  Taking part in cardiovascular exercise, otherwise known as cardio, on a regular basis may also help strengthen the heart and reduce plaque.  Simple cardio activities that raise the heart rate include:  A person should aim to do 30 to 60 minutes of exercise that raises the heart rate for a good workout. A doctor may recommend a specific exercise routine to fit an individual, based on various lifestyle factor.  Stop smoking. According to the AHA, smoking is a  major risk factor . It directly damages the arteries and can make fatty deposits grow faster and become larger.   Stress  reduction. Psychological stress levels may also cause a reaction in the body. Stress-reduction techniques, including  yoga , meditation, or breathing exercises may help some people relax during a hectic day.  When prevention methods are not effective, a person may need medical intervention to try and alleviate the effects of clogged arteries.  A doctor may recommend medications to lower LDL cholesterol to use alongside dietary changes. These actions should be seen as an additional help rather than as solutions.  Similarly, a blocked artery may require surgical treatment. This could involve inserting a tube into the artery to remove the plaque while leaving behind a stent to support the artery walls and increase blood flow.  With severe blockages, doctors may perform surgery called a heart bypass to make sure the blood can get around the obstructed artery.  Below is a 3-D model of atherosclerosis, which is fully interactive. You can explore this model using your mouse pad or touchscreen.  There are some risk factors for clogged arteries that people can manage themselves, including:  When someone employs the tips listed above, they will be taking a step in the right direction. If they are worried about their risk factors, they should speak with their doctor.  Clogged arteries, if they are left unchecked, can lead to conditions such as:  A person's arteries get narrower over their lifetime. The process  usually speeds up  after the age of 30. Typically, it does not become a problem until a person is in their 50s or 60s.  Removing plaque from the arteries is not a simple process. It may involve invasive procedures that can impact a person's quality of life.  Taking steps to prevent or slow down the formation of plaque is the best way to avoid clogged arteries at any stage in life. This will be especially helpful for a person who is at risk of a plaque buildup or atherosclerosis.  A doctor will be able to recommend diet and lifestyle tips tailored to an individual's requirements and current abilities, and they can discuss any necessary treatment or prevention options.    
 Atherosclerosis. (2017, November 16).  Atherosclerosis. (2017, November 16).  Atherosclerosis. (n.d.).  Hooper, L., Martin, N., Abdelhamid, A., &amp; Smith, G. D. (2015, June 10). Reduction in saturated fat intake for cardiovascular disease.  The Cochrane Library ,  6 , CD011737.  Iqbal, M. P. (2014, January-February). Trans fatty acids – a risk factor for cardiovascular disease.  Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences ,  30 (1), 194–197.  Marnewick, J. L., Rautenbach, F., Venter, I., Neethling, H., Blackhurst, D. M., Wolmarans, P., &amp; Macharia, M. (2011, January 7). Effects of rooibos ( Aspalathus linearis ) on oxidative stress and biochemical parameters in adults at risk for cardiovascular disease [Abstract].  Journal of Ethnopharmacology ,  133 (1), 46–52.  Mazidi, M., Gao, H.-K., Rezaie, P., &amp; Ferns, G. A. (2016, November 1). The effect of ginger supplementation on serum C-reactive protein, lipid profile and glycaemia: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  Food &amp; Nutrition Research ,  60 (1), 1–9.  Nettleton, J. A., Brouwer, I. A., Geleijnse, J. M., &amp; Hornstra, G. (2017, April). Saturated fat consumption and risk of coronary heart disease and ischemic stroke: A science update.  Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism ,  70 (1), 26–33.  The skinny on fats. (2017, September 19).  Zheng, X.-X., Xu, Y.-L., Li, S.-H., Liu, X.-X., Hui, R., &amp; Huang, X.-H. (2011, August 1). Green tea intake lowers fasting serum total and LDL cholesterol in adults: A meta-analysis of 14 randomized controlled trials.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  94 (2), 601–610.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Is it possible to unclog your arteries?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321238.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, March 17). "Is it possible to unclog your arteries?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  