 Nausea before a period could be caused by many factors, including cramps, premenstrual syndrome (PMS), and pregnancy. If symptoms are severe, this could indicate an underlying condition such as  endometriosis .  PMS is the main cause of nausea before a period. Around  20 to 50 percent  of women experience PMS in the 7 to 10 days before their period.  Read on to learn about possible causes and treatments for nausea before a period.  Nausea before a period is common. What matters most, however, is what is normal for the individual.  Feeling nauseated before a period may be a regular symptom for some people. However, a sudden change in PMS symptoms can indicate an underlying medical problem.  A person should also see a doctor if they are:  Nausea before a period is often caused by PMS. However, there are some other possible causes, so it is wise to speak to a doctor if the symptoms are unusual or interfering with everyday activities.  PMS is a very common cause of nausea before a period. A person often experiences additional symptoms of PMS, including a  headache , dizziness,  fatigue ,  diarrhea , and muscle aches.   Researchers  are still unsure about what causes PMS, and why some people experience it and others do not.  Possible explanations for PMS include:  Hormones are the body's chemical messengers, so changes in hormone levels can affect how it responds to many experiences.  A  2018 study  of women undergoing  breast cancer  surgery under general anesthesia, found a link between menstruation and vomiting. Women were much more likely to experience vomiting after surgery when they were getting their periods.   Premenstrual dysphoric disorder  (PMDD) is a severe form of PMS. People with PMDD typically also have serious mood swings and may have depression and anxiety.  Endometriosis is when tissue similar to the tissue that lines the uterus develops outside of it, sticking to other organs, such as the ovaries and fallopian tubes.  Some women with endometriosis do not have symptoms. For others, endometriosis can be debilitating, causing intense pain and heavy bleeding during a period and even throughout the month. Endometriosis is also a leading cause of  infertility .   One study  found higher rates of stomach and digestive problems in women with endometriosis. Around 85 percent of women with endometriosis reported gastrointestinal problems during the previous year.  In addition to nausea, they also reported gas, bloating, diarrhea, stomach pain, and  constipation .  Nausea and vomiting are among the earliest signs of pregnancy. These symptoms may appear even before a woman misses her period.  Shortly after a fertilized egg implants itself in the uterus, a woman's body begins producing human chorionic gonadotropin hormone (HCG).  HCG may play a role in  morning sickness . It is also how most home pregnancy tests detect pregnancy.  Not all symptoms that happen during a period are due to menstruation.  Food poisoning , stomach viruses, food sensitivities, and a range of other health issues may cause nausea around the time of a period.  People experiencing nausea before their period for the first time, especially if it is severe or accompanied by vomiting or intense stomach pain, may have an unrelated illness or infection.  Anyone experiencing frequent nausea before their period should talk to a doctor about possible underlying causes. The treatment they recommend will depend on what is responsible for nausea.  Some strategies that may help reduce mild nausea include:  If nausea before a period is caused by an underlying medical condition, a doctor may recommend:  Nausea is a common premenstrual symptom. For most people with nausea before a period, the symptoms can be managed with over-the-counter medications and by avoiding any trigger foods.  However, if nausea does not improve with conservative methods or if it is interfering with daily life, a person should speak to a doctor who specializes in menstrual health and work with them to come up with a treatment plan.    
 About endometriosis. (2017, January 31).  About endometriosis. (2017, January 31).  Ek, M., Roth, B., Ekström, P., Valentin, L., Bengtsson, M., &amp; Ohlsson, B. (2015, August 13). Gastrointestinal symptoms among endometriosis patients — A case-cohort study.  BMC Women's Health ,  15 , 59.  Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG): The pregnancy hormone. (2017, August 22).  Lee, J. W., Lee, J. S., Kim, J. H., Kim, Y. J., Woo, J. H., Kim, D. Y., &amp; Jeong, J. (2018, January 31). Influence of the phase of menstrual cycle on postoperative nausea and vomiting after breast cancer surgery [Abstract].  The Ewha Medical Journal ,  41 (1), 19–23.  Marjoribanks, J., Brown, J., O'Brien, P. M., &amp; Wyatt, K. (2013, June 7). Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for premenstrual syndrome.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  6 , CD001396.  Pinkerton, J. V. (2017, September). Premenstrual syndrome (PMS).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What causes nausea before a period?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321208.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, March 14). "What causes nausea before a period?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  