 Home remedies can often alleviate the pain, but medical treatment may also be needed, depending on the cause.  This article will discuss some possible causes of inner thigh pain, other symptoms, and ways to treat them.  Depending on its cause, pain around the inner portion of the thigh may either be described as:  A person may feel pain in the inner thigh muscles or adductors. These muscles sit close to the groin, which refers to the region of the hip between the stomach and thigh. Pain in the groin and inner thigh may overlap because of this proximity.  Inner thigh pain may occur with other symptoms, such as:  Other symptoms may also be present, depending on the cause.   Muscle injuries   The inner thigh muscles, or adductors, can become strained or torn by certain movements or activities. These can include running or turning too quickly. The resulting muscle damage can cause pain in the inner thigh or groin region.  The intensity of the pain will vary, depending on the extent to which the muscle was damaged. The pain can also be accompanied by swelling or bruising around the affected region.   Bone conditions   Bone conditions that affect the hip can cause discomfort in the thigh area.  One example is osteoarthritis, a condition where cartilage on the ends of bones is broken down, causing inflammation in the joints.  Other symptoms of osteoarthritis include:  Another bone condition is called femoroacetabular impingement. This happens when extra bone develops in the hip joint, causing friction between the bones as they rub together. Over time, this can cause damage to the joint, pain or an ache in the thighs, stiffness, or a limp.  Osteosarcoma is a rare type of  bone cancer  that develops in growing bones, most commonly around the knee, including the femur or thigh bone. It is  most common  in people aged 10 to 25. It can induce swelling and tenderness in the affected area.   Hernia   A  hernia  occurs when an internal body part pushes through surrounding muscle or tissue wall.  Inguinal hernias are the most common type of hernia. They occur in the groin area, where the intestines push through the lower abdomen, causing a fleshy bulge to develop.  Pain may be felt around the affected region, including the inner thigh. There may be no or very few other symptoms.   Kidney stones    Kidney stones  are where crystals build up to form a solid lump in the kidneys. When passed through the urinary tract they can cause significant discomfort, particularly with larger stones. It is possible to feel sharp pains in the inner thigh.  Other symptoms could include:   Pregnancy   Someone who is pregnant can develop pubis dysfunction, a condition that causes the pelvic bone to become unstable. This is caused by the ligaments supporting the pelvic bone becoming too relaxed and typically occurs during the second trimester.  This can cause severe pain in the pelvis, which may be felt in surrounding regions, including the inner thigh. It can also restrict mobility and cause clicking or grinding noises when moving.   Menstruation   Along with uterus cramps, a person may feel cramps, aches, or pains in other areas of their body near the uterus. These include the back, pelvis, and thighs.  If a person has substantial pain in their lower abdomen and the surrounding area during menstruation, it may be worth consulting a doctor.  Two conditions called  endometriosis  and adenomyosis are among those that can cause painful periods. These conditions can be managed with diagnosis and treatment.  It is possible to alleviate some inner thigh pain through experimenting with different home or natural remedies. These could include:  It is essential to work out the cause of inner thigh pain when deciding what methods to try. More serious conditions, such as hernias, osteosarcoma, or kidney stones, will require hospital treatment or surgery to reduce the pain.  It is possible to reduce the risk of developing inner thigh pain from some causes by making lifestyle changes. These changes might include:  Some causes, such as kidney stones or pubis dysfunction, are not as easily preventable.  In most cases, inner thigh pain is temporary and can be treated with home remedies or over-the-counter pain medication. However, if the pain is persistent or severe, medical attention should be sought.  If a lump has developed with the inner thigh pain, it could be a hernia, which requires medical attention. Intense pain in the abdomen could indicate the inner thigh pain is caused by kidney stones, which would require immediate emergency care.  Most cases of inner thigh pain do not pose any serious health risks, and they are often caused by a muscular injury. The pain will often disappear after a few days, but it can sometimes take longer, depending on the cause. It can usually be managed without the need for medical treatment unless the pain is the result of a more serious health condition.    
 Byrd, T. (2016, November). Femoroacetabular impingement.  Byrd, T. (2016, November). Femoroacetabular impingement.  Depledge, J., McNair, P. J., Keal-Smith, C., &amp; Williams, M. (2005, December 1). Management of symphysis pubis dysfunction during pregnancy using exercise and pelvic support belts.  Physical Therapy ,  85 (12), 1290–1300.  Hernia. (2016, June 27).  Joyce, M. J., &amp; Ilaslan, H. (2017, February). Primary malignant bone tumors.  Kidney stones. (2016, June 15).  Osteoarthritis. (2016, August 4).  Osteosarcoma. (2016, December 1).  Pinkerton, J. V. (n.d.). Dysmenorrhea.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "Causes and treatment of inner thigh pain."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321260.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, March 20). "Causes and treatment of inner thigh pain."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  