 The Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS), published in 2001, found that certain nutrients — zinc,  copper ,  vitamin  C, vitamin E, and  beta carotene  — may reduce the risk of age-related decline in eye health by  25 percent .  This study was updated in 2013 to test different versions of the original formula. The variations included  omega-3  fatty acids, zeaxanthin, lutein, and beta carotene; the study found that certain combinations may work better than others.  Further studies  agree that  omega-3 fatty acids (including DHA), copper, lutein, and zeaxanthin are vital for eye health.  In this article, we look at the evidence for 10 nutrient-rich foods to boost eye health. We also discuss other tips for healthy eyes and eye health warning signs.  Organizations such as the  American Optometric Association (AOA)  and the  American Academy of Ophthalmology (AAO)  continue to recommend nutrients for eye health based on the AREDS reports.  The AREDS reports support the following 10 nutrient-rich foods:  Many fish are rich sources of omega-3 fatty acids.  Oily fish are fish that have oil in their gut and body tissue, so eating them offers higher levels of omega-3-rich fish oil. The fish that contains the most beneficial levels of omega-3s include:  Some studies have found that fish oil can reverse dry eye, including dry eye caused by spending too much time on  a computer .  Nuts are also rich in omega-3 fatty acids. Nuts also contain a  high level  of vitamin E, which can protect the eye from age-related damage.  Nuts are available for purchase in most grocery stores and online. Nuts and legumes that are good for eye health include:  Like nuts and legumes, seeds are high in omega-3s and are a rich source of vitamin E.  Seeds are available for purchase in most grocery stores and online. Seeds high in omega-3 include:  Citrus fruits are rich in vitamin C. Just like vitamin E, vitamin C is an  antioxidant  that is  recommended by  the AOA to fight age-related eye damage.  Vitamin C-rich citrus fruits include:  Leafy green vegetables are rich in both lutein and zeaxanthin and are also a good source of eye-friendly vitamin C.  Well-known leafy greens include:  Carrots are rich in both Vitamin A and beta carotene. Beta carotene gives carrots their orange color.   Vitamin A  plays an essential role in vision. It is a component of a protein called rhodopsin, which helps the retina to absorb light.  Research on beta carotene's role in vision is  mixed , though the body needs this nutrient to make vitamin A.  Like carrots, sweet potatoes are rich in beta carotene. They are also a good source of the antioxidant vitamin E.  Beef is rich in zinc, which has been  linked to  better long-term eye health. Zinc can help delay age-related sight loss and  macular degeneration .  The eye itself contains high levels of zinc, particularly in the retina, and the vascular tissue surrounding the retina.  Meats such as chicken breast and pork loin also contain zinc, but at  lower levels  than beef.  Eggs are an excellent source of lutein and zeaxanthin, which can reduce the risk of age-related sight loss. Eggs are also good sources of vitamins C and E, and zinc.  It may come as no surprise that a fluid essential to life is also vital to eye health.  Drinking plenty of water can prevent  dehydration , which may reduce the symptoms of  dry eyes .  The current daily recommendations for healthy eye nutrients, as suggested by the  AAO  to slow the progression of eye disease, are:  According to the AAO, the following strategies can help to ensure healthy eyes:   Diabetes  is a leading cause of blindness. People with diabetes should carefully monitor blood sugar levels, take medications exactly as prescribed by their doctor, and manage  carbohydrate  intake while focusing on eating low-moderate glycemic index (GI) foods.  Early treatment for eye health problems can prevent them from getting worse. So people who notice changes in their vision should schedule a comprehensive eye exam with an optometrist or ophthalmologist.  Possible symptoms that a person may be experiencing vision trouble include:  Eating a varied diet that includes lots of fruits, vegetables, and lean proteins is enough to ensure most people get the right nutrients for eye health.  People who cannot get these nutrients from their diet should ask an eye doctor about eye health supplements.  People with vision problems or those with very restrictive diets should talk to an eye health provider about the right foods to eat.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Adult vision: 41 to 60 years of age. (n.d.).  Adult vision: 41 to 60 years of age. (n.d.).  A randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial of high-dose supplementation with vitamins C and E, beta carotene, and zinc for age-related macular degeneration and vision loss. (2006, May 17).  Archives of Ophthalmology ,  199 (10), 1417–1436.  Bhargava, R., Kumar, P., Phogat, H., Kaur, A., &amp; Kumar, M. (2015, June). Oral omega-3 fatty acids treatment in computer vision syndrome related dry eye.  Contact Lens and Anterior Eye ,  38 (3), 206–210.  Diet and nutrition (2013, May 24).  Dry eye. (n.d.).  NIH study provides clarity on supplements for protection against blinding eye disease. (2013, May 5).  Rasmussen, H. M., &amp; Johnson, E. J. (2013, June 19). Nutrients for the aging eye.  Clinical Interventions in Aging ,  8 , 741–748.  Richter, S., &amp; Newman, S. (n.d.). Diet &amp; nutrition.  Top 10 tips to save your vision. (2015, September 15).  Vitamin A. [Fact Sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Zinc. [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Top 10 foods for healthy eyes."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321226.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, March 17). "Top 10 foods for healthy eyes."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  