 Several different issues may cause a person to 'see stars,' and many of them are no cause for concern. An isolated flash of light is usually harmless.  However, if seeing stars becomes frequent or is severe and sudden, a person should speak to an eye doctor right away.  A person typically sees stars because of a disturbance in the retina or the brain.  The retina is a lining of cells that sits at the back of the eye and sends messages to the brain when it detects light.  The retina does not see colors or shapes; it only sees light. A special gel called the vitreous sits in front of the retina to protect it.  If the retina gets inflamed, or the vitreous gel moves around or shrinks, the retina will be stimulated and send signals to the brain. The brain interprets these signals as light, even if no external light source exists.  The brain takes signals from the retina and interprets them as light using electrical impulses.  If something disrupts electrical activity in the brain, it may send false signals, making a person think they see stars.  The following are the most common causes of disruptions in the brain or retina that could lead to seeing stars:  Cartoons have portrayed this phenomenon for years: if someone gets hit on the head, they see stars.  The brain is protected by a layer of fluid that usually prevents it from hitting the inside of the skull. A hard knock, such as from a sports collision or car accident, however, may result in the brain bouncing against the skull.  The back of the brain contains the occipital lobe, which is the part of the brain that processes visual information. If this area is knocked, it sends out electrical signals that the brain thinks are light.  Getting hit in the eye can also cause flashes of light because it bumps the retina. The retina is stimulated and sends light signals to the brain. Gently rubbing closed eyes is one way to experience this phenomenon without injury.   Migraine  headaches can cause changes in vision, including seeing stars, sparkles, or flashes. They can also cause spots, heat-like waves, tunnel vision, or zigzagging lines.  These changes occur in both eyes and are thought to be caused by abnormal electrical signals in the brain.  If these visual changes occur before a  headache  develops, it is called migraine with aura. Some people who get migraines may also experience the aura without a headache afterward.  A retinal migraine is a different type of headache that causes visual changes in one eye only. This is a rare condition and can be a symptom of something more serious. Like a migraine with aura, the visual changes happen before the headache hits.  The visual changes may include seeing stars, flashes, or dark spots, as well as temporary blindness. Retinal disturbances or decreased blood flow to the retina may cause these symptoms.  It is essential for people to contact a doctor right away if they experience retinal migraine symptoms.  Other typical migraine symptoms include:  The vitreous gel that is in front of the retina can move around, sometimes pulling on the retina itself. This causes the retina to send light signals to the brain.  Movement or changes in the vitreous become more common as people age and are typically harmless.  However, these flashes could signal a serious issue if:  Sometimes, the vitreous gel pulls on the retina hard enough to cause damage. It may tear the retina or detach it from the back of the eye.  If this happens, a person may see:  Risk factors for  retinal detachment  or tearing include:  A torn or detached retina needs emergency medical care. It may be corrected with surgery, but can lead to blindness if left untreated.  Flashes of light or seeing stars in vision should not be confused with floaters. While seeing stars may sometimes accompany floaters, these two things are caused by different factors.  Floaters may look like shadows, lines, or dots that move across a person's field of vision. They can be caused by:  Floaters are typically harmless and become common as a person ages. However, a person should still discuss the floaters with an eye doctor, especially if they happen frequently or come on suddenly.  Seeing stars on occasion is often a natural part of aging and cannot be prevented. However, certain lifestyle factors can help keep eyes healthy for as long as possible.  To keep the eyes healthy, a person should:  Seeing occasional flashes or stars in vision is usually not an indication of an underlying health problem.  Many people find that seeing stars happens only occasionally and that their eyes are otherwise healthy. Seeing stars may occur more often with age.  However, seeing flashes frequently can indicate an eye problem that needs medical treatment. If a person experiences a rapid onset of flashes, stars, or any other sudden vision changes, they should seek medical care right away.  The  American Academy of Ophthalmology  recommend people get a comprehensive eye exam by age 40 even if they have no other health problems.  Some people will need to get an exam sooner if they have  diabetes ,  high blood pressure , or a family history of eye disease. People with poor vision may also be offered a comprehensive eye exam during their regular checkup.  These appointments are a good time to mention seeing any stars or flashes and to discuss any tests or treatments with a doctor to maintain healthy eyes for years to come.    
 Boyd, K. (2016, March 1). Retinal detachment: What is a torn or detached retina?  Boyd, K. (2016, March 1). Retinal detachment: What is a torn or detached retina?  Boyd, K. (2017, September 1). What are floaters and flashes?  Eye exams 101. (2012, May 25).  Facts about retinal detachment. (2009, October).  Friedman, D. I. (2016, February 5). Visual disturbances: Related to migraine or not?  Gudgel, D. T, &amp; Boyd, K. (2017, March 21). Flashes of light.  Understanding ocular migraine. (2017, October 19).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "What does it mean when you see stars?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321263.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, March 20). "What does it mean when you see stars?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  