 A salty or odd taste is usually not a cause for concern, but these symptoms can be annoying or distracting.  Some causes of a lasting salty taste require a doctor's diagnosis and treatment. In the meantime, home remedies can help to relieve the symptom.  Some causes are harmless, while others may require a visit to a doctor or dentist.  Postnasal drip is common and may due to issues such as:  Postnasal drip involves excess mucus in the nasal passages dripping from the back of the nose down the throat. The presence of this mucus may cause saliva to taste saltier than usual.  Over-the-counter medications can help to clear up a postnasal drip, which will likely eliminate the salty taste.   Dehydration  can lead to an odd taste and other symptoms, such as  dry mouth . When the body is short on liquids, it can cause saliva to become rich in salty minerals, because there is an imbalance in the levels of salt and water in the body.  Symptoms of dehydration that usually appear with an odd taste include:  Issues such as  diarrhea  or drinking excessive amounts of alcohol can cause dehydration. People who exercise vigorously without drinking enough water may also become dehydrated.  It is important to watch for signs of dehydration throughout the day and add liquids to the diet accordingly.  Dry mouth is one symptom of dehydration, but it can be a separate condition. The term for dryness in the mouth is xerostomia. People with xerostomia may feel as though they have cotton balls in their mouths, and may also experience dry or sticky saliva. The saliva can taste strange, often bitter or salty.  Some medications can cause dry mouth. The symptom can also be linked to tobacco use or an underlying condition. However, a stuffy nose is often enough to dry out the mouth, as a person is forced to breathe through their mouth instead of their nose.   GERD  may be responsible for a lasting salty taste. The disease occurs when the esophageal sphincter weakens, allowing bile or stomach acid to creep up into the food pipe. This will lead to a burning sensation in the chest, along with other symptoms.  GERD can also cause an unusual taste in the mouth, often described as bitter, sour, or salty.  When the saltiness also tastes like rust or metal, this can indicate the presence of blood in the mouth. Eating sharp foods, such as chips or hard candies can cause bleeding. A person may also injure their gums while flossing or brushing their teeth.  A salty taste after brushing or flossing can be an early symptom of  gingivitis . This can be diagnosed and treated by a dentist.  When gingivitis remains untreated, it may lead to an oral infection, such as  periodontitis . If this is left untreated, it can have lasting effects on teeth and bones.  Periodontitis may lead to a salty or iron-like taste. It can also cause:  Other infections may also lead to a salty taste, including  oral thrush . This yeast infection causes white blotches to appear in the mouth, and an unusual sensitivity or a burning sensation in the mouth. They may have difficulty tasting or experience a bitter, metallic, or salty taste.  Infection with  human papillomavirus  (HPV) can also cause an odd taste in the mouth. If symptoms are not managed, HPV can cause a person to cough up blood, resulting in a metallic or salty taste.  A salty taste can result from missing or low levels of nutrients. If a doctor suspects that this is the case, they will test the blood to determine which nutrients are lacking. Treatment usually involves some form of supplementation.  Some conditions that affect the brain or nerves can also affect the tongue, leading to an odd or salty taste. These can include nervous conditions such as  multiple sclerosis  or Bell's palsy, or even a brain  tumor . A person with a head or neck injury may also experience symptoms of nerve damage.  Sjögren's syndrome, an immune system disorder, can cause dryness of the eyes and mouth. It may be responsible for a lasting salty taste, as well as joint pain, fatigue, and organ dysfunction.  Hormonal imbalances, such as those experienced during  menopause  or pregnancy, can cause changes in taste buds, leading to strange tastes.  Some medicines can dry out the mouth or seep into the saliva, leading to an odd taste. A doctor can help to identify whether the taste is a side effect of a medication.  Some  cancer  treatments can affect the taste buds, leading to odd tastes. People receiving these treatments may also experience dry mouth, another common cause of a lasting salty taste.  The correct treatment for a salty taste in the mouth will depend on the cause. For many people, drinking a few extra glasses of water throughout the day will be enough to eliminate the symptom. Others may need to visit a doctor or dentist for a diagnosis.  To determine the cause of the salty taste, a doctor will often examine the mouth, then ask about diet, lifestyle, and medications. The doctor may also order tests or blood work to rule out possible causes. When the doctor identifies the cause of the salty taste, they will recommend treatment.  Neglecting to treat any condition can lead to complications and worsening symptoms. Anyone who experiences persistent changes in taste with no known cause should visit a doctor as soon as possible.  While waiting for diagnosis and treatment, many people find relief by using home remedies. Some remedies for a salty taste include:  The cause of a salty taste in the mouth may be simple. A doctor can help to identify the impact of any medications or supplements. Some people find that the symptom disappears when they change medications.  Treatments are most effective when guided by a healthcare professional.    
 About Sjögren's. (n.d.).  About Sjögren's. (n.d.).  Genco, R. J., &amp; Borgnakke, W. S. (2013, April 11). Risk factors for periodontal disease [Abstract].  Periodontology 2000 ,  62 (1), 59–94.  HPV/Oral cancer facts. (2018, February 20).  Hummel, T., Landis, B. N., &amp; Hüttenbrink, K.-B. (2012, April 26). Smell and taste disorders.  GMS Current Topics in Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery ,  10 (4).  Sapir, E., Samuels, S., Feng, F. Y., Vineberg, K. A., &amp; Eisbruch, A. (2016, March 15). Predictors of dysgeusia in patients treated with chemoradiation for head and neck cancer.  International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics ,  94 (4), 959.  Snyder, D. J., &amp; Bartoshuk, L. M. (2016, June). Oral sensory nerve damage: Causes and consequences.  Reviews in Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders ,  17 (2), 149–158.  Villa, A., Connell, C. L., &amp; Abati, S. (2015). Diagnosis and management of xerostomia and hyposalivation.  Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management ,  11 , 45–51.  Yagi, T., Asakawa, A., Ueda, H., Ikeda, S., Miyawaki, S., &amp; Inui, A. (2013, January). The role of zinc in the treatment of taste disorders.  Recent Patents on Food, Nutrition &amp; Agriculture ,  5 , 44–51.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Why do I have a salty taste in my mouth?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321202.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, March 14). "Why do I have a salty taste in my mouth?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  