 Together with the female sex hormone  estrogen ,  testosterone  plays a role in the growth and maintenance of female reproductive tissue and bone mass. These hormones also influence behavior.  In this article, learn about conditions that cause high testosterone in women, as well as about symptoms and treatment.  Normal testosterone levels in men are around  280 to 1,100 nanograms per deciliter  (ng/dL).  Women secrete much lower amounts, with normal levels considered to be between  15 and 70 ng/dL .  The level of hormones produced in the body varies each day and throughout the day. Testosterone levels are highest in the morning.  Testosterone imbalances in women can affect their physical appearance and overall health.  Symptoms of high testosterone in women include:  Severely high levels of testosterone in women can cause  obesity  and  infertility .  High testosterone in women is usually caused by an underlying medical condition, such as:  CAH is the term given to a group of inherited disorders that affect the adrenal glands. These glands secrete the hormones cortisol and aldosterone, which play a role in managing metabolism and  blood pressure .  The adrenal glands also produce the male sex hormones DHEA and testosterone.  People with CAH lack one of the enzymes necessary to regulate the production of these hormones, so they secrete too little cortisol and too much testosterone.  CAH may be mild (nonclassic CAH) or severe (classic CAH).  Symptoms in women include:  While there is no cure for CAH, most people with the condition can receive treatment that will reduce symptoms and improve their quality of life.   Hirsutism  is characterized by unwanted hair growth in women . It is a hormonal condition thought to be linked to genetics.  Symptoms include male-pattern hair growth that is dark and coarse. It typically affects the:  In cases of excessively high testosterone, other symptoms will also be present, including:  Home remedies and medical treatments help many women control the symptoms of hirsutism.  PCOS is a common hormonal disorder that affects women of reproductive age. Some  sources  suggest that PCOS affects between 8 and 20 percent of women worldwide.  Women are not usually diagnosed until they are in their 20s and 30s, but children as young as 11 years old can be affected.  Symptoms of PCOS include:  PCOS may lead to several complications, including:  Doctors do not know what causes PCOS, although genetics and excess  insulin  may play a role.  A doctor can diagnose high testosterone in women based on the following:   Physical examination   During a physical examination, the doctor will look for symptoms such as:  They will also inquire about:  If PCOS is suspected, the doctor may visually and manually examine the pelvic region to look for abnormalities.   Blood test   If symptoms suggest high testosterone levels, the doctor will take a blood sample and have hormone levels tested. They may also check glucose and  cholesterol  levels.  Usually, the blood will be drawn in the morning when testosterone levels are highest.   Ultrasound   To check for PCOS, the doctor may perform an  ultrasound  of the ovaries and uterus.  The treatment recommended for high testosterone will depend on its underlying cause.  Typically, a doctor will recommend both lifestyle changes and medication. Some treatments may also be used to control unwanted hair.  High testosterone in women and associated conditions can be treated with the following medications:  Oral contraceptives may also be prescribed, as this treatment helps to block excess testosterone. The  best types  of oral contraceptives for high testosterone and hirsutism are ones that contain low doses of norgestimate, gestodene, and desogestrel.  However, oral contraceptives may not be suitable for women who are trying to get pregnant, and they can also cause adverse side effects.  Both electrolysis and laser therapy may be used to control unwanted hair. However, these treatments will not resolve an underlying hormonal imbalance.  Note that these hair removal treatments can cause adverse reactions, and they may have other associated risks.  Anyone with a hormonal imbalance should speak to a doctor before trying medical treatments for excess hair growth.  Some of the following lifestyle changes can reduce high testosterone in women, while others simply manage symptoms.   Achieve and maintain a healthy weight   Achieving a healthy weight may help with the symptoms of a hormonal balance. Losing even  5 to 10 percent   body weight  may improve PCOS symptoms, reduce testosterone levels, and help prevent complications, including infertility.   Manage unwanted hair   Some women choose to treat their facial and body hair growth by plucking, shaving, waxing, or using chemical depilatories. Others bleach their hair to make it less visible.  High testosterone in women can cause a range of symptoms, from excess facial hair to infertility, and is usually caused by an underlying medical condition. Treating the underlying disorder will often reduce symptoms and improve a person's quality of life.  Women who are or think they may be experiencing high testosterone symptoms should consult their doctor to determine the cause and to gain access to appropriate treatments.    
 How many people are affected or at risk for PCOS? (2017, January 31).  How many people are affected or at risk for PCOS? (2017, January 31).  Hunter, M. H., &amp; Carek, P. J. (2003, June 15). Evaluation and treatment of women with hirsutism.  American Family Physician ,  67 (12), 2565–2572.  Teede, H., Deeks, A., &amp; Moran, L. (2010, June 30). Polycystic ovary syndrome: A complex condition with psychological, reproductive and metabolic manifestations that impacts on health across the lifespan.  BMC Medicine ,  8 (1), 41.  Total testosterone. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What causes high testosterone in women?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321292.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, March 23). "What causes high testosterone in women?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  