 Learn more about the benefits of using olive oil on the face, and discover how to use it for the best results.  Some of the potential benefits of olive oil for the skin include:  Olive oil acts as an  antioxidant , which is a substance that prevents oxidation. Oxidation is a process that can produce free radicals, which are chemicals that can potentially damage cells and may contribute to  cancer  development.  When applied to the skin, antioxidants may prevent premature aging. Also, some  research  suggests that putting olive oil on the skin after sun exposure may fight off cancer-causing cells.  In the study, scientists applied the oil to the skin of mice that had been exposed to potentially harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays.  Tumor  growth was significantly lower in the mice that had olive oil on their skin compared with those who did not.  Scientists need to carry out more research in this area to understand the effects of olive oil's antioxidant properties on human skin.  Olive oil contains the fat-soluble  vitamins  A, D, E, and K. Some of these vitamins may be beneficial for the skin.  For example, people have used vitamin E oil topically  throughout history  to treat a variety of skin conditions, including  psoriasis  and  eczema .  Olive oil  has been shown  to have antibacterial properties. However, there are very few studies on olive oil's ability to control bacteria on the skin.  One  small study  looked at the effects of using olive oil and  coconut oil  on  Staphylococcus aureus  bacteria on the skin. The results found that both oils exhibited antibacterial properties, but virgin coconut oil was more effective at eliminating the bacteria.  Nonetheless, olive oil may sometimes be used to treat bacterial infections of the skin. It may also  improve healing  in people with foot ulcers caused by  type 2 diabetes .  Olive oil is a popular natural moisturizer that is often used to soften both skin and hair. However, there is very little research on its effectiveness.  Olive oil is an ingredient in many personal care products, including face wash, body wash, soap, and lotions. Other ways to use olive oil on the skin include:  Some people use olive oil as a moisturizing lotion by applying it directly to the skin before blotting off excess oil. Alternatively, the oil can be applied to damp skin to prevent a greasy feeling.  Based on  the study  of its antioxidant effects on mice, olive oil may be especially beneficial when applied following sun exposure.  To exfoliate the face and body and treat areas of dry or scaly skin, a person can mix olive oil and sea salt to make a scrub.  People should use fine-grained salt on the face and other sensitive areas, and coarser grains on the rest of the body.  Olive oil breaks down any water-resistant substances in eye makeup, allowing them to be wiped away more easily.  To remove eye makeup, just add a few drops of olive oil to a cotton ball and gently wipe the eye area.  People with dry skin may see benefits from using an olive oil-based face mask. Olive oil mixed with ingredients such as egg white, honey, or ground oats can soften and hydrate the face.  Due to its antioxidant content, olive oil may reduce aging skin and wrinkles. The oil can be dabbed around the eye area at night or following sun exposure.  The vitamins and other antioxidants in olive oil may fade scars by helping skin cells to regenerate.  Simply massage the undiluted oil into scars or mix it with a squeeze of lemon juice to treat areas of hyperpigmentation, where the skin has darkened due to scarring.  Olive oil may also be used to prevent or treat stretch marks, although  studies  on its effectiveness have found mixed results.  Although some studies have shown that olive oil has skin benefits, others suggest it is not the best option for everyone.  Potential risks of using olive oil on the face include:   Damaged skin barrier   A  2013 study  reported that the use of olive oil for dry skin in adults and infants should not be encouraged. Researchers suggest that it may cause redness and damage to the outer layer of the skin in some people.   Childhood atopic eczema   Olive oil may contribute to the development of childhood eczema, according to  2016 research , especially in children with a family history of the condition.   Clogged pores   Olive oil is a heavy oil that may clog pores and trap bacteria if used in excess. People should use it sparingly, and wipe off any extra oil with a soft cloth or cotton ball immediately.   Using low-quality oil   Using high-quality olive oil is important. Low-quality oils may contain additives or chemicals that could irritate or damage the skin.  People should try to buy from a reputable brand and look for certification from the International Olive Council.  Research found that  73 percent  of the five top-selling imported extra-virgin olive oil brands in the United States did not meet the required standards for olive oil.  Finally, be sure to choose pure olive oil or virgin olive oil over blends.  Olive oil may offer some benefits for the skin, including vitamins, antioxidants, and antibacterial effects. However, the research on olive oil benefits for the face and skin is limited.  Evidence suggests that it may cause adverse reactions in some people, so people with sensitive skin should use it sparingly and do a test patch first.  To do this, rub a few drops of the oil onto the arm and watch for a reaction. If none appears in 48 hours, it is likely safe to use.  Remember to only use high-quality, certified olive oil.    
 Brennan, M., Clarke, M., &amp; Devane, D. (2016, September 21). The use of anti-stretch marks' products by women in pregnancy: A descriptive, cross-sectional survey.  BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth ,  16 (1), 276.  Brennan, M., Clarke, M., &amp; Devane, D. (2016, September 21). The use of anti-stretch marks' products by women in pregnancy: A descriptive, cross-sectional survey.  BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth ,  16 (1), 276.  Budiyanto, A., Ahmed, N. U., Wu, A., Bito, T., Nikaido, O., Osawa, T., ... Ichihashi, M. (2000, November 1). Protective effect of topically applied olive oil against photocarcinogenesis following UVB exposure of mice.  Carcinogenesis ,  21 (11), 2085–2090.  Cooke, A., Cork, M. J., Victor, S., Campbell, M., Danby, S., Chittock, J., &amp; Lavender, T. (2016, March). Olive oil, sunflower oil or no oil for baby dry skin or massage: A pilot, assessor-blinded, randomized controlled trial (the Oil in Baby SkincaRE [OBSeRvE] study) [Abstract].  Acta dermato-venereologica ,  96 (3), 323–330.  Danby, S. G., AlEnezi, T., Sultan, A., Lavender, T., Chittock, J., Brown, K., &amp; Cork, M. J. (2013, January–February). Effect of olive and sunflower seed oil on the adult skin barrier: Implications for neonatal skin care [Abstract].  Pediatric Dermatology ,  30 (1), 42–50.  Frankel, E. N., Mailer, R. J., Wang, S. C., Shoemaker, C. F., Guinard, J.-X., Flynn, J. D., &amp; Sturzenberger, N. D. (2011, April). Evaluation of extra-virgin olive oil sold in California.  Medina, E., Romero, C., Brenes, M., &amp; de Castro, A. (2007, May). Antimicrobial activity of olive oil, vinegar, and various beverages against foodborne pathogens [Abstract].  Journal of Food Protection ,  70 (5), 1194–1199.  Michels, A. J. (2012, February). Vitamin E and skin health.  Nasiri, M., Fayazi, S., Jahani, S., Yazdanpanah, L., &amp; Haghighizadeh, M. H. (2015, April 29). The effect of topical olive oil on the healing of foot ulcer in patients with type 2 diabetes: A double-blind randomized clinical trial study in Iran [Abstract].  Journal of Diabetes &amp; Metabolic Disorders ,  14 (1), 38.  Olive oil and skin. (n.d.).  Verallo-Rowell, V. M., Dillague, K. M., &amp; Syah-Tjundawan, B. S. (2008, November–December). Novel antibacterial and emollient effects of coconut and virgin olive oils in adult atopic dermatitis [Abstract].  Dermatitis ,  19 (6), 308–315.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Is olive oil a good moisturizer for your face?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321246.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, March 18). "Is olive oil a good moisturizer for your face?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  