 The human body needs water to perform normal bodily functions. It is therefore vital for a person to drink water every day. However, there is some debate about whether people should drink water before going to bed.  In this article, we look at the benefits of drinking water, how much to drink each day, and the pros and cons of drinking water near bedtime.  If someone feels dehydrated at night or is at risk of  dehydration , then they should drink some water. Beyond this, there are few specific benefits of drinking water before bed.  However, drinking water before going to bed can increase a person's risk of nocturia.  Nocturia is the increased need to urinate at night. While asleep, the human body produces more hormones that slow down kidney function and decrease urine production.  This combination reduces the need for people to urinate during the night and helps them sleep uninterrupted. Repeatedly getting up can reduce both the duration and quality of sleep.  When people's sleep is disturbed by nocturia, it can have a significantly impact on their quality of life.  A person's memory, concentration, and mood can be  negatively affected  by  sleep deprivation . The risk of a range of disorders can also be increased, including  obesity ,  heart disease ,  diabetes , and  depression .  Nocturia can happen to anyone at any age but is more common in older people. The following can also increase the risk of nocturia:  People with nocturia should avoid drinking water in the late evening. A person could try having their last glass a few hours earlier than normal.  Drinking an adequate amount of water during the day is still important. Unless the person is drinking too much, reducing total intake does not usually help.  However, close to bedtime, people should reduce or avoid:  The need to urinate is increased by caffeine and alcohol. Caffeine can also make it more difficult for someone to fall asleep.  People should see a doctor to rule out other possible underlying conditions if they are experiencing persistent nocturia.  A person should drink fluids whenever they feel dehydrated or if there is a high possibility of dehydration. Signs of dehydration include:  The following things increase the risk of dehydration:  According to the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), it can be fatal if a person loses  more than 10 percent  of their body water.  There is no consensus on how much water people should drink each day. The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  and the  Food and Nutrition Board (FNB)  say thirst alone is enough to guide most people on how much to drink.  However, the FNB suggest women should take in around 2.7 liters of water daily and men around 3.7 liters.  These amounts include the water obtained from eating, which is estimated to make up 19 to 20 percent of daily intake.  Water is a cheap and effective way of quenching thirst and replacing lost fluids. As well as being essential for general health, drinking water has several other potential benefits:  One  small study  suggests that increasing daily water intake by 1.5 liters in people with  migraines  may reduce the headaches. However, it only showed a limited effect in preventing them altogether.  Alcohol increases the need to urinate. This can lead to dehydration, which causes some of the symptoms of a  hangover .  The best way to avoid a hangover is to drink alcohol in moderation. However, the following tips can also help prevent or reduce the effects of a hangover:  Getting enough water is essential for health. In most healthy people, thirst is sufficient in guiding them to know how much to drink.  Water is a cheap, no-calories alternative to sugary drinks and may help improve mood and mental performance. It can also help to prevent headaches and hangovers.  However, if a person drinks water before bed, it can increase the need to urinate during the night and significantly impact on their sleep.    
 Beccuti, G., &amp; Pannain, S. (2011, July). Sleep and obesity.  Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition &amp; Metabolic Care ,  14 (4), 402–412.  Beccuti, G., &amp; Pannain, S. (2011, July). Sleep and obesity.  Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition &amp; Metabolic Care ,  14 (4), 402–412.  Brain basics: Understanding sleep. (2017, May 22).  Dehydration. (2017, June 2).  Scientific opinion on dietary reference values for water. (2010, March 25).  EFSA Journal ,  8 (3), 1459.  Hangover cures. (2017, February 28).  Headaches and dehydration. (2016, July 7).  Institute of Medicine Food and Nutrition Board. (2004, February 11). Dietary reference intakes: Water, potassium, sodium, chloride, and sulfate [Press release].  Muckelbauer, R., Sarganas, G., Grüneis, A., &amp; Müller-Nordhorn, J. (2013, August 1). Association between water consumption and body weight outcomes: A systematic review.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  98 (2), 282–299.  Nocturia. (n.d.).  Nocturia (getting up at night to pass urine). (2017, January).  Popkin, B. M., D'Anci, K. E., &amp; Rosenberg, I. H. (2011, August). Water, hydration and health.  Nutrition Reviews ,  68 (8), 439–458.  Pross, N., Demazières, A., Girard, N., Barnouin, R., Metzger D, Klein, A., … Guelinckx, I. (2014, April 11). Effects of changes in water intake on mood of high and low drinkers.  PLoS ONE ,  9 (4), e94754.  Spigt, M. G., Kuijper, E. C., Schayck, C. P., Troost, J., Knipschild, P. G., Linssen, V. M., &amp; Knottnerus, J. A. (2005, September). Increasing the daily water intake for the prophylactic treatment of headache: A pilot trial [Abstract].  European Journal of Neurology ,  12 (9), 715–718.  The eatwell guide. (2016, March 16).  Water &amp; nutrition. (2016, October 5).  Water, drinks and your health. (2015, July 13).  Weiss, J. P. (2012). Nocturia: Focus on etiology and consequences.  Reviews in Urology ,  14 (3–4), 48–55.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gill, Stephen. "When is the best time to drink water?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321250.php&gt;    APA  Gill, S. (2018, March 18). "When is the best time to drink water?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  