 These uncomfortable side effects of excessive fiber can occur when someone eats more than  70 grams (g)  of fiber a day. This is not uncommon, and it may be more likely in a person following a vegan, whole food, or raw diet.  In this article, we look at how much fiber is too much and how to tell when you have eaten it in excess. Plus, we look at treatments, and the good sources of fiber to introduce into your diet.  Fiber is the indigestible part of plants and  carbohydrates . Foods like lentils, vegetables, and cereals are high in fiber.  In general, eating too much fiber is a less common problem than eating too little. Only an estimated  5 percent  of Americans meet their daily recommended fiber intake.  The optimal amount of fiber varies based on an individual's gender, age, and pregnancy status.  The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics  recommend the following  for dietary fiber intake:  A diet rich in fiber is essential for keeping the digestive system healthy. It is also related to lower  blood pressure  and a reduced risk of heart problems,  diabetes , and  obesity .  However, eating more than  70 g of fiber a day  can cause uncomfortable side effects, and some people may experience these after just 40 g.  When eating foods, such as high-fiber  nutrition  bars and fiber-added bread, eating 70 g of fiber in a day is not difficult.  A healthy diet of oatmeal for breakfast, a sandwich and fruit or vegetables for lunch, and a whole-grain dinner with lentils can easily reach that threshold.  The most common symptoms of eating too much fiber are:  Fiber makes bowel movements bigger and bulkier. It also promotes fermentation and gas formation. This is why excessive fiber intake frequently affects the digestive system.  Fiber is vital for healthy, solid bowel movements. However, too much of it can cause  constipation .  A 2012 study  tested the effects  of changing the fiber intake of 63 people who were experiencing constipation, bloating, and stomach pain.  In this study, individuals who reduced their fiber intake had more frequent bowel movements, less bloating, and less abdominal pain that those who did not change their fiber intake.  However, it should be noted that for some people, particularly those being treated for  irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS), increasing intake of dietary fiber can  be helpful  for constipation.  Too much fiber may also cause nutrient deficiencies, as it can interfere with the body's ability to absorb essential nutrients. This unwanted result is because the fiber binds with minerals, including  calcium ,  magnesium , zinc, and iron.  The symptoms of eating too much fiber can be reduced by:  A person with severe symptoms may choose to adopt a low-fiber diet, which means eating 10 g of fiber a day until their symptoms can be better managed. This diet is most often prescribed for individuals with serious digestive conditions or after procedures.  According to the Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of Medicine, a low-fiber diet  can meet  a person's daily nutritional needs.  A low-fiber diet emphasizes:  Hidden sources of fiber include products that contain the following ingredients:  There are two basic kinds of fiber, soluble and insoluble. Although the body cannot digest either of them, they are both necessary for a healthy diet.  Soluble fiber breaks down in the water found in the digestive system and forms a gel. It helps keep stools soft and slows the digestive process.  Insoluble fiber does not break down at all, as it passes through the digestive system. It adds bulk to bowel movements and helps to move food along.  Individuals can strive to reach the recommended daily level of dietary fiber by eating a diet rich in:  whole fruit, though fruit juice is low in fiber  It is essential to include a variety of fiber-rich foods in the diet. This ensures that a person will obtain a wide range of nutrients in addition to fiber. It will also help them to eat a good balance of soluble and insoluble fiber.  Naturally occurring fiber is usually easier for the body to handle than foods made with added fiber. So, whole grains and fresh fruits are usually more effective sources than high-fiber supplements or energy bars.  A good balance of fiber in the diet is associated with a host of health benefits. These include:  When someone has eaten too much fiber, the discomfort will pass over time, as the body eliminates the fibrous foods.  A person may relieve their discomfort by decreasing their fiber intake, increasing the amount of water they drink, and exercising more.  Note that fiber is an essential part of a healthy diet. Once following a low-fiber diet has helped a person with their symptoms, they can consider re-introducing fiber in limited amounts, so the body has time to adapt.  When increasing dietary fiber, it is vital to drink more fluids. An individual should aim for  8 glasses  of water a day, and make a habit of choosing low or no-sugar beverages.  Achieving the recommended daily fiber targets is worth the effort because the health dangers of not eating enough fiber greatly outweigh the discomfort of eating too much.    
 Anderson, J. W., Baird, P., Davis, R. H. Jr., Ferreri, S., Knudtson, M., Koraym, A., … Williams, C. L. (2009, April 1). Health benefits of dietary fiber [Abstract].  Nutrition Reviews ,  67 (4), 188–205.  Anderson, J. W., Baird, P., Davis, R. H. Jr., Ferreri, S., Knudtson, M., Koraym, A., … Williams, C. L. (2009, April 1). Health benefits of dietary fiber [Abstract].  Nutrition Reviews ,  67 (4), 188–205.  Dahl, W. J., &amp; Stewart, M. L. (2015, November). Position of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: Health implications of dietary fiber.  Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,  115 (11), 1861–1870.  Dietary fiber. (2017, March 11).  Fiber – How much is too much? (n.d.).  Fiber: How to increase the amount in your diet. (2017, March 27).  Ho, K.-S., Tan, C. Y. M., Daud, M. A. M., &amp; Seow-Choen, F. (2012, September 7). Stopping or reducing dietary fiber intake reduces constipation and its associated symptoms.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  18 (33), 4593–4596.  Manual of clinical nutrition management. (2013).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "How much fiber is too much?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321286.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, March 22). "How much fiber is too much?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  