 Adenomyosis is similar to  endometriosis  and can cause similar symptoms or no symptoms at all.  Adenomyosis is a relatively widespread condition. The National Health Service (NHS) in the UK estimate that  1 in 10  women have adenomyosis and that it is most common in women aged 40 to 50.  This article gives an overview of adenomyosis, including symptoms, causes, diagnosis, complications, and treatment.  Adenomyosis is a condition where the cells that usually grow outward into the uterus lining instead grow inward into the uterus muscle.  During a woman's menstrual cycle, these "trapped" cells become stimulated, which can make menstrual cramps and bleeding more severe than usual.  The symptoms of adenomyosis vary throughout the menstrual cycle because of rising and falling levels of  estrogen , which affect the shedding of the uterus lining.  Symptoms usually go away or improve after  menopause , when a woman's estrogen levels naturally decrease.  Adenomyosis varies widely among people, including the extent of the condition and the severity of the symptoms.  Around  one-third of women  do not experience any symptoms at all, while for others, symptoms can get in the way of daily life.  Possible symptoms of adenomyosis include:  Doctors are not sure what causes adenomyosis, but there are several theories:  Some risk factors that may result in adenomyosis include:  Without treatment, adenomyosis may remain the same or symptoms can get worse.  Treatment is not necessary if a woman has no symptoms, is not trying to get pregnant, or is nearing menopause, which is when most women find relief from their symptoms.  However, there are many different treatment options available to women with this condition:  Adenomyosis and endometriosis are very similar, but there are differences.  In adenomyosis, cells lining the uterus grow into the uterus muscle. In endometriosis, these cells grow outside of the uterus, sometimes on the ovaries and fallopian tubes.  These two conditions are equally widespread, though endometriosis occurs more often in women in their  30s and 40s , while more women aged  40 to 50  tend to develop adenomyosis.  It is possible for a woman to have both endometriosis and adenomyosis. The symptoms of both conditions should subside after menopause.  Research suggesting that adenomyosis  may have  an impact on a woman's fertility is conflicting, as there are often other conditions present in women with fertility issues.  Research into the relationship between adenomyosis,  infertility , and pregnancy complications is still ongoing. There are no studies that show an increased risk for miscarriage or other obstetric complications.  Diagnosing adenomyosis begins with a visit to the doctor. The doctor will likely take a medical history and perform a physical and pelvic exam.  A woman will often feel tenderness in her uterus during the pelvic exam. If a doctor thinks that a woman's uterus feels slightly enlarged, and they suspect adenomyosis, the doctor may consider other tests, including:  These testing methods will not give a definite diagnosis, however. It is only possible to definitively diagnose adenomyosis once a woman has had a hysterectomy and a specialized doctor called a pathologist examines the uterus under the microscope.  A woman who is not trying to get pregnant or who is not experiencing any symptoms may not require treatment. However, any woman who suspects adenomyosis or endometriosis should see her doctor for evaluation.  If a woman is experiencing heavy periods or severe uterine cramping, it is essential that she mentions it to her doctor. These symptoms can signal other serious conditions, and it is important that the doctor does tests to determine their cause.  Heavy menstrual bleeding can cause  anemia , which is a deficiency of iron. This can make someone feel tired, weak, or run-down and not well. Taking iron supplements can help treat anemia, which can be especially important during menstruation.  The outlook for a woman with adenomyosis is excellent; it is not a life-threatening condition, but it can cause severe discomfort.  A woman should see their doctor if she suspects adenomyosis or endometriosis.  Adenomyosis will go away once a woman reaches menopause. In the meantime, there are some treatments available that can help to alleviate the symptoms.    
 Adenomyosis (n.d.).  Adenomyosis (n.d.).  Adenomyosis. (2017, January).  Adenomyosis. (n.d.).  Endometriosis. (2018, March 16).  Harada, T., Khine, Y. M., Kaponis, A., Nikelis, T., Decavalas, G., &amp; Taniguchi, F. (2016, September 12). The impact of adenomyosis on women's fertility.  Obstetrical and Gynecological Survey ,  71 (9), 557–568.  Kok, V. C., Tsai, H. J., Su, C. F., &amp; Lee, C. K. (2015, July). The risks for ovarian, endometrial, breast, colorectal, and other cancers in women with newly diagnosed endometriosis or adenomyosis: A population-based study.  International Journal of Gynecological Cancer ,  25 (6), 968–976.  Maheshwari, A., Gurunath, S., Fatima, F., &amp; Bhattacharya, S. (2012, July). Adenomyosis and subfertility: A systematic review of prevalence, diagnosis, treatment and fertility outcomes [Abstract].  Human Reproduction Update ,  18 (4), 374–392.  McNeeley, S. G. (n.d.). Adenomyosis.  Smith, R. A., von Eschenbach, A. C., Wender, R., Levin, B., Byers, T., Rothenberger, D., … Eyre, H. (2001, Jan-Feb). American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer: Update of early detection guidelines for prostate, colorectal, and endometrial cancers [Abstract].  CA Cancer Journal for Clinicans ,  51 (1), 38–75.  Taran, F. A., Steward, E. A., &amp; Brucker, S. (2013, September). Adenomyosis: Epidemiology, risk factors, clinical phenotype and surgical and interventional alternatives to hysterectomy.  Geburtshilfe und Frauenheilkunde ,  73 (9), 924–931. Retrieved  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3859152/   Tomassetti, C., Meuleman, C., Timmerman, D., &amp; D'Hooghe, T. (2013, March). Adenomyosis and subfertility: Evidence of association and causation [Abstract].  Seminars in Reproductive Medicine ,  31( 2), 101–108.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "What to know about adenomyosis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321296.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, March 23). "What to know about adenomyosis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  