 According to one study, the average depth of a vagina is about  3.77 inches , which is 9.6 centimeters (cm). Other sources suggest that the average range of size may be about  3 to 7 inches  (approximately 7.6–17.7 cm)  However, these variations in size are not usually apparent, even to a sexual partner.  A report in the  BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology  said that the average depth of the vagina is about 3.77 inches (9.6 cm), but that vaginal depth and appearance can vary widely.  In fact, the depth of the vagina (from the opening to the tip of the cervix) can measure anywhere up to 7 inches (17.7 cm).  The vagina is the canal to the cervix, which separates the uterus and the vagina.  Several types of tissue line the inside of the vagina, including the mucosa. The mucosa is made up of specialized cells that secrete a lubricating fluid, which helps the vaginal walls to stretch.  The exterior portion of the female genitals is the vulva. The vulva includes the labia minora and majora — the lip-like parts of the female genitals.  The appearance of vulvas varies widely. The skin may be the same color or darker than the rest of the body. The labia majora, which are the external "lips," can vary from around  2.7 to 4.7 inches  (7 to 12 cm) in length.  The clitoris ranges from about  0.1 to 1.3 inches  (5 to 35 mm) in size but swells and enlarges if a woman is aroused.  The vagina's size and depth changes in certain situations. It can stretch to accommodate the insertion of a tampon, a finger, or a penis.  During arousal, more blood flows to the vagina. This causes the vagina to elongate and the cervix, or tip of the uterus, to lift up slightly, allowing more of a penis, finger, or sex toy to fit in the vagina.  While a vagina expands during arousal, a large penis or sex toy can still cause discomfort when having sex.  The vagina will not change in appearance, as it is internal. In fact,  research  has found no link between the depth of a person's vagina and their age.  However, the labia may appear smaller over time. This is because the amount of  estrogen  in the body decreases with age, which can reduce fat and  collagen .  The genitals may also appear to change color, becoming lighter or darker with hormonal changes over time.  Some women may find that their vagina feels different following childbirth. While the tissues in the vagina do stretch to accommodate a baby, this is not permanent.   Research  has found no difference in vaginal length between women who had given birth and those who had not.  If a person thinks their vagina feels different after childbirth, a doctor may recommend Kegel exercises, which involve squeezing and releasing the muscles used to control urination to help strengthen the pelvic floor.  The average erect penis is about  33 percent longer  than the average vagina. While both penis and vagina sizes can vary, these organs can usually accommodate each other.  A  2015 study  found the average erect penis length to be just over 5 inches (13.12 cm). Some women may report discomfort if their sexual partner has a penis that is larger than average.  It may be painful or uncomfortable if an object such as a penis or sex toy hits the cervix. Having adequate lubrication and communicating any discomfort to a partner can help keep sexual activity pleasurable.  Tips for keeping the vagina healthy include:  The depth and appearance of vaginas vary greatly between individuals. Usually, the depth of the vagina is between 3 and 7 inches.  The vagina is an organ that is designed to accommodate both childbirth and sexual activity. However, if a woman is experiencing pain during sex due to what she perceives as a shallow vagina, she should talk to her doctor.  Doctors can investigate any underlying causes for the pain, and may refer someone to a specialist. A specialist may recommend pelvic floor therapy or sex therapy, which can make sex more pleasurable regardless of vaginal depth.    
 How deep is the average vagina, and does it elongate when something's in it?  How deep is the average vagina, and does it elongate when something's in it?  Lloyd, J., Crouch, N. S., Minto, C. L., Liao, L.-M., &amp; Creighton, S. M. (2005, May) Female genital appearance: 'Normality' unfolds.  British Journal of Obstetrics &amp; Gynaecology ,  112 (5), 643–646.  Martin, R. D. (2015, April 20). Does size matter for women?  Prause, N., Park, J., Leung, S., &amp; Miller, G. (2015, September 2). Women's preferences for penis size: A new research method using selection among 3D models.  PLoS One ,  10   (9), e133079.  Sexual arousal in women. (2016, June 20).  Vaginal yeast infections. (2012).  Veale, D., Miles, S., Bramley, S., Muir, G., &amp; Hodsoll, J. (2015, June). Am I normal? A systematic review and construction of nomograms for flaccid and erect penis length and circumference in up to 15 521 men.  BJU International ,  115 (6), 978–986.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How deep is a vagina? What to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321220.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, March 16). "How deep is a vagina? What to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  