 According to the  American Gas Association , over 73 million residential, commercial, and industrial premises in the United States use natural gas. It is highly flammable, and gas leaks increase the risk of fire and explosion.  If people suspect a gas leak, it is essential that they evacuate the area immediately, and call 911, the local fire department, or the utility company's emergency line.  In this article, learn about the signs and symptoms of a gas leak and what to do if a gas leak occurs in the home.  Small gas leaks may not have a smell or other physical signs. However, if there is a gas leak in the home, a person may notice:  Also, gas bills may be higher than normal, as gas will be escaping from gas lines or appliances into the house.  A reduction in the amount of oxygen in the air causes gas leak symptoms. These can include:  Pets will likely also be experiencing symptoms in the event of a gas leak. Pet owners should look out for signs of:  Very high levels of gas may cause unconsciousness or even death in pets.  Carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning can lead to symptoms similar to those caused by a gas leak. Carbon monoxide is emitted when gas burns incompletely.  Exposure to CO can be fatal and requires emergency medical treatment. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),  5,149 people  died from unintentional  carbon monoxide poisoning  in the U.S. between 1999 and 2010.  Symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning can include:  If there is a gas leak, it is vital to do the following:  Symptoms of a gas leak in both people and animals require medical treatment. In cases of severe symptoms, someone should call an ambulance or go directly to the hospital's emergency department.  If a gas leak is suspected but not confirmed, they should do the following:  In the event of a gas leak or suspected gas leak, NEVER:  A gas leak is usually confirmed by a certified inspector, using a device called an adjusted electronic gas analyzer. The inspector will also check appliances and outside gas lines for faults and leaks.  Once the leak has been located and repaired, it is essential to:  The symptoms of a gas leak do not typically affect health if exposure was low and the leak was addressed quickly. However, long-term exposure may result in physical symptoms that persist, such as:  Therefore, it is essential to consult a doctor after a gas leak has occurred, especially if a person notices long-term effects. Symptoms may improve or resolve with the proper treatment.  Most gas leaks are preventable by taking the following steps:   Stay educated   People should learn about gas leak symptoms and signs and remember to teach family members and children about natural gas safety.  Everyone in the home should know what to do if a gas leak is suspected or confirmed.   Schedule regular inspections   Ensure that all gas-burning appliances and gas pipelines are inspected every year by a certified inspector. This service is usually free of charge.  A certified professional should also inspect furnaces, chimneys, flues, and vents.   Ensure adequate ventilation   The areas around gas-burning appliances and gas equipment should be kept unobstructed. This is to prevent natural gas from building up in these areas.  It is also helpful and healthy to regularly air out of the house.   Install carbon monoxide detectors   These devices look like smoke alarms and emit a loud sound if carbon monoxide is detected. There should be a detector on every floor of the house and in all bedrooms.   Keep a fire extinguisher on site   Gas leaks are highly flammable, and natural gas can be ignited by a spark or even by making phone calls. React quickly to fires in the home by having at least one multipurpose fire extinguisher on site.   Chemical storage   All flammable materials and household chemicals, such as cleaning supplies and paints, should be stored far away from gas appliances and gas lines.  Natural gas leaks cause physical signs and symptoms in both people and animals. Although these leaks are rare, ongoing exposure to natural gas can be hazardous and have lasting effects.  It is essential that people are educated about natural gas safety and are aware of the signs of gas leaks and carbon monoxide poisoning.  Many steps can be taken to prevent gas leaks and their complications, including scheduling yearly inspections and installing carbon monoxide detectors.    
 About us. (n.d.).  About us. (n.d.).  Carbon monoxide poisoning. (2016, May 23).  QuickStats: Average annual number of deaths and death rates from unintentional, non–fire-related carbon monoxide poisoning, by sex and age group — United States, 1999–2010. (2014, January 24).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "How to recognize a gas leak."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321277.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, March 21). "How to recognize a gas leak."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  