  Fibromyalgia  is a long-term condition capable of causing widespread pain throughout the body.  It can also create problems with sleep, chronic  fatigue , and emotional distress.  Fibromyalgia affects around  10 million people  in the United States, according to the National Fibromyalgia Association.  It is most often diagnosed when a person is 20–50 years old.  While  75–90 percent  of those who have fibromyalgia are women, the condition also occurs in men, children, and people of all ethnicities.  It is unclear what exactly causes fibromyalgia. Scientists believe that fibromyalgia may be linked to abnormal levels of certain brain chemicals and changes in the way that the  central nervous system  processes pain messages.  There is currently no cure for fibromyalgia, but treatments — such as medications, talking therapies, and lifestyle changes — are available to alleviate some of the symptoms.  It can be useful to read blogs written by people who also have fibromyalgia to know that you are not alone. Fibromyalgia blogs can also provide helpful information on the latest research and therapies, along with tips and strategies for how to live well with the condition.  Here are  Medical News Today 's top 10 picks of the best blogs for fibromyalgia.  Sue Ingebretson is the director of program development for the Fibromyalgia and Chronic Pain Research and Education Center at California State University, Fullerton. She is also a certified holistic healthcare practitioner, author, speaker, and creator of  Rebuilding Wellness .  Sue has experienced fibromyalgia and walked the path from illness to wellness by researching traditional and nontraditional methods of healing.  The Rebuilding Wellness  blog  focuses on providing encouragement and promoting healthy living and positive lifestyle changes. Posts include  the anatomy of head pain  in fibromyalgia,  a quick fix for stress , and  strategies to reduce the symptoms of fibromyalgia .   Visit the Rebuilding Wellness blog .  Shelley is a freelance writer who lives in Houston, TX, with her husband and two children. She is the founder of the  Chronic Mom  blog.  Shelley began blogging in 2011 when diagnosed with fibromyalgia. She turned to blogging as an outlet for her frustrations. She was frustrated not only with being treated like she was "crazy," but also with being unable to find a doctor that was willing to help her.  Recent posts on Chronic Mom include  how the medical system fails  those with chronic pain,  five management techniques  for chronic pain, and  how to deal with individuals who don't believe that you're sick .   Visit the Chronic Mom blog .  Julie Ryan started the blog  Counting My Spoons  in 2010 — the year of her fibromyalgia diagnosis. She says that over time, she has switched from hopeless to hopeful and from sad to inspired by learning how to manage her illness.  Her condition started with temporomandibular joint disorder and then progressed to fibromyalgia, thyroid issues, and  endometriosis . Julie also regularly has to deal with  cluster headaches  and  migraines .  Through her blog, Julie hopes to help others to live an inspired life despite chronic illness. Posts include  the importance of support groups  when you are living with a chronic condition, the link between  vitamin D and fibromyalgia relief , and  the things that have improved Julie's health the most  since 2010.   Visit the Counting My Spoons blog .  Sue lives in Illinois, was diagnosed with fibromyalgia in 2006, and is the creator of the fibromyalgia lifestyle blog  FibroDaze . FibroDaze began as a way for Sue to "make sense of the senseless," and it is now designed to help others with fibromyalgia lead better lives.  Sue says that to begin with, her fibromyalgia symptoms were mild with few flare-ups. However, they soon escalated to her having fatigue, migraines, and dizziness — preventing her from enjoying life.  Popular posts on the blog include  temperature sensitivity in fibromyalgia ,  skin-related symptoms of fibromyalgia , and  how fibromyalgia pain varies  depending on the weather.   Visit the FibroDaze blog .  Brandi was diagnosed with fibromyalgia in 2012 after struggling for 6 years with aches, joint stiffness, sensory sensitivities, severe back spasms,  anxiety , and  depression .  She started  Being Fibro Mom  with the mission of "helping fibromyalgia sufferers become fibromyalgia thrivers." The blog provides resources to learn about fibromyalgia and chronic pain, as well as strategies for coping with crazy days with the kids, flare-ups, and unpredictable emotions.  Latest articles on Being Fibro Mom include  how to cope with the anxiety of doctor's appointments ,  whether eating spicy foods affects fibromyalgia , and  tips on surviving a cold  as a parent with fibromyalgia.   Visit the Being Fibro Mom blog .  Donna set up the blog  February Stars  in 2013 after finally receiving a diagnosis of fibromyalgia following years of illness.  February Stars was initially launched as a way for Donna to share her experiences with fibromyalgia, but it has now grown into a health and lifestyle blog where Donna shares her helpful tips on living as well as possible with chronic illness.  The topics covered on February Stars include  the underlying cause of Donna's fibromyalgia  and chronic fatigue revealed,  whether or not there is a connection between fibromyalgia and sleep apnea , and  whether a diagnosis of fibromyalgia is masking a common women's health problem .   Visit the February Stars blog .  Katarina Zulak is a health writer, health advocate, self-confessed health nerd, and founder of the  Skillfully Well and Painfully Aware  blog.  She has fibromyalgia and endometriosis, and she has learned to better her health and well-being through the power of self-care skills. Katarina aspires to educate, inform, and inspire other people to be skillfully well despite living with the associated challenges of chronic illness.  Some of the articles on the blog include  how to plan a chronic illness-friendly wedding ,  whether probiotics can help treat fibromyalgia , and  how to sleep better at night despite fibromyalgia  and chronic pain.   Visit the Skillfully Well and Painfully Aware blog .   FibroMapp Pain Manager+  is an award-winning pain management app that is designed to help individuals gain control over their condition.  Dave developed the app after his wife, Alyssa, was diagnosed with fibromyalgia,  chronic fatigue syndrome  (CFS), and severe neck pain. After hitting a dead end looking for apps to help Alyssa manage her chronic pain, Dave, as a web developer, decided to create his own.  Their FibroMapp  blog  is written by Alyssa and includes the posts  three reasons for your symptoms  of fibromyalgia and CFS,  the real reason you feel hot  with fibromyalgia and CFS, and  four things you should know about fibromyalgia, CFS, and sleep issues .   Visit the FibroMapp blog .  Tamiko is the woman behind  My Foggy Brain . Tamiko lives with her husband of 30 years, has two children, and copes with chronic pain, fibromyalgia, and depression on a daily basis.  Tamiko first created My Foggy Brain to share the ups and downs of her conditions and her findings from researching how other people live with similar conditions, diseases, and disorders.  Posts on My Foggy Brain include  what to do when self-sabotage gets in the way ,  a reflection on fibromyalgia  at the age of 50 years, and  the importance of starting a conversation  about invisible and chronic illnesses.   Visit the My Foggy Brain blog .  Nikki Albert has experienced chronic illness since she was a child. Over time, she has been diagnosed with hypermobility syndrome, migraines, depression,  hypothyroidism ,  asthma , and fibromyalgia.  Nikki developed  Brainless Blogger  as a distraction from the pain and to promote awareness of chronic illness, pain, and invisible disability. The blog name refers to the symptom of brain fog and fibro fog.  The most recent posts on Brainless Blogger include  how nothing does more harm for chronic pain than just pushing through it ,  how those with chronic illness may stand out socially  from other people, and  reasons for not sleeping  with chronic conditions.   Visit the Brainless Blogger blog .  