 Luckily, there are many ways to treat  acne  or other types of  pimples  and prevent them from turning into blood-filled pimples.  Up to  80 percent  of 11- to 30-year-olds will experience pimples or acne at some stage.  In this article, learn more about the different types of pimples and the treatment options available.  Blood-filled pimples occur after someone has squeezed or popped a pimple  Squeezing a pimple forces out a yellow liquid called  pus . The trauma caused by the squeezing can also cause blood vessels underneath to burst, causing the pimple to fill with blood.  Regular pimples occur when the skin's pores become clogged with bacteria, sweat, or dirt. More severe acne can be due to hormonal changes in adolescents and adult women.  Most of the time, blood-filled pimples will heal on their own if they are left alone. If someone squeezes the pimple before it heals, they may spread bacteria to other parts of the face and body.  It is essential to keep the area around the pimple clean and wash twice daily, using a gentle cleanser or soap and water.  Blood-filled pimples that recur or persist may need to be treated with:  There are many over-the-counter treatments for different types of pimples and acne, including blood-filled pimples:  Less commonly, a doctor may recommend medical procedures to people with severe blood-filled pimples and other types of pimples and acne. Such procedures include:  Medication or medical treatments are often not necessary for mild cases of blood-filled pimples. Many home remedies can alleviate symptoms, and some speed up healing.  Many people use the following home remedies to treat blood-filled pimples:  Many skin products can irritate sensitive and acne-prone skin and should be avoided. These include oil-based makeups and fragranced products.  Always look for cleansers, moisturizers, and sunscreens that are fragrance-free, suitable for sensitive skin, and "noncomedogenic," which means they do not clog pores.  Wash the skin twice daily with lukewarm water and a gentle cleanser or soap. Between washings, ensure the skin is clean and dry and keep hair back from the face.  People should also avoid touching the face, keep mobile phones and other items that come into contact with the face clean, and change bedding and towels often.  Put some ice in a clean towel and apply it to the blood-filled pimples for up to 15 minutes.  This treatment aims to reduce pain and swelling. A person can repeat this several times daily.  Topical zinc treatments, such as zinc oxide, are popular home remedies for acne and blood-filled pimples.  Zinc  may be  especially beneficial when used in combination with other treatments.  Tea tree oil might help treat mild to moderate acne and blood-filled pimples.  One  study  found that 5 percent tea tree oil was as effective at treating acne as 5 percent benzoyl peroxide lotion, which is an acne medication. Although the tea tree oil worked slower than the benzoyl peroxide, it caused fewer adverse reactions.  There are many different types of pimples, which can be categorized as either non-inflammatory acne or inflammatory acne.  Picking or squeezing any of these pimples can lead to blood-filled pimples.  Non-inflammatory acne usually responds well to home remedies and over-the-counter treatments. These include:  Red and inflamed pimples indicate inflammatory acne. These pimples may be classed as:  The following tips can help prevent blood-filled pimples and other forms of acne:  Acne is a very common skin condition. Blood-filled pimples result from picking at acne and other types of pimples. Repeatedly squeezing pimples can lead to scarring and should be avoided.  See a doctor if acne is severe, persistent, or is accompanied by signs of infection, such as:  Luckily, there are many treatments available for blood-filled pimples, ranging from home remedies to prescription medications and medical procedures.    
 Acne. (2016, September 1).  Acne. (2016, September 1).  Bassett, I. B., Pannowitz, D. L., &amp; Barnetson, R. S. (1990, October 15). A comparative study of tea-tree oil versus benzoyl peroxide in the treatment of acne [Abstract].  The Medical Journal of Australia ,  153 (8), 455–458.  Gupta, M., Mahajan, V. K., Mehta, K. S., &amp; Chauhan, P. S. (2014, July 10). Zinc therapy in dermatology: A review.  Dermatology Research and Practice , 2014.  Isotretinoin: Treatment for severe acne. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "How to get rid of blood-filled pimples."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321252.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, March 19). "How to get rid of blood-filled pimples."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  