 The mechanical soft food diet is another name for the diet, and refers to using equipment, such as blenders or food processors, to make food into a smooth puree.  In this article, we take a look at the foods to include and those to avoid when following a soft food diet.  There are many situations where people are advised to follow a soft food diet:   Following surgery   Doctors may recommend that people who have had surgery to the mouth, head, neck, or stomach follow a soft food diet for a period following surgery.  Examples of surgery that may require a person to eat a soft food diet afterward include  gastrectomy , where a surgeon removes all or part of the stomach, and  bariatric surgery , which is an operation to reduce someone's weight.   Cancer treatment    Chemotherapy  and  radiotherapy  can make the digestive tract sore and inflamed, a condition known as mucositis. If someone is experiencing mucositis, they might benefit from a soft food diet.   Difficulty swallowing   The soft food diet may be appropriate for people who find it difficult to chew or swallow. This condition is called  dysphagia .  For people with significant dysphagia, who are unable to eat tough foods safely, a doctor or dietitian might prescribe a  texture-modified diet . In this diet, users alter the texture of foods to reduce the need to chew. They may achieve this by mashing and pureeing foods.  A texture-modified diet is similar to the soft food diet, and a doctor or dietitian may recommend it to people who may be at risk of getting food stuck in the throat or windpipe.  Doctors will assess people with dysphagia and will make appropriate dietary recommendations depending on individual needs.  The  range of foods  and textures offered depends on the severity of the dysphagia. Individuals should discuss options with a doctor or other professional, such as a speech and language therapist who specializes in helping people who have difficulty swallowing.   Dental problems   A soft food diet may be appropriate following dental implant or tooth extraction, such as wisdom tooth removal.  Following a procedure, it is essential to follow dietary recommendations from the dentist to avoid infections and other dental problems.  Dentures are removable replacements for missing teeth. They can become loose or ill-fitting over time, which makes it difficult to bite and chew properly. Hard or sharp foods can dislodge the dentures, causing them to become unstable in the mouth.  The soft food diet might be more suitable for adults with dentures as it prevents food getting stuck and causing any damage.  The soft food diet does not have to be restrictive. It is crucial to continue to eat a wide variety of nutritious foods, especially if recovering from surgery.  People following a soft food diet should try to eat regular meals including a variety of foods from the  main food groups :   Carbohydrates to provide energy and fiber    Protein-rich foods for growth and repair    Dairy and alternatives that contain calcium    Fruit and vegetables for vitamins, minerals, and fiber   People should be sure to remove the skins from all vegetable and fruit before eating.   Sauces   Followers of the soft food diet can use sauces to help soften foods. Options include:   Desserts   As a rule, it is best to avoid chewy, crunchy, and dry foods when following a soft food diet.  People should take care with the following:   Carbohydrates    Protein    Fruit and vegetables    Other foods to avoid   Foods can be mashed, pureed, or covered in sauce to make them moist and easier to eat.  Here are some other preparation ideas for the soft food diet:  Some recipes and meals work well as part of a soft food diet, such as:  A soft or mechanical diet might take a bit of getting used to, but it can be a healthful diet to follow. There are a few other things and tips to consider for people on a soft food diet, however:   Loss of appetite   For those with less of an appetite, consider smaller meals and regular snacks. Try not to rush meals.  Eating nutritious snacks between meals is fine. Nutritional supplement drinks can be useful if it is proving difficult to chew even with a soft food diet.  If problems persist, people should contact a doctor, specialist nurse, or dietitian for further advice.   Fortified drinks   If someone is struggling to maintain a healthy weight or experiencing difficulty eating a soft food diet, it might be useful to consider  nutrient-rich drinks  alongside meals.  Cream or full-fat milk can be used to make drinks and milkshakes for extra  calories  and fat.   Food variety   People should be sure to include a variety of foods in their diet. Doing so will prevent them getting bored of the same foods and meals while ensuring that they are consuming a wide range of nutrients.  Both the soft food diet and mechanical diet can include foods from all food groups. A diet such as this requires careful planning and consideration to ensure that it is balanced to suit individual needs, however.  It is best for people to seek advice from a doctor or dietitian when beginning a soft food diet.    
 A guide to life after oesophageal/gastric surgery — Oesophageal and gastrectomy [Fact sheet]. (2013, September).  A guide to life after oesophageal/gastric surgery — Oesophageal and gastrectomy [Fact sheet]. (2013, September).  Cichero, J. A. Y., Steele, C., Duivestein, J., Clavé, P., Chen, J., Kayashita, J., … Murray, J. (2013, August 24). The need for international terminology and definitions for texture-modified foods and thickened liquids used in dysphagia management: Foundations of a global initiative.  Current Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Reports ,  1 (4), 280–291.  Dentures (false teeth). (2015, June 22).  Eatwell guide. (n.d.).  Elrazek, A. E., Elbanna, A. E. M., &amp; Bilasy, S. E., (2014, November 27). Medical management of patients after bariatric surgery: Principles and guidelines.  World Journal of Gastrointestinal Surgery ,  6 (11), 220–228.  High calorie drinks. (2017, October 6).  Mucositis. (2017, November 23).  Nutrition and dysphagia food textures. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  RNutr, Jo Lewin. "What are the soft food and mechanical soft food diets?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321331.php&gt;    APA  RNutr, J. (2018, March 26). "What are the soft food and mechanical soft food diets?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  