 The clitoris is a female sexual organ. It is located just above the urethra, where urine is released from the body.  The medical community refers to an enlarged clitoris as clitoromegaly or macroclitoris. This refers to a clitoris longer than  10 millimeters (mm)  in an adult or  9 mm  in a newborn.  A swollen clitoris in an adult is not usually a cause for concern. However, a child or newborn with a large or swollen clitoris should be evaluated by a pediatrician to rule out certain conditions.  In this article, we look at causes of clitoral enlargement at several stages of life. We also explore symptoms and treatments.  An adult's clitoris usually swells because of sexual excitement or arousal. During arousal, more blood flows to the genitals, and the clitoris can fill up and appear larger. A similar process occurs in the penis.  Blood flow quickly returns to normal after orgasm, and the clitoris returns to its usual size. If no orgasm follows arousal, it can take hours or day for the clitoris to shrink. This will not harm a person, but if the clitoris remains swollen and rubs against clothing, it can cause irritation or discomfort.  An enlarged or swollen clitoris may be caused by general  inflammation  of the genitals. This is known as vulvitis, which describes inflammation of the vulva.  Causes of vulvitis include:  The genitals have abundant nerve endings, and overstimulation of this sensitive area can cause pain or swelling. If a person handles the genitals more gently, discomfort should subside within a day or two.  Symptoms of a yeast infection are similar to those of many STIs. See a doctor for a diagnosis and treatment.  If a person suspects that an allergic reaction is causing vulvitis, they should avoid contact with any products that might be responsible. See a doctor if symptoms do not improve within a week.  Female hormones (estrogens) and male hormones (androgens) are normally present in the body.  Testosterone  is one example of an androgen.  An excess of any androgen can cause the clitoris to swell. The following may be responsible for this hormonal imbalance:   Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)   In this condition, many small  cysts  form on the ovaries, which cause an excess of androgens in the body. A small study from 2015 found that a larger clitoris was  strongly linked  to a diagnosis of PCOS.  The following factors may also indicate PCOS:  Hormone medication and lifestyle changes are usually sufficient to manage this condition.   Anabolic steroids   These steroids are used to build muscle and boost athletic endurance.  Anabolic steroid use can also lead to an excess of male hormones. This can result in:  Steroids should only be used to treat designated medical conditions under a doctor's careful supervision.   Adrenal gland tumors or growths   The adrenal glands secrete hormones. If a  tumor  or another type of growth form on these glands they cannot function properly. In this event, a person may develop a hormonal imbalance and an enlarged clitoris.  A person may also experience other hormone-related symptoms, such as weight gain, menstrual changes, or excessive hair growth.  Treatment for adrenal gland tumors depends on many factors, such as the size of the tumor and whether it is cancerous.  Several conditions can cause an enlarged clitoris in a child. Only a doctor can make a proper evaluation and diagnosis.  An enlarged clitoris in a child is usually caused by one of the following conditions:   Congenital adrenal hyperplasia   This disorder of the adrenal glands leads the body to produce too much androgen, which can result in swelling of the clitoris. It may be difficult to determine whether the genitals are male or female.   Disorders of sex development   Congenital disabilities that affect the sex organs can cause an enlarged clitoris at birth. Many additional types of developmental complication fall under this category.   Other disorders   Growths may cause the clitoris to appear unusual in size or shape. According to a  2013 report , the following factors can cause clitoral enlargement in children:  The report stated that surgery was successful in removing the growths from these children.  A report from  2017  described a hemangioma, a noncancerous birthmark containing blood vessels, which had developed on an infant's clitoris, causing it to appear abnormally large and red. Hemangiomas often disappear after several months or years. Surgery may not be required.  Changes in the appearance of the clitoris or other genital organs should be checked by a doctor if a person has:  If swelling of the clitoris goes away in a few days, it usually does not indicate a serious condition.  However, a child who has enlarged or swollen genitals should be evaluated by a pediatrician, to rule out certain conditions.    
 Anabolic steroids. (2016, March).  Anabolic steroids. (2016, March).  Congenital adrenal hyperplasia. (n.d.).  Gomes, A. L., Onofre, L. S., de Souza Leão, J. Q., Leão, F. G., Cruz, T. M. A., Sircilli, M. H. P., … Carnevale, J. (2013, November 7). Clitoral anomalies not associated with disorders of sex development.  Journal of Pediatric Surgery Case Reports ,  1 (11), 403–405.  Kaefer, M., &amp; Rink, R. C. (2017, August 28). Treatment of the enlarged clitoris.  Frontiers in Pediatrics ,  5 ,125.  Köşüş, A., Kamalak, Z., Köşüş, N., Hizli, D., &amp; Eser, A. (2016). Clitoral and labial sizes in women wıth PCOS [Abstract].  Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology ,  36 (1), 97–101.  Lloyd, J., Crouch, N. S., Minto, C. L., Liao, L.-M., &amp; Creighton, S. M. (2005, January 12). Female genital appearance: 'Normality' unfolds.  BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology ,  112 (5), 643–646.  Nichols, P. E., Michaud, J. E., &amp; Wang, M. H. (2017, November). Infantile hemangioma of the clitoris presenting as a clitoral mass: A case report.  Urology Case Reports ,  15 , 44–45.  Phillip, M., De Boer, C., Pilpel, D., Karplus, M., &amp; Sofer, S. (1996, March 1). Clitoral and penile sizes of full term newborns in two different ethnic groups.  Journal of Pediatric Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism: JPEM ,  9 (2), 175–179.  Polycystic ovary syndrome. (2017, July 26).  Reifsnyder, J. E., Stites, J., Bernabé, K. J., Galan, D., Felsen, D., &amp; Poppas, D. P. (2016, April). Nerve sparing clitoroplasty is an option for adolescent and adult female patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia and clitoral pain following prior clitoral recession or incomplete reduction [Abstract].  The Journal of Urology ,  195 (4), 1270–1274.  Signs and symptoms of adrenal cancers. (2018, January 2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "What causes an enlarged clitoris?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321367.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, March 30). "What causes an enlarged clitoris?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  