 Although the new study — now  published  in the journal  PLOS Biology  — was carried out in mice, the findings shed a clarifying light on a poorly understood phenomenon: the blunting of taste buds frequently noticed in people with  obesity .  Eating delicious food activates reward centers in the brain. Dopamine — the  "sex, drugs, and rock 'n' roll" neurotransmitter  — is released every time our taste buds come into contact with yummy flavors.  Taste buds are nerve endings that comprise 50–100 different cells.  It's a fact that people with obesity tend to  lose  their sense of taste. However, until now, researchers had few clues as to how this happens, on a molecular level.  So, scientists at Cornell University in Ithaca, NY, led by Andrew Kaufman and Robin Dando, set out to explore the link between taste buds and obesity.  For 8 weeks, Kaufman and team fed rodents either a regular diet (consisting of only 14 percent fat) or a high-fat diet (which consisted of 58 percent fat).  After the study period, obese mice had fewer taste buds than the regular mice. In fact, the high-fat diet reduced the number of their taste buds by 25 percent. But why did this happen?  The researchers also found that obese mice had higher levels of a pro-inflammatory cell called TNF-alpha, a class of pro-inflammatory cytokine.  Kaufman and team also genetically engineered a mouse model that was incapable of producing these cytokines, and interestingly, the researchers found that these mice did not lose any taste buds — despite being fed a high-fat diet and becoming obese.  Additionally, the scientists injected TNF-alpha into the tongues of normal-weight mice. This caused the rodents to lose taste buds as well, despite the fact that they were not obese.   Research  has shown that obesity increases  inflammation  — which often leads to cardiometabolic disorders — and this new study furthers the theory that the same inflammation is responsible for the reduced number of taste buds.   These findings "demonstrate that chronic low-grade inflammation brought on by obesity [...] is likely the cause of taste dysfunction seen in obese populations — by upsetting this balance of renewal and cell death," write the authors.   In fact, the researchers noted that obese mice had a higher rate of taste bud cell death, while the rate at which new progenitor cells appeared in the tongue decreased.   " These data together suggest that gross adiposity stemming from chronic exposure to a high-fat diet is associated with a low-grade inflammatory response causing a disruption in the balancing mechanisms of taste bud maintenance and renewal."  Robin Dando  "These results may point to novel therapeutic strategies for alleviating taste dysfunction in obese populations."  