 Not everyone who has a hiatal  hernia  will require surgery. Many people will be able to treat the condition with medication or lifestyle changes. However, for those who do need surgery, there is a range of procedures available, the most common being Nissen fundoplication.  This article discusses hiatal hernia surgery procedures, expected recovery times. complications, and risks.  Most hiatal hernias do not cause symptoms, and therefore treatment is not usually necessary. Those who have mild symptoms, such as  heartburn ,  acid reflux , or gastroesophageal reflux disorder ( GERD ) may be able to treat their condition with medications or lifestyle changes.  However, surgery may be recommended if:  There are three types of surgery for a hiatal hernia: Nissen fundoplication (keyhole surgery), open repairs, and endoluminal fundoplication. All three procedures require a general anesthetic.  A Nissen fundoplication is the most  commonly performed  surgery for a hiatal hernia. This procedure uses laparoscopic repair or keyhole surgery. This surgery is minimally invasive and only requires the surgeon to make a few tiny incisions in the abdomen.  The surgeon inserts a laparoscope, which is a thin tube with a light and a camera, into the abdomen to repair the hernia. The surgeon may also tighten the stomach opening to prevent the hernia from coming back.  Laparoscopic repair has some advantages over other types of hiatal hernia surgery. These include:  Open surgery involves making a larger incision in the abdomen so that the surgeon can fix the hernia. This procedure carries more risks than laparoscopic repair.  A surgeon will pull the stomach back up into the abdominal cavity and wrap the upper portion, called the fundus, around the lower part of the food pipe. This creates a tight sphincter which stops the stomach acid from leaking up into the food pipe (reflux).  Sometimes, the surgeon may need to insert a tube to keep the stomach in place. The doctor will remove the tube after several weeks.  This procedure is relatively new and is even less invasive than laparoscopic repair, though it is not commonly used. The surgeon does not need to make any incisions. Instead, they place an endoscope (a tube with a light and camera) down the throat and into the food pipe.  The surgeon tightens the area where the stomach and esophagus join to prevent reflux.  However, this treatment may have its limitations. According to  an interview  published in the journal  Gastroenterology and Hepatology  in 2015, the endoluminal devices developed to date are not entirely reliable, and many people experience their symptoms coming back.  After laparoscopic surgery, most people will not experience much pain, but they may feel discomfort in their abdomen and chest and have difficulty swallowing. This usually passes within  48 hours .  After a laparoscopy, a person may be able to go home the same day if they have recovered from the anesthetic. Otherwise, they may spend a night in the hospital and should be able to walk around the day after the surgery.  A person may soon feel well again but may find that they tire easily.  In the days after surgery, a person will usually be advised to:  In the weeks after surgery, the  UK National Health Service (NHS)  recommend the following:  A person will need to follow a specific diet after surgery. It is advisable to drink clear liquids immediately after surgery and move onto soft or liquefied foods, including mashed potatoes, smoothies, and soups, the following day. A person should also avoid foods that cause gas and bloating.  During recovery, it might be a good idea for people to eat several smaller meals throughout the day instead of three large ones.  Most people can return to their regular diet between  3 to 6 weeks  after surgery.  However, even after a person makes a full recovery, their doctor may recommend they continue to limit or avoid foods that contribute to gas, bloating, and acid reflux symptoms, such as:  Open surgery will usually require a lengthier stay in the hospital and an extended recovery time.  Nissen fundoplication is very effective for relieving symptoms of GERD. A  2009 study  estimates that this surgery achieves a success rate of 90 to 95 percent.  The same study also suggests that even when the laparoscopic surgery has to be carried out again to control reflux symptoms further, the success rate is 86 percent.  The NHS in the UK estimate that  80 to 85 percent  of people will continue to have relief from symptoms 10 years after surgery.  All surgeries carry risks, including the risk of:  However, the risk with laparoscopic procedures is lower than with open surgery. It is  estimated  that laparoscopic repair carries a mortality rate of just 0.57 percent, and open surgery carries a mortality rate of 1.0 to 2.7 percent.  Complications associated with hiatal hernia surgery include:  While surgery is an effective treatment for a hiatal hernia that causes severe symptoms, people with mild symptoms may find relief using medications or home treatments.  Heartburn and acid reflux may be treated with:  Some people can experience relief from reflux by making the following lifestyle changes:  Hiatal hernias usually do not cause symptoms. If they do, symptoms may be treated with medications or lifestyle changes, though if these do not work, surgery may give long-term relief from acid reflux and GERD.  Even when hiatal hernia surgery is necessary, the procedure is usually minimally invasive and has a high success rate. Most people make a full recovery in just a few weeks.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Chung, A. Y. (n.d.). Laparoscopic hiatal hernia repair.  Chung, A. Y. (n.d.). Laparoscopic hiatal hernia repair.  Fass, R. (2017, January). An overview of transoral incisionless fundoplication and magnetic sphincter augmentation for GERD.  Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  13 (1), 50–52.  Frantzides, C. T., Madan, A. K., Carlson, M. A., Zeni, T. M., Zografakis, J. G., Moore, R. M., ... Ayiomamitis, G. D. (2009, April). Laparoscopic revision of failed fundoplication and hiatal herniorraphy.  Journal of Laparoendoscopic &amp; Advanced Surgical Techniques ,  19 (2), 135139.  Fundoplication. (2013, December).  Krystztopik, R. (2008, August). Laparoscopic antireflux surgery information sheet.  Velanovich, V. (2015, May). Nonmedical treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease.  Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  11 (5), 343–345.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  , Jayne Leonard. "What to know about hiatal hernia surgery."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321370.php&gt;    APA  , J. (2018, March 31). "What to know about hiatal hernia surgery."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  