 Wisdom teeth are the last molars to emerge. They typically appear in people between the ages of  15 and 25 years old .  Wisdom teeth often only partially emerge from the gums or emerge at crooked angles. When this happens, they are considered impacted teeth.  A wisdom tooth becoming impacted can lead to decay, infection, and  inflammation  of the surrounding soft tissue. The medical term for this inflammation is pericoronitis.  Here, we list the best foods to eat following a wisdom tooth removal. We also look at foods to avoid and other recovery tips.  A person recovering from a wisdom tooth removal should consume liquids and soft foods. Some of these include:  Avoid eating lots of store-bought products, such as milkshakes with high amounts of added sugar.  Milkshakes are easy to make at home by adding pureed seedless fruit to milk. The fruit will contribute necessary  vitamins  and minerals to the diet. These are especially important in the early stages of recovery.  If a blender is accessible, homemade smoothies can contain a variety of fruit and vegetables. These should provide fiber and nutrients needed for recovery. However, avoid fruits with small seeds.  Soups can be full of flavor and contribute fiber, vitamins, and minerals to the diet. Broths are typically lighter and will have less nutritional value.  While ice cream is cold and soothing, it is very high in sugar and  calories . Yogurt is a more healthful alternative, and a person may wish to add fruit puree.  Mashing vegetables removes the need for chewing. The texture and substance may be welcome after a diet of liquid foods.  Quick tips:  The following foods can be harmful when healing from a wisdom tooth removal:  Acidic foods can also irritate removal sites and slow healing.  One  study  suggests that the pH level of the wound, which indicates its acidity or alkalinity, may affect healing.  However, the study looked at chronic wounds lasting several months. The wound caused by a wisdom tooth removal is not usually chronic and heals more quickly.  Avoiding acidic foods will more likely help with comfort during eating, rather than the ability to heal.  Also, avoid drinking with a straw, because the suction can cause a painful condition called dry socket.  Wisdom tooth removal can either be a quick procedure, lasting  up to 20 minutes , or it may require admission to a hospital and general anesthetic. Quick removals occur under local anesthetic.  Recovery time varies from  person to person , as does the ability to eat afterward.  Immediately after removal and for the  next few days , people should eat liquid and soft foods. An individual's healing and comfort will determine when they can eat more solid foods.  A healthful diet is an  important part  of wound healing. However, pain, inflammation, and jaw stiffness can make eating difficult after wisdom tooth removal.  People may receive specific instructions and  antibiotics , in addition to anti-inflammatories and pain medication. Take every medication as directed.  The dentist or surgeon may also recommend an antiseptic mouthwash to be used regularly, beginning  24 hours  after the surgery.   Antibiotics   Doctors and dentists  may prescribe  an  antibiotic  called amoxicillin after a tooth removal to reduce the risk of infection.  A  review of studies  found that patients who followed an antibiotic regimen had 70 percent lower risk of infection, 38 percent lower risk of dry socket, and less pain overall.  It is  important  to finish a full course of antibiotics to prevent infection and bacteria resistance.   Anti-inflammatories   The dentist or surgeon may prescribe anti-inflammatory drugs after tooth removal. People should take these as advised.   Painkillers   People often take acetaminophen or ibuprofen for pain relief following a wisdom tooth removal.  A  review of studies  found that ibuprofen might be more effective than acetaminophen after this procedure.   Take time off work   The amount of time someone should take off work depends on the severity of the surgery, and may depend on whether general anesthetic was used.  The British National Health Service (NHS) suggest taking  1 or 2 days  off work to rest and recover.  As with any surgery, complications can follow the removal of a wisdom tooth.   Infection   A person can prevent an infection by using antibiotics correctly, following any advice given by the dentist or surgeon, and avoiding the foods listed above.  Signs of infection can include:  See the dentist or surgeon who removed the tooth if these symptoms persist.   Delayed healing   When new bone is slower to grow in the empty socket, this is termed delayed healing. One  study  suggests that this is difficult to predict unless someone has a weakened immune system.  Delayed healing will not necessarily require another trip to the dentist or surgeon, and may only mean that recovery will take longer.   Dry socket   Dry socket occurs when a blood clot does not develop in the empty tooth socket. It may also happen if a clot dislodges, and this is a common complication in people who use straws to drink.  Also, a person has a  higher risk  of developing dry socket if they:  If dry socket occurs, contact the dentist or surgeon who removed the tooth for a follow-up appointment.   Permanent numbing of the jaw   The wisdom teeth are close to nerves that can be injured during a removal. An injury may lead to paresthesia, which is the numbing of the lower jaw, lip, and tongue.  The risk of permanent numbing is very low. A person may experience temporary numbing for  several weeks or months , which can make eating and drinking more difficult.  If numbness lasts for longer than a few months, contact the dentist or surgeon.  Stock the home with liquids and soft foods before a wisdom tooth removal. Eating a healthful diet will improve recovery.  If no complications arise, the tooth socket will heal completely.  If complications do arise, contact the doctor or dentist who performed the removal for a follow-up appointment.    
 Acton, C. (2013). The importance of nutrition in wound healing.  Wounds UK ,  9 (3), 61–64.  Acton, C. (2013). The importance of nutrition in wound healing.  Wounds UK ,  9 (3), 61–64.  Antibiotics: Overview. (2016, June 9).  Bailey, E., Worthington, H. V., van Wijk, A., Yates, J. M., Coulthard, P., &amp; Afzal, Z. (2013, December 12). Ibuprofen and/or paracetamol (acetaminophen) for pain relief after surgical removal of lower wisdom teeth.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .  Cohen, N., &amp; Cohen-Lévy, J. (2014). Healing processes following tooth extraction in orthodontic cases.  Journal of Dentofacial Anomalies and Orthodontics ,  17 (3), 1–21.  Daly, B., Sharif, M. O., Newton, T., Jones, K, &amp; Worthington, H. V. (2012). Local interventions for the management of alveolar osteitis (dry socket).  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , (12).  Esen, A. (2017, April 3). The effects of amoxicillin with or without clavulanic acid on the postoperative complaints after third molar surgery: A retrospective chart analysis.  Journal of Istanbul University Faculty of Dentistry ,  51 (2), 1–6.  Ishii, S., Abe, S., Moro, A., Yokomizo, N., &amp; Kobayashi, Y. (2017, December). The horizontal inclination angle is associated with the risk of inferior alveolar nerve injury during the extraction of mandibular third molars [Abstract].  International Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery ,  46 (12), 1626–1634.  Lodi, G., Figini, L., Sardella, A., Carrassi, A., Del Fabbro, M., &amp; Furness, S. (2012, November 14). Antibiotics to prevent complications following tooth extractions.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , 11.  Ristow, O., Hohlweg-Majert, B., Stürzenbaum, S. R., Kehl, V., Koerdt, S, Hahnefield, L., &amp; Pautke, C. (2014, May). Therapeutic elastic tape reduces morbidity after wisdom teeth removal – a clinical trial [Abstract].  Clinical Oral Investigations ,  18 (4), 1205–1212.  Schreml, S., Meier, R. J., Kirshcbaum, M., Kong, S. C., Gehmert, S., Felthaus, O., … Babilas, P. (2014, April 30). Luminescent dual sensors reveal extracellular pH-gradients and hypoxia on chronic wounds that disrupt epidermal repair.  Theranostics ,  4 (7), 721–735.  Wisdom tooth removal: Complications. (2015, April 20).  Wisdom tooth removal: Overview. (2015, April 20).  Wisdom tooth removal: Recovery. (2015, April 20).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "What foods can I eat after wisdom tooth extraction?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321300.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, March 24). "What foods can I eat after wisdom tooth extraction?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  