 A hysterectomy through the vagina is minimally invasive, so recovery is normally shorter and easier than other types, such as abdominal hysterectomy. It also leaves no visible scar.  In this article, we look at what to expect after a vaginal hysterectomy, including timescales for returning to work, exercising, and driving. We also discuss recovery tips, long-term effects, and possible complications.  Surgeons can perform several types of hysterectomy, with each option dependent on a person's specific condition. The options are:  The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG)  recommend  a vaginal hysterectomy for benign disorders where possible. Surgeons may use this method for the following conditions:  Each woman's recovery after a vaginal hysterectomy is different. The following timescales are a guide to what a person may expect after this surgery.  It is normal to feel drowsy and tired for several hours after surgery while the effects of anesthesia wear off. Nurses and other medical staff may be monitoring  blood pressure , pain, and how the body is recovering, plus other factors.  Some women will be discharged from the hospital on the same day as their surgery, while others may need to stay for a day or longer. This depends on the success of their surgery and if any complications occur.  Right after the procedure, a woman may have:  In the first few weeks after a vaginal hysterectomy, it is normal to have:  Some women can go home on the day of their surgery or within 24 hours. Others may be in the hospital a day or two longer, depending on any complications or medical concerns that may arise.  Although a vaginal hysterectomy is less invasive than other kinds, it still takes some time to recover from and get back to normal activities. After a person leaves the hospital, it is essential that they limit activities for a few weeks and follow the surgeon's home care instructions.  Some women can go back to work after 2 to 3 weeks with their doctor's permission. Others may have to wait up to 6 weeks, depending on their job and how quickly they are recovering.  A woman may be able to drive after 2 to 3 weeks, or once they are:  If a woman is getting some exercise each day, she may be able to get back to her workout routine after 4 to 6 weeks. She should talk with a doctor before resuming strenuous exercise, including HIIT (high-intensity interval training), weight-lifting or contact sports.  Most surgeons advise women to get plenty of rest during the first few weeks after a hysterectomy, though it is important to get up and move around too.  Light exercise, such as walking, helps get the bowels moving and may help reduce the risk of a blood clot. Starting with a short walk and making it longer each day helps build up endurance safely and can help increase energy levels.  There are several things to avoid for a smooth recovery:  If a womn follows the recommendations below, her body will heal quickly and successfully after a vaginal hysterectomy:  The ACOG  reports  that a hysterectomy is safe and has a low risk of complications when performed by a qualified surgeon. Though uncommon, complications include:  An individual can expect certain long-term effects after her uterus has been removed. These include:  Depending on the route of a hysterectomy, a woman will still need regular Pap tests if the cervix was not removed. Other screenings also may be needed if  cancer  or precancerous cells are found.  Some women experience  depression , emotional changes, or a sense of loss after a hysterectomy. They may also find that their interest in sex changes, especially if the ovaries were removed.  If a woman Is struggling with any of these issues, they can talk with a doctor who can offer advise on support, therapy, or medications that may be helpful.  The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG)  recommend  vaginal hysterectomy as the first choice for benign conditions. It is less invasive than other types of hysterectomy, recovery is usually faster and easier, and there is no visible scar.  In some cases, a vaginal hysterectomy is not appropriate, and other kinds of hysterectomy are recommended instead. This is a decision that should be made jointly with a woman and her gynecologist.  Vaginal hysterectomy is usually avoided if a woman has:  A hysterectomy may involve more than the removal of just the uterus. The variations in this surgery include:  It is important to know that the term 'hysterectomy' refers to removal of the uterus. When the fallopian tubes are removed it is called a salpingectomy, and when the ovaries are removed it is called oophorectomy.  When talking with a doctor about surgery, a person should make sure they ask if these procedures are planned in addition to the hysterectomy.  Most women recover quickly from a vaginal hysterectomy and can get back to healthy, active lives.  Making an informed decision about a vaginal hysterectomy will require a conversation with a gynecologist and surgeon to determine whether this surgery is the best option.    
 Choosing the route of hysterectomy for benign disease. (2017, June).  Choosing the route of hysterectomy for benign disease. (2017, June).  Hysterectomy. (2015, March).  Hysterectomy. (2018, February 15).  Recovering well: Information for you after a vaginal hysterectomy. (2015).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "What to expect after a vaginal hysterectomy."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321366.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, March 30). "What to expect after a vaginal hysterectomy."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  