 Because they appear in children more often than adults, flat  warts  are often referred to as juvenile warts. They usually develop in large clusters, containing anywhere from 20 to 200 warts.  Like other warts, these are caused by a contagious virus called the  human papillomavirus  (HPV).  Here, we discuss identifying flat warts and techniques for removing them, some of which can be done at home.  There are several characteristics of this type of wart. Flat warts:  Flat warts commonly surround scratches or nicks on a person's skin. Men and women may notice them around shaving cuts on the face or legs.  Anyone concerned or unsure about a bump on the skin should consult a doctor. If a doctor cannot determine whether the lumps are flat warts on appearance alone they may wish to do a biopsy or make a referral to a dermatologist.  Flat warts usually do not require treatment and tend to disappear on their own. An  estimated  23 percent of warts will disappear within 2 months, and up to 78 percent will disappear within 2 years.  Some people want to get rid of them sooner, and there are many useful treatments.  Over-the-counter treatments are available and a person can  buy them online .  However, scientific research does not confirm the effectiveness of many wart-removal remedies. Consult a doctor before attempting home treatment.  A doctor can remove most types of warts. However, many of these removal techniques can cause warts to spread. Removal methods include:  If the flat warts are on a person's face, hands, or another sensitive area, gentler treatments may be used to avoid scarring.  A doctor may instead prescribe a topical cream designed to irritate the skin so that the wart can be peeled away. These may include retinoic acid or benzoyl-peroxide creams.  The type of wart, a person's overall health and the size of the affected area can affect how long it takes for the lesions to disappear.  Consult a doctor before trying any home remedies for wart removal. Also, be aware that many home remedies are suggested for treating single warts, not clusters of flat warts.  A person should check with their pharmacist before taking any over-the-counter medication, and should always follow the instructions.  Apple cider vinegar is sometimes used to remove warts at home. However, this  can cause  chemical burns and scarring. Be very careful if attempting this home remedy.  The human papillomavirus (HPV) causes all types of warts. It has more than 100 different strains, and strains 3, 10, 28, and 49 can cause flat warts. These strains are benign, while other strains of HPV, such as those that affect the genitals,  may increase  the risk of developing  cervical cancer .  A person is more likely to develop warts if they:  Around  7 to 10 percent of people  are estimated to have non-genital strains of HPV, with many cases appearing between the ages of 12 and 16. Children and young people usually come into close contact more frequently than adults and are more likely to transfer the virus.  Because HPV is highly contagious, people with warts should take steps to avoid spreading the virus.  They can do this by:  Avoid contracting HPV by:  While proper hygiene and the precautions above can help, a person may not be able to avoid contracting HPV.  Flat warts are likely to go away on their own and should not cause complications. However, some people seek treatment to eliminate them more quickly.  Warts may return and can spread to other parts of the body. People with warts can pass them on.  It a wart grows larger, bleeds, or changes color, contact a doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bunick, C. G., Lott, J. P., Warren, C. B., Galan, A., Bolognia, J., &amp; King, B. A. (2012, October). Chemical burn from topical apple cider vinegar [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  67 (4), 143–144.  Bunick, C. G., Lott, J. P., Warren, C. B., Galan, A., Bolognia, J., &amp; King, B. A. (2012, October). Chemical burn from topical apple cider vinegar [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  67 (4), 143–144.  Dermatologists share tips to treat common warts [Press release]. (2015, October 8).  HPV (human papillomavirus). (2018, January 24).  Human papillomavirus (HP) and cervical cancer [Fact sheet]. (2016, June).  Lipke, M. M. (2006, December 1). An armamentarium of wart treatments.  Clinical Medicine &amp; Research ,  4 (4), 273–293.  Warts and verrucas. (2017, September 8).  Warts: Who gets and causes. (n.d.).  Zaman, H. (2015, June 09). Warts and verrucas: Assessment and treatment.  The Pharmaceutical Journal ,  294 (7867).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What to know about flat warts."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321355.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, March 29). "What to know about flat warts."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  