 These  warts  are also called digitate or facial warts. They are harmless and usually disappear without treatment. However, many people prefer to remove them.  Home removal may cause complications, so it is always best to have a wart removed by a doctor.  In this article, we look at how to identify filiform warts, prevention, and the treatments, medications, and home remedies that can remove them.  The following characteristics give filiform warts their unusual appearance.  Filiform warts are:  These warts, like others, are caused by the  human papillomavirus  (HPV). This virus can be spread through skin-to-skin contact, and the risk of infection is higher if the skin is broken.  Filiform warts may disappear on their own over time. Facial warts tend to be harder to treat than those located elsewhere.  Anyone who wishes to remove a wart quickly should seek medical treatment.  Filiform warts can be removed in several ways. However, there is currently no cure for HPV, so warts can reappear.  A doctor may recommend the following methods for removing filiform warts:  For warts that do not respond to the methods above, a doctor may suggest:  If a person has a weakened immune system, due to a chronic illness or conditions such as  HIV  or  AIDS , it may be more difficult to remove warts.  Several home remedies can remove warts. However, there has not been enough research to show that these remedies work. The medical community has not confirmed the safety or effectiveness of home remedies for warts.  Filiform warts appear on sensitive areas, and attempting to remove them with home remedies can result in scarring. Importantly, do not use home wart-freezing kits on sensitive parts of the body.  The following are home remedies that some people attempt to remove filiform warts:  If pain or a burning sensation follows the use of any home remedy, discontinue it immediately.  Home removal remedies may be especially dangerous for people with  diabetes  and warts on their feet. Diabetes can cause a loss of feeling in the feet, so an initial injury may go unnoticed.  Filiform warts are caused by HPV strains 1, 2, 4, 27, and 29. However, exposure to these strains does not guarantee that warts will develop.  HPV usually spreads through skin-to-skin contact. Clothing or objects that have touched warts can also spread the virus.  A person is more likely to develop filiform warts if they have:  A person can reduce their risk of contracting HPV by having an up-to-date vaccine and using condoms during sexual activity.  An individual with HPV can lower the risk of infecting others by:  Get tested for HPV, even if no symptoms are present. Many people are unaware that they have the virus.  Filiform warts are benign, meaning that they are not cancerous. However, they can cause discomfort.  See a doctor if any of the following symptoms accompany a filiform wart:  Many people who do not experience discomfort choose to remove their filiform warts for cosmetic reasons.  Filiform warts are not cancerous, and very rarely cause complications. They often disappear without treatment.  However, these warts are highly contagious and may cause irritation, such as an itchy feeling. Many people opt for medical treatment to eliminate filiform warts.    
 Bunick, C. G., Lott, J. P., Warren, C. B., Galan, A., Bolognia, J., &amp; King, B. A. (2012, October). Chemical burn from topical apple cider vinegar [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  67 (4), 143–144.  Bunick, C. G., Lott, J. P., Warren, C. B., Galan, A., Bolognia, J., &amp; King, B. A. (2012, October). Chemical burn from topical apple cider vinegar [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  67 (4), 143–144.  Dinulos, J. G. H. (2016, October). Warts: Verrucae vulgaris.  Johnston, C. S., &amp; Gaas, C. A. (2006, May 30). Vinegar: Medicinal uses and antiglycemic effect.  Medscape General Medicine ,  8 (2), 61.  Petrosky, E., Bocchini, J. A., Hariri, S., Chesson, H., Curtis, C. R., Saraiya, M., ... &amp; Markowitz, L. E. (2015, March 27). Use of 9-valent human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine: Updated HPV vaccination recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices.  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report ,  64 (11), 300–304.  Stulberg, D. L., &amp; Hutchinson, A. G. (2003, March 15). Molluscum contagiosum and warts.  American Family Physician ,  67 (6), 1233–1240.  Trottier, H., &amp; Franco, E. L. (2006, March 30). The epidemiology of genital human papillomavirus infection.  Vaccine ,  24 (1), 4–15.  Warts. (n.d.).  Warts and verrucas. (2017, September 08).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What to know about filiform warts."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321345.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, March 28). "What to know about filiform warts."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  