 Rice water is the starchy water left over after rice is cooked or left to soak. It is thought to make the hair smooth and shiny, as well as help it grow faster.  This article looks at the beauty benefits of rice water hair treatments and whether scientific research backs up the purported results.  Rice grains contain  75–80 percent  starch.  Rice water is the starchy water that remains after soaking or cooking rice.  Rice water is thought to contain many of the  vitamins  and minerals contained in rice. These include:  According to  researchers , women in the Heian period (794 to 1185 CE) in Japan had floor-length hair they kept healthy by bathing it in rice water.  A modern-day equivalent of this story can be found in China. The Yao women, who live in a village called Huangluo in China, are famed for having hair that averages 6 feet long.  In addition to its incredible length, the Yao women's hair is said to keep its color for longer, as they do not begin to get gray hair until they reach their 80s.  The Yao women credit the length and color of their hair to the fact they bathe it in rice water.  In recent years, beauty advice websites and product developers have caught on to this tradition. Now, the rice water trend is spreading.  Advocates of using rice water for hair believe it:  As the popularity of using rice water for hair increases, there is growing anecdotal evidence about its benefits. But are the claims scientifically proven?  At first glance, a  2010 paper  suggests they may be. The authors note that rice water may reduce surface friction and increase hair elasticity. However, the study relies on historical examples to draw unsupported conclusions.  Elsewhere, a  research facility  in Japan has developed an imaging technique that visualizes the strengthening effect of inositol on hair. Inositol is contained in rice water.  It is important to note that this research is published directly by a facility that may have commercial interests.  To date, the benefits of rice water for hair remain unproven. More research is needed to support anecdotal evidence about the benefits of rice water for hair.  There are several different ways to make rice water, including  Soaking is the quickest way to make rice water.  To use this method:  Some rice water advocates claim fermented rice water has more benefits than plain rice water.  According to a  2012 study , fermented substances have a higher amount of antioxidants. Antioxidants may combat hair and skin cell damage, which is why they are typical ingredients in beauty products.  To ferment rice water, follow steps 1–4 of the soaking method. Before straining, leave the rice water to stand at room temperature for up to 2 days, allowing it to ferment. Strain the rice water into a clean bowl before use.  Another way to make rice water is by boiling the rice.  Cover ½ cup of rice with double the water typically used for cooking. Cook the rice in boiling water and strain the rice water into a clean bowl before use.  Rice water can replace a commercial conditioner. To do this, a person should:  In addition to its potential beauty benefits for the hair, rice water may also benefit the skin.  A  2002 study  found that the starch in rice water helped damaged skin heal for people with dermatitis.  Rinsing hair in rice water is a traditional beauty treatment popular in many regions in Asia.  Having gained attention online, this alternative beauty remedy is now popular across the world.  Many people find rice water to be a beneficial hair treatment. Historical examples and anecdotal evidence suggest rice water may improve the strength, texture, and growth of hair.  Most scientific evidence about the treatment is inconclusive, so more research is needed to prove the benefits of using rice water.  While its benefits for hair remain unproven, using a rice water hair rinse is safe to try at home and may also be used on the skin. It has been found to promote skin health in people with dermatitis.   Article last updated on Wed 21 November 2018.  Visit our  Complementary Medicine / Alternative Medicine  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Complementary Medicine / Alternative Medicine.   
 De Paepe, K., Hachem, J. P., Vanpee, E., Roseeuw, D., &amp; Rogiers, V. (2002). Effect of rice starch as a bath additive on the barrier function of healthy but SLS-damaged skin and skin of atopic patients [Abstract].  Acta Dermato-Venereologica ,  82 (3), 184–186.  De Paepe, K., Hachem, J. P., Vanpee, E., Roseeuw, D., &amp; Rogiers, V. (2002). Effect of rice starch as a bath additive on the barrier function of healthy but SLS-damaged skin and skin of atopic patients [Abstract].  Acta Dermato-Venereologica ,  82 (3), 184–186.  Development of hair-care products from rice water. (n.d.).  Hunaefi, D., Akumo, D. N., Riedel, H., &amp; Iryna, S. (2012). The effect of  lactobacillus plantarum  ATCC 8014 and  lactobacillus acidophilus  NCFM fermentation on antioxidant properties of selected in  vitro  sprout culture of  orthosiphon aristatus  (Java tea) as a model study.  Antioxidants ,  1 (1), 4–32.  Inamasu, S., Ikuyama. R., Fujisaki, Y., &amp; Sugimoto, K. I. (2010, September 1). Abstracts: The effect of rinse water obtained from the washing of rice (YU-SU-RU) as a hair treatment [Abstract].  International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,  32 (5), 392–393.  Verma, D. K., &amp; Srivastav, P. P. (2017, January). Proximate composition, mineral content and fatty acids analyses or aromatic and non-aromatic Indian rice.  Rice Science ,  24 (1), 21–31.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What does rice water do for your hair?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Nov. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321353.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, November 21). "What does rice water do for your hair?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  