 A person might feel sick continuously for a few days, weeks, or months due to a lack of sleep,  stress ,  anxiety , or a poor diet.  In other cases, there may be an underlying medical disorder.  According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as of 2012, around  50 percent  of American adults had at least one chronic or long-term condition.  If a person is pregnant or may be pregnant, feeling sick continuously may be  morning sickness , which can occur at any time of the day and makes a person feel sick with or without vomiting.  In this article, we look at the causes, symptoms, and treatments for a person feeling sick all the time.  Below are some of the common reasons why someone might always feel sick, plus their symptoms, and how to treat each one.  Many people may not associate anxiety with feeling sick, but often it can make a person feel sick to their stomach.  A person with anxiety may feel nauseous, or they may find that they get sick more often because their anxiety weakens their immune responses.  Other symptoms of anxiety include:  It is normal for people to have some anxiety. When a person feels anxious continuously, and this gets in the way of daily life, they may wish to talk to a doctor about anxiety disorders.  If a person feels anxiety on most days for  6 months or more , they may be diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).  A person may have a specific anxiety disorder or a  phobia  if their anxiety is specific to certain situations, such as social contact or unhygienic places.   Treatment   Anxiety and anxiety disorders are  very treatable . Possible options include:  Experiencing stress here and there is completely normal, but continual stress can greatly impact the mind and body.  Extreme stress, such as that caused by grief, shock, or traumatic experiences can also affect people physically.  People with chronic or extreme stress can have many different symptoms, as stress affects the immune system, nervous system, hormones, and heart functioning.  Other symptoms of chronic stress can include:   Treatment   The only definite way to treat chronic stress is to address and change the underlying cause. However, several lifestyle habits can greatly reduce stress and its symptoms.  Many traditional and alternative therapies exist to help manage or alleviate stress.  Good ways for someone to treat their stress include:  Proper, regular sleep is important for mental and physical health. When someone is chronically sleep-deprived, they may feel sick all the time.  Many chronic medical conditions can interfere with sleep, usually intensifying the symptoms of both conditions.  Common symptoms of chronic  sleep deprivation , or a lack of adequate sleep, include:   Treatment   Common ways to improve sleep deprivation include:   Dehydration  and  malnutrition , or having a poor diet, both put stress on the body. A chronic lack of proper nutrients and hydration can cause many problems, including:   Treatment   Recommendations for daily water intake differ, depending on a person's age, sex, pregnancy status, and illness. It is often said that most people should drink at least  6 to 8 glasses  of water daily.  If a person suspects they are dehydrated, they should visit their doctor to find out the best treatments.  To treat and prevent malnutrition, people should eat a healthy, balanced diet rich in foods, including:  Poor physical hygiene, especially oral, can cause a variety of symptoms that could make someone feel sick all of the time. Poor hygiene makes it easier for bacteria to grow and thrive, which can result in infection.  The skin is the body's natural barrier to things that can cause infection, such as bacteria and viruses.  Washing the body, and keeping clothes and bedding clean can help to keep bacteria out, and keep natural, healthy bacterial communities in check.  People have a lot of blood vessels in their gums. This blood supply means that chronic, untreated gum infections can spread through the body. Severe  gum disease  has also been linked to several medical conditions.   Treatment   Regular washing of the body, clothes, and bedding should help treat and prevent most infections related to poor hygiene. And practicing oral hygiene habits can help treat, and greatly reduce the likelihood of developing gum infections and disease.  Good oral hygiene habits include:  Alcohol, caffeine, recreational drugs, and many prescription medications are known to interfere with sleep, which can lead to a general feeling of being unwell.  An overuse, or long-term use, of chemicals that act as stimulants or depressants, can cause certain mental and physical changes.   Treatment   A person should avoid drinks, foods, and drugs with these chemicals in them, especially in the evening or before bedtime. It is important to remember that caffeine and sugar can have a strong effect on how a person feels.  When someone's symptoms are caused by prescription medication, they should speak to their doctor to find an alternative.  Autoimmune conditions weaken the immune system and make it easier to develop infections, colds, and flu. This means that people with chronic immune conditions tend to feel sick more often and may take longer to recover from illnesses.  Common immune conditions that can make people feel sick all the time include:  Autoimmune conditions cause many symptoms, including fatigue, rashes, insomnia, and gastrointestinal problems.   Treatment   The only way to treat symptoms related to an autoimmune condition is to seek medical treatment and monitoring for the condition.  A person who has a lot of social contact with other people is exposed to things that cause infection, such as viruses and bacteria, more than other people.  People may be exposed to more infections if they:   Treatment   A person cannot always avoid social contact, though they can use the following techniques to reduce their risk of infection:  People with  anemia  do not have enough hemoglobin, the part of red blood cells that carries oxygen, in their blood. When their tissues and cells do not get enough oxygen, they cannot function properly. This means that people with anemia tend to always feel under the weather.  Common symptoms of anemia include:   Treatment   Often, the easiest way to treat anemia is to make dietary changes or to take iron supplements, available for  purchase online .  Foods rich in iron include:  People who always feel sick are more likely to have to skip work or school, or they may be less able to perform day-to-day activities. This is especially true when a person has a chronic condition.  Chronic conditions can also cause feelings of anxiety and interfere with activities that are important to good health, such as proper sleep, exercise, and socializing.  Though the specific complications depend on the cause, a person who feels sick all the time, and whose symptoms do not improve, may develop depression, anxiety, or fatigue.  Anyone who feels sick for more than a week or two should seek medical attention. A doctor can figure out the cause of the sickness and provide treatment.  A doctor may also recommend lifestyle changes or therapies that can reduce symptoms.  It is also important to talk with a doctor about prolonged sickness so they can rule out or treat underlying medical conditions.  Feeling run down, getting sick often, or feeling nauseous always is often explained by a lack of sleep, poor diet, anxiety or stress. However, it could also be a sign of pregnancy or chronic illness.  If a person is unsure what is causing them to feel sick all the time, they should consult their doctor for an accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 10 medical reasons for feeling tired. (2018, March 8).  10 medical reasons for feeling tired. (2018, March 8).  Autoimmune diseases: What autoimmune diseases affect women, and what are their symptoms? (2017, April 28).  Beyond worry: How psychologists help with anxiety disorders. (2016, October).  Chronic disease overview. (2017, June 28).  Greist, J. H. (n.d.). Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).  Gum disease. (Feburary, 2018).  Hunger and malnutrition. (2015, September).  Six to eight glasses of water 'still best'. (2011, July 13).  Understanding chronic stress. (n.d.).  Why a lack of sleep is bad for your health. (2015, June 15).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Why do I always feel sick?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321389.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, April 3). "Why do I always feel sick?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  