 Most people experience morning  diarrhea  at some point. Occasional morning diarrhea may be a sign of a temporary illness or the result of lifestyle choices.  However, having morning diarrhea on a regular basis may be a sign of an underlying condition.  Lifestyle choices that may cause morning diarrhea include some of the following common habits:  Temporary conditions that may cause morning diarrhea include:  Long-term conditions that may cause morning diarrhea include:  When lifestyle factors cause morning diarrhea, a person can make some changes to try to reduce the irritants causing the problem.  If an allergy is responsible for causing morning diarrhea, then the best way to prevent the condition occurring is to cut any irritating foods out of the diet completely.  Anyone who thinks that IBS or IBD is causing the morning diarrhea must see a doctor for an accurate diagnosis. The first step in diagnosing the cause of the morning diarrhea is to identify the symptoms of each condition.  The symptoms of IBS, in addition to morning diarrhea, are:  The symptoms of IBD, in addition to morning diarrhea, are:  A doctor can help determine whether a person has IBS or IBD. The treatments for each condition are as follows:  IBS treatments include:  Anti-inflammatory medications for IBD target inflammation in the gut that cause symptoms including:  Dietary changes also help to manage IBD. A  2017 study  found that following the autoimmune protocol diet (AIP), which involves eliminating certain foods, could help control IBD symptoms.  Similarly to many other conditions, morning diarrhea is less likely to affect people who lead a healthful lifestyle, eat well, and exercise regularly.  Making positive lifestyle changes to reduce gut irritation, such as stopping smoking or reducing drinking, are good ways of preventing morning diarrhea.  Taking steps to reduce the effects of psychological stress is another good way to promote healthful bowel movements.   Yoga , meditation, and running are all effective ways to reduce the impact stress has on the mind and body.  Limiting quantities of the foods that are likely to irritate the gut is also a good idea. Foods to limit, include:  Having diarrhea can cause  dehydration . This can affect older people, children, and those with underlying conditions more seriously.  Drinking plenty of fluids to help prevent dehydration is essential if someone has diarrhea.   Food poisoning  results in a higher risk of becoming dehydrated.  Most causes of morning diarrhea are temporary and soon pass. People should speak to their doctor if the diarrhea does not go away.  The doctor can help diagnose the underlying condition causing morning diarrhea. Causes may include IBD or IBS. Once the doctor has diagnosed the cause, they can recommend appropriate treatment.  If the cause is food poisoning, people are at higher risk of dehydration. They should seek medical attention if they are unable to keep down any liquids and are unable to rehydrate.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Altobelli, E., Del Negro, V., Angeletti, P. M., &amp; Latella, G. (2017, September). Low-FODMAP diet improves irritable bowel syndrome symptoms: A meta-analysis.  Nutrients ,  9 (9), 940.  Altobelli, E., Del Negro, V., Angeletti, P. M., &amp; Latella, G. (2017, September). Low-FODMAP diet improves irritable bowel syndrome symptoms: A meta-analysis.  Nutrients ,  9 (9), 940.  Konijeti, G. G., Kim, N., Lewis, J. D., Groven, S., Chandrasekaran, A., Grandhe, S., … Torkamani, A. (2017, November). Efficacy of the autoimmune protocol diet for inflammatory bowel disease.  Inflammatory Bowel Diseases ,  23 (11), 2054–2060.  Rahimi, R., Nikfar, S., Rezaie, A., &amp; Abdollahi, M. (2009, April 7). Efficacy of tricyclic antidepressants in irritable bowel syndrome: A meta-analysis.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  15 (13), 1548–1533.  Roohafza, H., Bidaki, E. Z., Hasanzadeh-Keshteli, A., Daghaghzade, H., Afashar, H., &amp; Abidi, P. (2016). Anxiety, depression and distress among irritable bowel syndrome and their subtypes: An epidemiological population based study.  Advanced Biomedical Research ,  5 (183).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What could be the cause of morning diarrhea?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321319.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, March 26). "What could be the cause of morning diarrhea?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  