 However, some people experience this pressure constantly, and it may feel like an ache. This is not normal and is likely caused by interstitial  cystitis . This condition is sometimes known simply as bladder pain syndrome.  Here, we look at the causes of interstitial cystitis and symptoms that may accompany pressure on the bladder. We also discuss treatment options and prevention tips.  The medical community is unsure what causes interstitial cystitis or the bladder pressure involved.  Usually, as the bladder fills up, it sends signals to the brain, telling it to use the bathroom. The body interprets this communication as the need to urinate.  Researchers suspect that in people who experience persistent bladder pressure, signals to urinate are sent more frequently than necessary.  Other causes of persistent bladder pressure can include:   Contributing factors  can increase the risk of developing interstitial cystitis.  The condition is more common in adults than children, for example. Also,  twice as many  women have interstitial cystitis than men, according to the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases in the United States.  The presence of other  health conditions  may increase the likelihood of developing persistent bladder pressure. These conditions include chronic pain or  fatigue  and  irritable bowel syndrome .  The most notable symptom of interstitial cystitis is bladder pressure or pain, which can range from mild to severe. The pain or pressure may also be constant, or it may fade and return.  Other symptoms of interstitial cystitis may include:  A person may easily mistake interstitial cystitis for a  urinary tract infection  because many symptoms are similar.  However, urinary tract infections can also cause different symptoms, and these should not be ignored. They include:  Anyone who suspects that they have a urinary tract infection should see a doctor.  A person with lasting bladder pressure should see a doctor, who can rule out a urinary tract infection and diagnose interstitial cystitis.  The doctor will likely test a urine sample and examine the pelvic region. If the doctor detects no infection, they will often perform a physical exam and ask the person to record:  Bring this log to a follow-up appointment. After reviewing it, the doctor may order one or more of the following tests:  A doctor may also collect a sample of tissue from the lining of the bladder to rule out  cancer .  Treatment of bladder pressure often varies from person to person. A person may discuss the following options with their doctor:  Some medicines may be inserted directly into the bladder.  Below are two additional therapies that may help with interstitial cystitis.  Bladder distension is used to diagnose interstitial cystitis. With the person under anesthesia, a doctor will fill the bladder with air, which can increase capacity for urine.  A doctor may recommend transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation to relieve pain and urgency.  This procedure helps to strengthen the muscles around the bladder and can keep impulses sent from the bladder to the brain under control. It is not effective in all patients, however.  Basic lifestyle changes can prevent persistent bladder pressure.  The best tip is to avoid foods and drinks that trigger these feelings of pressure. While no link between diet and bladder pressure has been proven,  research  strongly suggests it.  It may help to avoid the following:  A person may want to identify triggers of bladder pressure specific to them. It may help to keep a record of each meal and whether the symptom was present.  A person may also reduce or prevent lasting bladder pressure by:  Interstitial cystitis may last a lifetime, but treatments can help to relieve symptoms.  It is essential that people with persistent bladder pressure seek diagnosis and treatment. If left untreated, interstitial cystitis can lead to further complications.  See a doctor as soon as possible, to rule out the presence of infections or more severe conditions.    
 Eating, diet, &amp; nutrition for interstitial cystitis. (2017, July).  Eating, diet, &amp; nutrition for interstitial cystitis. (2017, July).  Interstitial cystitis: oral pentosan polysulfate sodium. (2015, April).  Interstitial cystitis painful bladder syndrome. (2017, July).  Mullins, C., Bavendam, T., Kirkali, Z., &amp; Kusek, J. W. (2015, October). Novel research approaches for interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome: Thinking beyond the bladder.  Translational Andrology and Urology ,  4 (5), 524–533.  What is interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What causes bladder pressure?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321339.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, March 27). "What causes bladder pressure?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  