  Pimples  develop when pores on the skin become clogged with too much oil (sebum), dead skin cells, or bacteria.  Acne  tends to occur most often during  puberty  when the sebaceous glands typically produce more sebum but can develop at any time.  A pimple is more likely to become infected when it is popped. Infected pimples also occur when a person has  cystic acne .  Skin infections such as  boils  and  impetigo  are caused by a staph bacteria called  Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus)  and may be more challenging to treat.  Read on to find out more about causes, symptoms, and treatments.  A bacterium known as  Propionibacterium acnes  lives naturally on the skin. It is typically harmless, but when a sebaceous gland becomes blocked, it can start to reproduce and trigger an immune response, causing the pimple to become inflamed and grow larger.  Popping pimples can cause an infection because bacteria can enter the wound, or it can rupture the pustule inside the skin.  Cystic acne is the most severe form of acne, where pimples become large and pus-filled. This form of acne is more likely to cause scarring.  Skin infections such as boils and impetigo are caused by a staph bacteria called  Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus)  and may be more challenging to treat.  Unlike a standard pimple, infected pimples can run deep into the skin and create a bigger, more painful bump.  Infected pimples may have the following symptoms:  A pimple infected with  S. aureus  may be a boil. Boils are contagious, and although the infections are usually minor, a person might experience the following symptoms:  Staph infections may also cause impetigo, which is a highly contagious skin infection. Small, itchy or painful blisters or sores usually appear on the hands or face first but can spread to other parts of the body. With treatment, impetigo usually clears up within  10 days . It is common in children.   Rosacea  can also cause infected pimples. Rosacea is a long-term condition that usually causes pimples and redness on the face, sometimes with a burning or stinging sensation.  Anyone who is unsure what the infected bump on their skin is should see a doctor or a dermatologist, (skin doctor) for diagnosis.  Treating an infected pimple involves killing the bacteria that causes the infection. Medications to treat regular pimples will not treat infected pimples, although they can help reduce the spread to other areas.  When an infection is severe, a doctor may prescribe  antibiotics , which can help reduce bacteria and inflammation. However, they may be less effective if a person takes them lots of times. Antibiotics are available as creams or oral tablets.  To treat an infected pimple at home, a person can use the following:  Other tips that can help to treat and prevent infected pimples include:  If the infection does not go away after a couple of weeks, or the symptoms are very severe, more invasive treatments may be necessary. Options could include laser surgery or light therapy to kill the bacteria causing the infection.  Infected pimples can often be treated using OTC medication and home remedies, but severe infections may require antibiotics. The infection may take several weeks to disappear.  Anyone who is experiencing inflammation, infection, or pimples near the eyes should see a doctor. A person should also see a doctor if their symptoms do not improve after a couple of weeks or get worse.  If a person has a pimple that is unusually large and painful, it could be a boil or skin abscess caused by an infection. If a person suspects this is the cause, they should consult their doctor to find the most appropriate treatment.  Most people will have pimples at some time or another, but it is essential not to pop them or expose them to bacteria, or they may get infected. An infected pimple will usually clear up after a few weeks without the need for medical treatment.  In severe cases, however, more invasive treatments may be necessary to kill the bacteria causing the infection. It is important to consult a doctor if a more serious condition is suspected, as infected pimples can cause permanent scarring or may be contagious.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Acne. (n.d.).  Acne. (n.d.).  Acne. (2016, April 28).  https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/acne/   Boils. (2017, July 18). Boils.  Impetigo. (2018, January 11).  https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/impetigo/   Rosacea. (2016, July 8).  Ravenscroft, J. (2005, November 21). Evidence based update on the management of acne.  Archives of Disease in Childhood-Education and Practice ,  90 (4), ep98–ep101.  Staphylococcal infections. (2015, April 15).  Zaenglein, A. L., Pathy, A. L., Schlosser, B. J., Alikhan, A., Baldwin, H. E., Berson, D. S., ... Bhushan, R. (2016, May). Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris.  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  74 (5), 945–973.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "Is my pimple infected?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321381.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, March 31). "Is my pimple infected?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  