 During the healing process, scars often form. Scars, which are areas of thick, discolored skin, often develop after damaged skin causes cells to die. The body produces a protein called  collagen  to repair the damaged skin, which leads to a scar.  Burn scars can be large or small depending on how much of the skin is damaged. The severity of the burn will determine whether these scars will fade or remain permanently visible.  In this article, we look at which types of burn are more likely to scar, how to reduce burn scars, and how to prevent long-term scarring from a recent burn.  The likelihood and severity of getting a burn depend on how long a person is exposed to the heat as well as its intensity.  Burns are classified depending on how much of the skin they affect:  Scars caused by second and third-degree burns are categorized according to their appearance and how they affect the skin:  Quick treatment and proper wound care is often the best way to prevent or minimize the appearance of scars.  Many scars fade over time. However, keloid scars often  do not fade  by themselves and may require treatment.  Once a scar has already formed, a person can reduce the appearance of the scar by:  If burn scars cause significant distress, a person can talk to their doctor about options for reducing scar tissue. These treatments involve working with the damaged collagen.  The  AAD  recommend the following medical options for reducing scars:  While these treatments can help to reduce scars, they may not remove them completely, and healing can take time.  Avoid using creams that contain  vitamin  A or vitamin E on scars, as this  can make  them more noticeable. However, it is important to keep the skin moisturized.  After a recent burn, a person can use several methods to prevent or reduce the severity of scars:  Directly after the burn occurs, a person can:  Shortly after the burn has healed, a person can:  To ensure a severe burn is healing well make regular appointments with a doctor. They can advise on how to prevent or lessen scarring and check the burn is healing as it should.  Quick and proper treatment of a burn will reduce the risk and severity of any scarring.  A person can usually treat a first-degree burn at home by soaking the burn in cool water for a minimum of 5 minutes.  People who have a second-degree burn should usually see a medical professional. However, people can treat  small burns  at home in the following ways:  Third-degree burns are very serious and require immediate medical attention.  Treatment for third-degree burns include:  If a burn does not heal within a week, regardless of its size or severity, make an appointment with a doctor. If the burn scar is severe or it does not fade in time, a person should also consult their doctor.  Applying aloe vera gel, eating a diet rich in  antioxidant  foods, drinking plenty of water, and taking certain supplements may improve a person's healing process. However, it is essential to consult a doctor before putting anything on severe burns and taking new supplements as these may interfere with other treatments.  The majority of minor burns will heal without causing any further problems and do not require medical care. More severe burns need medical management, may leave scars, and carry a higher risk of complications, such as:   Infection   Burns cause open wounds where bacteria and other germs can enter the body. The resulting infections can be minor and easily treatable or can develop into more severe infections, such as  sepsis . Sepsis occurs when the infection enters a person's bloodstream and can be life-threatening.   Dehydration   Burns cause the body to lose fluid. Losing excessive amounts of fluid can cause  dehydration , which can affect the volume of blood flowing through the body.   Low body temperature   A person's skin helps to regulate their body temperature. When a burn damages the skin extensively, the resulting heat loss can result in  hypothermia , when a person's body temperature suddenly drops to dangerously low levels.   Contractures   Contractures occur during the healing process when scar tissue forms. The scar tissue can tighten the skin, causing restricted movement in bones or joints.   Muscle and tissue damage   More severe burns often penetrate all the layers of a person's skin and can reach the muscles and tissue, which can cause long-term damage to these structures.   Self-esteem and emotional issues   Burn scars can harm a person's self-confidence or self-esteem, particularly when they are in an area that is not easy to hide, such as the face. This can lead to emotional and psychological distress.  The outlook depends on the severity of the burn is and how quickly treatment is given. Small first-degree burns should heal by themselves with little to no scarring. Second and third-degree burns may leave scars though treatment, such as skin grafts and pressure clothing, can help to reduce their visibility and encourage faster healing.  Some of the home remedies listed on this pages are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Avoiding household burns. (n.d.).  Avoiding household burns. (n.d.).  Burns. (n.d.).  Burns [Fact sheet]. (2018, January 26).  Burns and scalds. (2015, November 16).  Burns: Preventing burns in your home. (2017, March 23).  Goel, A., &amp; Shrivastava, P. (2010, September). Post-burn scars and scar contractures.  Indian Journal of Plastic Surgery ,  43 , S63–S71.  How to prevent scarring from a second degree burn. (2014, September 14).  Maenthaisong, R., Chaiyakunapruk, N., Niruntraporn, S., &amp; Kongkaew, C. (2007, May 17). The efficacy of aloe vera used for burn wound healing: A systematic review [Abstract]. Burns, 33(6), 713–718.  Peck, M. D. (2017, November 30). Prevention of fire and burn injuries.  Preventing scars and contractures. (n.d.).  Proper wound care: How to minimize a scar. (n.d.).  Purdue, G. F., Arnoldo, B. D., &amp; Hunt, J. L. (2011, May). Acute assessment and management of burn injuries [Abstract].  Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics  ,  22  (2), 201–212.  Puri, N., &amp; Talwar, A. (2009, July–December). The efficacy of silicone gel for the treatment of hypertrophic scars and keloids.  Journal of Cutaneous and Aesthetic Surgery ,  2 (2), 104–106.  Scars. Overview. (n.d.). retrieved from  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/bumps-and-growths/scars   Scars: Diagnosis, treatment, and outcome. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/bumps-and-growths/scars#treatment   Scar treatments can improve patients' quality of life. (2016, July 28).  Torpy, J. M., Lynm, C., &amp; Glass, R. M. (2009, October 28). Burn injuries.  JAMA ,  302 (16), 1828.  What do I need in my first aid kit? (2017, June 7).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "How to get rid of burn scars."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321314.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, March 25). "How to get rid of burn scars."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  