 Although everyone heals differently, a person may experience some common side effects after surgery that may initially affect sex.  However, given time to heal, and many women find their enjoyment of sexual activity remains the same after a hysterectomy, while others say it improves. Read on to find out what to expect.  According to the  American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists  (ACOG), after a hysterectomy, a woman should refrain from putting anything in the vagina for about 6 weeks. This includes a penis, fingers, sex toys, tampons, and douches.  It is important to understand that this recommendation is based on the average time it takes to heal, which is about 6 to 8 weeks. However, everyone heals at a different rate.  Doctors recommend that women refrain from sexual activity after a hysterectomy until all surgery-related vaginal discharge has stopped and any wounds have healed.  There are no official guidelines on when it is safe to have an orgasm, for example, from manual masturbation with the fingers. But, it is vital to give the body time to heal, and an orgasm tenses the muscles in the pelvic region, potentially straining any healing wounds.  There are no expectations about when a woman should feel like having sex after a hysterectomy.  Some women may experience vaginal bleeding and pain for several weeks after surgery, and they may have little interest in sex.  In addition to physical effects, a hysterectomy can have a significant emotional impact and affect how a woman feels about having sex.  A woman's feelings about sex after a hysterectomy may vary depending on the reasons for surgery, her personal situation, and whether surgery has induced  menopause .  Although a hysterectomy may cause certain changes in the pelvic areas, it usually does not affect the ability to enjoy sex. In most cases, a woman can resume a healthy, fulfilling sex life after she heals.  Typically, removing the uterus and cervix does not affect the sensation in the vagina or a woman's ability to have an orgasm. The vagina may be slightly shorter than before the surgery, but this should not cause problems with sexual activity.  As long as a woman has had sufficient time to heal, bleeding or pain should not occur. If bleeding or pain does occur during sex, a woman should talk with her doctor.  According to a  review of several studies , having a hysterectomy does not usually negatively affect sexuality.  Most women report either improved or unchanged sexual function after having a hysterectomy. When sexual dysfunction does occur, it appeared to be due to aging or the hormonal changes caused by removing the ovaries.  A hysterectomy may relieve a variety of symptoms that made sex uncomfortable before surgery, such as pain or heavy bleeding. Relief from these symptoms may make sex after a hysterectomy more enjoyable than before surgery.  Although many women do not experience sexual problems after a hysterectomy, some do experience complications.  These may include:  Having the ovaries removed during a hysterectomy will trigger menopause, regardless of a woman's age.  Although not all women experience sexual problems after menopause, it can have some effect on a woman's sex life.  Estrogen levels decrease because of menopause, which can lead to thinning of the vaginal tissues. Thinning tissues may make some sexual activity painful.  Vaginal dryness can also develop in the menopause and make sexual activity uncomfortable. Sometimes, a woman's sex drive may lower, due to a change in hormone levels.  Some women choose to take  hormone replacement therapy  (HRT) to help manage issues, including vaginal dryness and a decreased libido.  There are also several over-the-counter products to treat vaginal dryness.  It is normal to be a little apprehensive about having sex after a hysterectomy. There are several things a person can do to make it easier, including:  It is common to wonder what effect, if any, a hysterectomy will have on a person's sex life. In most cases, having a hysterectomy will not negatively impact sex in the long term.  Everyone heals differently and at a different pace. A woman should listen to her body and wait until she has recovered, both emotionally and physically, before engaging in sexual activity.  Women who experience sexual problems after a hysterectomy, such as pain or a reduced sex drive, should talk to their doctor about possible solutions.  The good news is a woman's sex life can be just as good or better after having a hysterectomy.    
 Danesh, M., Hamzehgardeshi, Z., Moosazadeh, M., &amp; Shabani-Asrami, F. (2015, December). The effect of hysterectomy on women's sexual function: A narrative review.  Medical Archives ,  69 (6), 387–392.  Danesh, M., Hamzehgardeshi, Z., Moosazadeh, M., &amp; Shabani-Asrami, F. (2015, December). The effect of hysterectomy on women's sexual function: A narrative review.  Medical Archives ,  69 (6), 387–392.  Hysterectomy. (2015, March).  Lonnée-Hoffmann, R., &amp; Pinas, I. (2014, September 14). Effects of hysterectomy on sexual function.  Current Sexual Health Reports ,  6 (4), 244–251.  Menopause and sexuality. (2018, March 6)  Thakar, R. (2015, October). Is the uterus a sexual organ? Sexual function following hysterectomy [Abstract].  Sexual Medicine Reviews ,  3 (4), 264–278.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  de Pietro, MaryAnn. "Does having a hysterectomy affect sex?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321316.php&gt;    APA  de Pietro, M. (2018, March 26). "Does having a hysterectomy affect sex?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  