 What a person eats and drinks during pregnancy can affect the smell of their urine. Sometimes, after using the restroom, small amounts of urine can remain on the outside of the vagina, causing it to take on the smell of urine.  Some infections, such as  urinary tract infections  (UTIs) and  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs), can also cause the vagina to smell odd or unpleasant.  There are several reasons why the vagina may smell like ammonia, including:  Some pregnant women are more sensitive to certain smells, even in trace amounts.  This heightened sense of smell is called hyperosmia.  Ammonia is found naturally in the urine but does not usually give off a strong smell.  However, a pregnant woman may become more aware of a faint smell of ammonia that she did not previously notice.  Some researchers think women's nasal sensitivity increases during pregnancy to trigger nausea and vomiting, helping the mother to avoid digesting toxins that may harm the fetus, especially during the first few months of pregnancy.  Some limited  research  suggests that hyperosmia may be related to changes in circulating levels of the hormone human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) during pregnancy.  During pregnancy, many women experience cravings for foods they would not usually eat. Sudden dietary changes can cause the urine to smell different.  Certain foods contain nutrients and  vitamins  that may cause urine to smell like ammonia. These foods include:  Many vitamins and supplements, especially those containing types of vitamin B, often cause changes in urine color and smell.  Pregnant women should always consult a doctor before taking new vitamins or supplements.  It is often best to increase the daily intake of foods rich in nutrients such as  calcium , iron, and  folic acid . Avoiding having to take unnecessary supplements can help reduce the risk of side effects and overdose.  When the body is dehydrated, the kidneys have less fluid available to dilute the urine, resulting in concentrated, stronger-smelling urine.  Many pregnant women experience some  dehydration , especially before they know they are pregnant.  If a person does not drink plenty of water, the body will be unable to produce as much urine as usual. Urine will likely be darker than usual and might be bubbly.  Around  8 percent  of pregnant women develop urinary tract infections (UTIs), which can cause an ammonia smell.  Most UTIs are caused by bacterial infections, usually by a species of bacteria called  Escherichia coli  or  E. coli .  Aside from the effects on odor, UTIs also cause:  It is essential for pregnant women to talk with a doctor if they suspect they have a UTI because an infection can affect the growing baby.  The best way to stop the vagina from smelling like ammonia during pregnancy depends on the cause of the condition.  However, following some lifestyle tips may help reduce the likelihood, severity, and duration of the smell.  Easy ways to help prevent the vagina from smelling like ammonia include:  Practicing good hygiene can help reduce the likelihood of developing infections and an ammonia-like smell. Tips for good hygiene include:  One of the easiest ways to stop the vagina from smelling like ammonia is to ensure that the body has enough fluid available to dilute the urine properly.  Many people believe that cranberry juice and apple cider vinegar can help acidify urine, which may help reduce its smell.  While cranberry juice has long been used as a home remedy for UTIs, there is no conclusive evidence that it is effective.  The longer urine sits in the bladder, the more concentrated with uric acid it becomes. Holding in urine also gives bacteria time to multiply.  Urinating more often or before the urge to urinate occurs might help reduce the concentration and smell.  Probiotics are healthy intestinal bacteria. Eating foods rich in probiotics or probiotic supplements may help reduce the risk of bacterial UTIs.   Some research  shows that probiotics found in fermented milk products, such as yogurt or kefir, may help prevent urinary infections and promote vaginal health.  Sexual activity without using a condom or having multiple sexual partners increases the risk of developing conditions associated with urine that smells like ammonia. This includes UTIs and some sexually transmitted infections (STIs).  A vagina that smells like ammonia is rarely a sign of a STI.  However, some STIs are known to cause intense or foul-smelling urine, especially  chlamydia . It is essential to get tested for STIs, as infections such as chlamydia often occur without symptoms.  Additional signs and symptoms of STIs associated with foul smelling urine include:  If the vagina has an ammonia smell because of specific lifestyle factors, such as dehydration and dietary preferences, a person can make simple changes to reduce the odor.  Common tips for reducing ammonia-smelling urine include:  Most UTIs and STIs are easily treatable with  antibiotics  if caught early enough. However, not all antibiotics are safe for pregnant women to take.   Penicillin  and cephalosporin-based antibiotics are considered safe to take during pregnancy, while trimethoprim, fluoroquinolones, and sulphonamides should be avoided.  Most ammonia in the body is a by-product of the digestion of protein in the intestines. Millions of microbes, primarily bacteria, inhabit the intestines and help digestion.  After digestion, ammonia is taken up in the blood and drained into the liver where it is broken down into uric acid and glutamine, which are less toxic substances.  Uric acid then travels in the blood to the kidneys where it is diluted with water and expelled from the body in urine.  Ammonia is toxic and high levels of ammonia in the blood can cause symptoms including:  High levels of ammonia may occur if the liver is unable to convert ammonia into uric acid, usually due to severe  hepatitis  or  cirrhosis .  If left untreated, very high blood levels of ammonia can eventually cause difficulty breathing, seizures,  coma , and death.  The vagina can smell like ammonia for a variety of reasons, especially during pregnancy.  The condition is typically harmless and associated with factors such as dietary changes and dehydration.  But if the vagina smells like ammonia for longer than a few days, or does not change with lifestyle changes, a woman should talk with her doctor.  Pregnancy is known to increase the likelihood of some conditions associated with unusual smelling urine, such as UTIs and STIs, which require prompt medical treatment.  While very rare, chronic ammonia-smelling urine can be a sign of severe medical conditions, such as kidney or liver failure.    
 Ailes, E. C., Summers, A. D., Tran, E. L., Gilboa, S. M., Arnold, K. E., Meaney-Delman, D., &amp; Reefhuis, J. (2018, January 12). Antibiotics dispensed to privately insured pregnant women with urinary tract infections — United States, 2014.  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report ,  67 (1), 18–22.  Ailes, E. C., Summers, A. D., Tran, E. L., Gilboa, S. M., Arnold, K. E., Meaney-Delman, D., &amp; Reefhuis, J. (2018, January 12). Antibiotics dispensed to privately insured pregnant women with urinary tract infections — United States, 2014.  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report ,  67 (1), 18–22.  Al-Badr, A., &amp; Al-Shaikh, G. (2013, August). Recurrent urinary tract infections management in women: A review.  Sultan Qaboos University Medical Journal ,  13 (3), 359–367.  Ammonia. (2018, March 27).  Bacterial vaginosis. (2018, January 16).  Cameron, E. L. (2014, February 6). Pregnancy and olfaction: A review.  Frontiers in Psychology ,  5 , 67.  Romero, R., Hassan, S. S., Gajer, P., Tarca, A. L., Fadrosh, D. W., Nikita, L., ... Ravel, J. (2014, February 3). The composition and stability of the vaginal microbiota of normal pregnant women is different from that of non-pregnant women.  Microbiome ,  2 (4), 2–4.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Why does urine smell like ammonia while pregnant?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321340.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, March 28). "Why does urine smell like ammonia while pregnant?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  