 A person should see a doctor if the dizziness is frequent or severe enough to interfere with daily activities. A doctor will be able to help a person determine and treat the underlying cause.  According to some  studies , feeling dizzy is one of the most commonly reported medical complaints. It becomes increasingly common after age 60 and is also more common in women than men.  In this article, we look at ten possible causes of dizziness when bending over.  Circulation refers to how well the blood moves around a person's body. Blood carries oxygen, so if blood does not circulate properly throughout the body, the brain may not get enough oxygen.  If the brain is lacking oxygen, sudden movements, such as tilting the head up or down or bending over, can cause the person to feel dizzy.  It is important for a person to consult a doctor if poor circulation is causing dizziness, as it may be a sign of:  Low blood sugar or  hypoglycemia  can also lead to dizziness, as it can cause brain cells to malfunction. Low blood sugar may occur if a person has not eaten enough or in several hours.  People with  diabetes  are particularly prone to dizzy spells due to low blood sugar levels. Changes in medication or bending over immediately after taking  insulin  can also increase the chances of dizziness.  When a person has low  blood pressure , sudden changes in the head's position can cause dizziness, especially when bending over or standing up suddenly.  Low blood pressure is usually a mark of good health, but it can still cause symptoms. This is because the blood may have difficulty reaching the brain quickly when a person changes position.  When a person with low blood pressure bends or stands, they may experience:   Dehydration  occurs when a person does not have enough fluid in their body.  The following can cause dehydration:  Anything that causes a person to become dehydrated may cause dizziness when they bend over. This is because having too little fluid in the body makes it difficult for the brain to function and can cause lightheadedness.  A  panic attack  may result in hyperventilation, which causes the carbon dioxide levels in the blood to dip.  A lack of carbon dioxide in the blood can cause dizziness or lightheadedness.   Anemia  is a lack of oxygen-rich red blood cells in the body. Without enough red blood cells, the blood flowing to the brain may not contain enough oxygen, causing frequent bouts of dizziness.  Other symptoms of anemia include:  Dizziness is a common side effect of a variety of medications. Some drugs that may cause dizziness include:  The thyroid produces important hormones and can have an impact on many aspects of the body, including the heart.   Hypothyroidism  or underactive thyroid is when the thyroid does not produce enough of these hormones, which can result in low blood pressure and a slower heartbeat. These factors can cause dizziness when a person changes position, such as when bending over.  A person's sense of balance is regulated within the inner ear. Ear infections or injuries can cause a person to feel dizzy when standing or bending over.  Simple infections are a common cause, but a person could also have an inner ear problem called benign paroxysmal positional  vertigo  (BPP).  BPP occurs when a  calcium  particle from one part of the ear comes off and moves to another part of the ear. This can cause both dizziness and vertigo.   Meniere's disease  is associated with long periods of extreme dizziness. The dizziness can occur while standing, bending, or for no apparent reason.  A person with Meniere's disease will also likely experience:  Other underlying conditions that can cause occasional dizziness include:  Most people who experience temporary dizziness when bending do not need medical intervention.  Many common causes can be managed at home by standing or bending slowly, staying hydrated, and avoiding excess caffeine and alcohol.  Some people find compression socks, such as those  available here , help reduce dizziness related to low blood pressure.  However, a person should see a doctor if the dizziness is:  A person should also speak to a doctor if dizziness occurs with other symptoms, such as:  Even in mild cases, if the dizziness is frequent, a person may wish to speak to a doctor about how to prevent it in the future.  In most cases, dizziness goes away after a person stands up again slowly and will not require any special attention.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Dizziness can be a drag: Coping with balance disorders. (2012, August).  Dizziness can be a drag: Coping with balance disorders. (2012, August).  Fernández, L., Breinbauer, H. A., &amp; Delano, P. H. (2015, June 26). Vertigo and dizziness in the elderly.  Frontiers in Neurology ,  6 (144).  Ghannoum, M. T., Selim, M. H., Elminawi, M. S., &amp; Medhat, M. M. (2015, June 15). Evaluation of dizzy adult patients using the Arabic dizziness questionnaire and its correlation with different vestibular test results.  Advanced Arab Academy of Audiovestibulogy Journal ,  2 (1), 28–38.  Lustig, L. R. (n.d.). Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.  Luxon, L. M. (2004, November 24). Evaluation and management of the dizzy patient.  Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry ,  75 (Suppl 4).  Prevalence and impact of thyroid disease. (n.d.).  Tucci, D. L. (n.d.). Dizziness and vertigo.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What causes dizziness when bending over?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321392.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, April 3). "What causes dizziness when bending over?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  