 Iodine is essential for thyroid function, and helps to maintain healthy cells and a healthy metabolic rate. Adverse reactions to iodine are not considered to be allergies, but some people can have an iodine intolerance.  Iodine is an ingredient in chemical agents such as radiocontrast agents, which help to improve visibility on X-ray images. A person who is sensitive to iodine may have an adverse reaction to these agents, and to certain iodine-containing disinfectants, such as Betadine.  Iodine is also an ingredient in certain foods that can cause a reaction in some people, but this is not the same as a food-related allergic reaction.  In this article, we look at symptoms of an iodine allergy, its relationship with shellfish allergies, and outlook.  Exposure to products containing iodine can cause various symptoms for people with an iodine sensitivity, including:  Symptoms of anaphylaxis include:  The symptoms of a person going into anaphylactic shock include:  Anaphylactic shock is life-threatening, and people should seek medical help immediately if suspected.  People with a shellfish allergy will react to certain proteins found in shellfish. Shellfish include any marine creatures with shells, including  crabs , shrimp, lobster, oysters, scallops, as well as squid and octopus.  However, shellfish allergies are not linked to iodine. A person with a shellfish allergy is  not any more  likely to react to the iodine used in medical practices than anyone else. Shellfish allergies usually occur due to specific proteins in fish, not iodine.  A person with a shellfish allergy may be allergic to all shellfish or certain kinds. Allergic reactions can range from mild to severe, and in some cases might be life-threatening. Anyone with a severe allergy who suspects they have consumed shellfish should seek immediate medical help.  A doctor will be able to confirm whether someone has a shellfish allergy by running skin prick tests and blood tests.  Some foods have a high iodine content, though the amount of iodine can be dependent on how much iodine was present in the soil, the farming practices, and the time of year.  Some foods that are rich in iodine include:  If a person suspects they have an iodine allergy, they should talk to their doctor who can run tests to confirm either way.  If a doctor diagnoses an iodine allergy, they will be able to advise the person on which foods, treatments, or medications they should avoid to minimize reactions.  An individual should make sure that all medical professionals are aware of their iodine allergy before having any medical treatment.    
 Group. E. (2015, February 25). 7 foods rich in iodine.  Group. E. (2015, February 25). 7 foods rich in iodine.  Iodine allergy and contrast administration. (n.d.).  Iodine: Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Iodine. (2016, May). [Fact Sheet].  Kuehn, A., Swoboda, I., Arumugam, K., Hilger, C., &amp; Hentges, F. (2014, April 22). Fish allergens at a glance: Variable allergenicity of parvalbumins, the major fish allergens.  Frontiers in Immunology ,  5   (179).  Morcos, S. K. (2008). Adverse reactions to iodinated contrast media [Abstract].  In Cancer Imaging  ,  2 ,   97–106.  Schabelman, E., &amp; Witting, M. (2010, November). The relationship of radiocontrast, iodine, and seafood allergies: A medical myth exposed.  Journal of Emergency Medicine ,  39   (5), 701–707.  Shellfish allergy. (n.d.).  Shellfish allergy: The facts [Fact sheet]. (2016, December).  Sicherer, S.H. (2018, February). Seafood allergies: Fish and shellfish.  Stafford, L. (2007, July 1). Hypersensitivity reaction to Amiodarone in a patient with a previous reaction to an iodinated radiocontrast agent.  Annals of Pharmacotherapy ,  41   (7-8), 1310–1314.  Vitamins and minerals. Iodine. (2017, March 3).  Woo, C. K., &amp; Bahna, S. L. (2011, June 10). Not all shellfish "allergy" is allergy!.  Clinical and Translational Allergy ,  1   (1), 3.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What is an iodine intolerance?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321393.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, April 3). "What is an iodine intolerance?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  