 Mites are microscopic, eight-legged parasites that can live on animals, including dogs, cats, and humans. They either burrow into the skin or into hair follicles to lay their eggs.  In this article, we look at the differences between mange in humans and animals, along with symptoms, treatment, and prevention of mite infestations in humans.  Different species of mites affect different animals — for instance, sarcoptic mites of the species  Sarcoptes scabiei canis  cause the mange that some dogs develop. Humans cannot catch mange from a dog or cat.  The mites that affect humans are a different subspecies called  Sarcoptes scabiei hominis . These mites cause a contagious condition called  scabies , which can spread quickly among people through physical contact.  Animal mites do not survive well on human skin. After contact with an affected animal, a person may notice red welts appear, similar to a mosquito bite, but this should be temporary. A person can use cortisone to reduce  inflammation  and itching.  However, a person can get scabies through close physical contact with a person who already has the condition. Less frequently, scabies can be spread by sharing clothing or bedding with an infected person.  Scabies is a common disease throughout the world. It is more problematic in areas that are overcrowded or have poor sanitation.  In a person who has never had contact with scabies mites before, symptoms may not appear for  2 to 6 weeks  after infection. However, a person can still spread scabies to other people when they are not experiencing symptoms.  A person who has had scabies before may experience symptoms as early as  1 to 4 days  after infection.  Symptoms include:  Symptoms of mites most commonly appear in areas with skin folds, including the fingers, palms, buttocks, under the breast, and the inner knee and elbow.  Scabies can be treated using scabicides, which are drugs that kill the mites and destroy the mite eggs. Effective scabicides are not available over-the-counter and must be prescribed by a doctor.  Common medications prescribed by the doctor include permethrin cream 5 percent (Elimite), lindane lotion, crotamiton (Eurax), or ivermectin (Stromectol).  Once prescribed, scabicide lotion should be used in the following way:  Sexual partners and people who were in close contact with the infected person should also be tested and possibly treated for scabies, as it is highly contagious. Each person should have treatment at the same time to prevent a re-infection.  For people who cannot use these medications or who do not respond to them, the doctor may prescribe other medications, such as sulfur compounded in petrolatum.  Alongside using scabicide medication, a person can take action at home to relieve itching and pain related to the skin irritation. These include:  Some actions can be taken to prevent mites from spreading to other people, and to avoid a re-infection.  These include:  Scabies is highly contagious. Symptoms of scabies can take up to  2 months  to appear after the infection, though an infected person can pass the mites on to others without knowing during that time. A person who has previously had scabies may experience symptoms  1 to 4 days  after the new infection.  Although contagious, scabies can be treated readily with topical creams called scabicides, which kill the mites and their eggs. After treatment, itching can persist for some weeks before going away completely.    
 Bandi, K. M., &amp; Saikumar, C. (2013, January). Sarcoptic mange: A zoonotic ectoparasitic skin disease.  Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research ,  7 (1), 156–157.  Bandi, K. M., &amp; Saikumar, C. (2013, January). Sarcoptic mange: A zoonotic ectoparasitic skin disease.  Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research ,  7 (1), 156–157.  Buffet, M. &amp; Dupin, N. (2003, April). Current treatments for scabies [Abstract].  Fundamental &amp; Clinical Pharmacology ,  17 (2), 217–225.  Campbell, J. J., Paulson, C. P. &amp; Nashelsky, J. (2017, August). What is the most effective treatment for scabies?  The Journal of Family Practice ,  66 (8), E11–E12.  Chosidow, O. (2006, April 20). Scabies.  New England Journal of Medicine , 354(16), 1718–1727.  Dressler, C., Rosumeck, S., Sunderkötter, C., Werner, R. N., &amp; Nast, A. (2016, November 14). The treatment of scabies. A systematic review of randomized controlled trials.  Deutsches Arzteblatt International ,  113 (45), 757–762.  Khalil, S., Abbas, O., Kibbi, A.G. &amp; Kurban, M. (2017, November 30). Scabies in the age of increasing drug resistance.  PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases ,  11 (11), e0005920.  Parasites. Disease. (2010, November 2).  Parasites. Treatment. (2016, September 120.  Rosamilia, L.L. (2014, September). Scabies [Abstract].  Seminars in Cutaneous Medicine and Surgery ,  33 (3), 106–109.  Strong, M. &amp; Johnstone, P. (2007, July 18). Interventions for treating scabies.  The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  18 (3), CD000320.  Walton, S. F. &amp; Currie, B. J. (2007, April). Problems in diagnosing scabies, a global disease in human and animal populations.  Clinical Microbiology Reviews ,  20 (2), 268–279.     Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "Can humans have mange?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321379.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, March 31). "Can humans have mange?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  