 The distinctive smell is caused by sulfur-containing chemicals in garlic and  onion . The smell can linger on a person's breath for hours and even overnight, which discourages some people from eating these vegetables.  Luckily, many home remedies can prevent or eliminate  bad breath . Below, we describe 12 simple methods.  There is no need to forgo the taste and health benefits of garlic and onions. Try the following tips to avoid bad breath associated with these vegetables.   1. Drink water   Drinking water after meals can wash garlic or onion remnants from the tongue or between the teeth.  It also stimulates the production of saliva, which helps to remove some of the odor-producing bacteria from the mouth.   2. Brush and floss   The bacteria that contribute to bad breath are usually found in plaque on the teeth and underneath the gum line.  Brushing the teeth and flossing after meals can significantly reduce the number of bacteria in the mouth and eliminate other causes of bad breath, including plaque and food particles.   3. Use a tongue scraper   A person will often neglect to brush the tongue and the roof of the mouth, and the back of the tongue is an ideal place for bacteria to collect. An individual may even notice a white film forming on the tongue.  Using a tongue scraper or brush every day can remove dead skin cells, microbes, and tiny particles of food. Continue scraping until there is no residue left on the scraper.  Many pharmacies carry tongue scrapers. They can also be  purchased online .   4. Rinse with mouthwash   A strong-smelling mouthwash, such as one containing peppermint, can cover up the smell of garlic or onions on the breath.  Some  research  suggests that using a mouthwash containing chlorine dioxide is especially effective at removing plaque, bacteria, and tiny food particles.   5. Eat fresh fruits and vegetables   Eating fresh produce with or after meals may cover up the smells of garlic and onion.  In one  study , researchers reported that eating raw apple or raw lettuce significantly decreased the odor of garlic on the breath.   6. Eat herb leaves   Chewing parsley after eating is an age-old remedy for garlic or onion breath. This herb cleanses the palate and masks unpleasant odors.   Mint  leaves have also  been shown  to significantly reduce garlic breath.   7. Try apple cider vinegar   Some people report that drinking a tablespoon of apple cider vinegar in water before or after meals gets rid of garlic or onion breath.  However, this is not a medically approved method. A person should always check with their doctor before using apple cider vinegar as a home remedy.   8. Have a cup of green tea   Sipping  green tea  after eating may help to cover up strong odors. One study suggested that green tea eliminated bad breath  more effectively  than mints, chewing gum, or a product containing parsley oil.  Green tea may have additional oral health benefits. Another study found that a mouthwash containing catechins, which are beneficial compounds in green tea, was able to reduce plaque  as effectively as  antiseptic mouthwash.   9. Chew gum   Chewing gum with a minty flavor can mask unpleasant odors on the go. It also stimulates saliva production, which can help to wash away bacteria and food particles.  Also, according to the  American Dental Association , a person chewing sugarless gum for 20 minutes after a meal may reduce their risk of tooth decay.   10. Drink milk   Drinking a glass of milk with or after a garlic-heavy meal may reduce the concentration of compounds in the mouth that contain sulfur and cause bad odor.   Research  has shown that full-fat milk is better at reducing odor than fat-free milk.   11. Drink lemon water   Lemon juice may help to neutralize the odor of onions or garlic on the breath. Try adding a squeeze of fresh lemon juice (approximately 1 tablespoon) to a glass of water and drinking it after an onion- or garlic-rich meal.   12. Remove the garlic's core   When preparing a meal, it is possible to reduce the risk of developing garlic breath. Cut each garlic clove in half and remove the stem from the middle of the bulb before adding the bulb to the dish.  Some compounds in onions, garlic, or both, can be responsible for bad breath and even  body odor . These include:  While bad breath caused by garlic or onions often does not last long, there are several ways to get rid of it. Practicing proper oral hygiene, drinking green tea or milk, eating fresh produce, and masking the smell can help.  What works for one person may not work for another, so try a few different remedies to determine which is the best at getting rid of garlic or onion breath.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Chewing gum to prevent cavities. (n.d.).  Chewing gum to prevent cavities. (n.d.).  Kaur, H., Jain, S., &amp; Kaur, A. (2014, March–April). Comparative evaluation of the antiplaque effectiveness of green tea catechin mouthwash with chlorhexidine gluconate.  Journal of Indian Society of Periodontology ,  18 (2), 178–182.  Lodhia, P., Yaegaki, K., Khakbaznejad, A., Imai, T., Sato, T., Tanaka, T., ... Kamoda, T. (2008). Effect of green tea on volatile sulfur compounds in mouth air.  Journal of Nutritional Science and Vitaminology ,  54 , 89–94.  Mirondo, R., &amp; Barringer, S. (2016, October). Deodorization of garlic breath by foods, and the role of polyphenol oxidase and phenolic compounds [Abstract].  Journal of Food Science ,  81 (10), C2425–C2430.  Munch, R. (2013).  Deodorization of garlic breath volatiles by food and food components  (master's thesis). Ohio State University, Ohio, USA.  Shinada, K., Ueno, M., Konishi, C., Takehara, S., Yokoyama, S., Zaitsu, T., ... Kawaguchi, Y. (2010, February 12). Effects of a mouthwash with chlorine dioxide on oral malodor and salivary bacteria: A randomized placebo-controlled 7-day trial.  Trials ,  11 , 14.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "How do you get rid of garlic or onion breath?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321334.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, March 27). "How do you get rid of garlic or onion breath?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  