  Acne  is a skin condition that affects up to  80 percent  of people between 11 to 30 years old. As with all forms of acne, whiteheads form when the pores get clogged with oil, dead skin cells, and bacteria.  Whiteheads can appear anywhere on the body but commonly occur on the face, neck, shoulders, upper back, and chest.  Unlike whiteheads,  blackheads  are acne lesions with open pores. The bacteria in the pore turn black when exposed to the air, giving this lesion its name.  Hormones, medications, certain types of makeup, and genetics are all factors that can contribute to a person getting whiteheads.  Factors that may make whiteheads worse include:  While there are several methods to get rid of whiteheads and other acne lesions on the nose, not all of them work for everyone.  A person may need to try a few different products or techniques before they find what works best for them.  Pore strips for the nose will not help treat whiteheads, as they only work to pull out oils from open pores. Whiteheads are closed, so will not be affected.  Many over-the-counter (OTC) products contain active ingredients, such as benzoyl peroxide and salicylic acid. These two ingredients work in different ways but are both used to treat acne.  Benzoyl peroxide kills bacteria and helps remove oil and dead skin cells in the pores. It can also lessen the swelling associated with pimples.  Salicylic acid is helpful for unclogging the skin's pores and may prevent whiteheads from forming in the first place.  Other active ingredients in OTC acne medications include alpha hydroxy acids and sulfur. These help to remove dead skin cells from the pores and lessen swelling. Sulfur is also known to help control oil.  OTC products include:  It is important to keep using OTC treatments even after acne blemishes have gone away. Stopping their use can allow new bacteria into the pores and cause another flare-up.  Honey is not only a natural sweetener, but can also have antibacterial properties. Medical-grade manuka honey  may be effective  in treating bacteria resistant to certain  antibiotics , including  Staphylococcus aureus , which can cause acne.  To treat whiteheads on the nose with manuka honey, a person should follow these steps:  Medical-grade manuka honey is available in some pharmacies and natural food stores. It can also be  purchased online .  If OTC treatments and natural remedies do not work, a person can try using prescription medications for acne.  For stubborn whiteheads, a doctor may prescribe:  Some acne treatments, such as contraceptives or drugs containing retinoid, cannot be used during pregnancy, as they may cause adverse side effects.  Other treatments may be available, so a person concerned about acne should speak to a doctor or pharmacist.  Steps a person can take to help prevent whiteheads on the nose include:  While whiteheads may be frustrating to treat, there are OTC and prescription options that can help.  Many washes, creams, and gels can be purchased over the counter to relieve the symptoms of acne. Some natural treatments, such as manuka honey, may also help. In some cases, however, prescription treatments may be needed.  Speaking with a qualified dermatologist or other skin care professional can help determine the best course of action to treat whiteheads on the nose.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Acne (2014, June).  Acne (2014, June).  Acne: Overview. (2016, April 28).  Acne: What are the types? (2016, September 1).  Acne: What causes it? (2016, September 1).  Acne: What is it? (2016, September 1).  Acne: Who gets it? (2016, September 1).  Different kinds of pimples. (n.d.).  Jenkins, R., Burton, N., &amp; Cooper, R. (2014, March). Proteomic and genomic analysis of methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA) exposed to manuka honey  in vitro  demonstrated down-regulation of virulence markers.  Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy ,  69 (3), 603–615.  Treating pimples. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. "How to treat whiteheads on the nose."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321374.php&gt;    APA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. (2018, March 30). "How to treat whiteheads on the nose."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  