 Common irritants include:  All of these particles may trigger a sneeze. Sneezing is a partially controllable reaction to irritants. Therefore, it is possible to delay or even stop a sneeze before it occurs.  It may be possible to delay or stop sneezing naturally by:  Treating allergies is a good way to prevent sneezing. Allergy sneezes often occur in clusters of two to three.  However, to treat the allergy, a person must first identify what allergens trigger the reaction. Once identified, a person might be able to avoid the allergen and prevent sneezing as a result of exposure to the allergen.  There may be times when it is impossible to avoid the allergen, however.  In these situations, people can control their reaction to the allergen by using over-the-counter medications that can help allergic reactions.  Popular types include:  Some people who experience more severe reactions may require prescription drugs or allergy shots to prevent or reduce the effects  Different things may cause someone to sneeze. Some of these triggers may be easy to spot and avoid. Learning what causes sneezing can help people avoid it.  Triggers include:  Sneezing when looking at a bright light is called photic sneezing. The condition affects about a  third  of people worldwide, who are triggered to start sneezing by going outside on a bright day.  People with photic sneezing normally have a family history of the condition. They can prevent sneezing by not looking directly at bright lights and wearing sunglasses on sunny days.  Some people sneeze following a meal where they feel particularly full. This reaction can be prevented by eating smaller portions and taking smaller bites. This phenomenon is not well understood.  People claim saying a funny or weird word out loud just before sneezing can stop the sneeze from occurring. It is purely anecdotal.  The thought is that the action of verbalizing something interesting or unusual distracts the brain to prevent the sneeze. There is no research to back these claims.  A person may be able to stifle a sneeze by stimulating the roof of the mouth with the tongue. Doing this for several seconds before sneezing may help prevent it from occurring.  Some people are in situations where they constantly come into contact with irritants in the air.  This may be due to an occupation, but a person may have hobbies or live in an area where irritants are regularly in the air.  Irritants may include:  Many irritants are dangerous if people are exposed to them over time. Some may lead to  cancer  in the throat, mouth, or nose.  People should wear protective gear when in areas where these particles are present. Ventilation and dust prevention can help reduce exposure. Reducing exposure to these irritants will prevent complications.  People who are about to sneeze can try to blow their nose instead. This helps clear the irritant triggering the sneeze. As a person may blow their nose and then sneeze immediately after, this method is not always effective.  Keeping tissues nearby can help a person reach them in time to stop the sneeze.  Using a nasal spray to clear the sinuses might prevent a trigger from causing a sneeze. However, a prescription or over-the-counter nasal spray may not be required. There are some solutions that are easy to make at home.  One spray involves  using capsaicin . Capsaicin gives chili peppers their spice. Using capsaicin in a nasal spray can desensitize the nasal tissue, which might make sneezing less frequent. It will also likely trigger a series of sneezes before the effect kicks in.  People wanting to try this method should proceed with caution and consult a doctor before trying it.  People can try pinching their nose at the first sign of a sneeze. A person can do this either by pinching the nostrils shut or pinching higher up on the nose closer to the eyes.   Vitamin  C is an antihistamine and thought to boost the immune system. Vitamin C is in citrus fruits, certain vegetables, and as supplements. By increasing the amount of vitamin C in their diet, a person may potentially see a reduction in sneezing over time.  Similarly to vitamin C, chamomile  has anti-histamine effects . To help prevent sneezing, a person can drink a cup of chamomile tea daily to help reduce the total amount of histamine in the body.  It is not always possible to stop a sneeze. Many of the methods of stopping a sneeze involve finding ways to help prevent the reflex of sneezing in the first place. People may find success with one or more methods.  People may need to consult their doctor if sneezing is excessive. They should also talk to a medical professional before taking any supplements or taking any new substance into the body.    
 Bielory, L. (n.d.). Do you "sternutate"?  Bielory, L. (n.d.). Do you "sternutate"?  Dust in the workplace: Guidance for health and safety representatives. (2011, October).  Gevorgyan, A., Segboer, C., Gorissen, R., van Drunen, C.M., Fokkens, W. (2015, July 14). Capsaicin for non-allergic rhinitis.  Hadhazy, A. T. (2008, January 28). Why do people sneeze?  Kobayashi, Y., Takahashi, R., &amp; Ogino, F. (2005, October). Antipruritic effect of the single oral administration of German chamomile flower extract and its combined effect with antiallergic agents in ddY mice [Abstract].  Journal of Ethnopharmacology ,  101 (1-3), 308–312.  Langer, N., Beeli, G., &amp; Jäncke, L. (2010, February 15). When the sun prickles your nose: An EEG study identifying neural bases of photic sneezing. PloS one , 5 (2), e9208.  Pagon, R. A. (2002, November 18). Why does bright light cause some people to sneeze? Scientific American.  Songu, M., &amp; Cingi, C. (2009, July 17). Sneeze reflex: facts and fiction [Abstract].  Therapeutic Advances in Respiratory Disease , 3 (3), 131–141.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What to do when you can't stop sneezing."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Mar. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321305.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, March 24). "What to do when you can't stop sneezing."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  