 Because Vyvanse is a stimulant, a person may feel depressed or fatigued when it begins to wear off. This is known as a Vyvanse crash.  A person who takes Vyvanse in the morning may experience a midday crash as the drug begins to leave their system. The crash may make a person's symptoms challenging to manage.  In this article, we look at the symptoms of Vyvanse crash and tips on how to cope with or avoid the comedown.  The active ingredient in Vyvanse is an amphetamine called lisdexamfetamine dimesylate that stimulates the  central nervous system . Vyvanse affects the dopamine and norepinephrine systems in the brain in the same way as Adderall, which is another  ADHD  medication.  A few hours after a person stops taking Vyvanse, it starts to leave their system, which leads to a chemical imbalance in the brain. Because Vyvanse is a stimulant, when the drug leaves the body, some people may feel effects that are opposite to stimulation, such as  fatigue  and irritability.  Because the symptoms of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) sometimes resolve as a person ages, a doctor may recommend that a person takes a 'Vyvanse holiday' to see the extent of their ADHD symptoms without the drug. This withdrawal can also result in a Vyvanse crash.  In addition to improving concentration, other effects of taking Vyvanse include faster breathing, a more rapid heart rate, increased  blood pressure , and higher blood sugar levels.  When a person stops taking Vyvanse suddenly, they may experience the following symptoms:  A person can experience sleep problems for a few days after a Vyvanse crash. They may feel exhausted but have trouble getting restful sleep.  Not all people experience a Vyvanse crash or any symptoms at all when they stop using it. As a general rule, the longer a person has used Vyvanse, or the more they have taken, the more significant their withdrawal symptoms are likely to be.  Some of the expected early symptoms associated with Vyvanse withdrawal include:  Most symptoms will subside after about 7 days. However, a person may still experience lingering symptoms known as post-acute withdrawal symptoms. These include:  When a person knows they are going to be stopping or reducing their use of Vyvanse, they can plan to reduce the symptoms of their comedown.  Some steps they can take include:  If a person is considering stopping taking Vyvanse, they should work out a plan with their doctor. Their doctor will recommend a gradual method for reducing and eventually eliminating Vyvanse. This technique allows the drug to leave a person's system slowly, reducing the side effects of withdrawal.  There is currently no approved medication to treat a Vyvanse crash. However, if a person is struggling to cope with severe withdrawal symptoms, they can talk to their doctor.  A doctor may be able to prescribe temporary medications to promote sleep or reduce feelings of depression. These could include benzodiazepines, such as Xanax or Valium.  If a person experiences depression as a result of Vyvanse withdrawal, they may benefit from interpersonal therapies, such as  cognitive behavioral therapy  (CBT) or talking therapies. These techniques can help a person overcome cravings caused by a Vyvanse crash and prevent Vyvanse relapse.  When a person is reducing their intake of Vyvanse, It is essential that they stick to the dosage the doctor has described, even if they experience symptoms of withdrawal.  A person can overdose on Vyvanse, which can cause symptoms such as:  A person should seek immediate medical attention if they suspect a Vyvanse overdose.  The symptoms of a Vyvanse crash do not usually last long. If a person stays hydrated, promotes sleep, and avoids using stimulants and illicit drugs, they should recover quickly from a Vyvanse crash.  Anyone who experiences extreme symptoms, such as drastic mood changes, should seek immediate medical attention.  Uncontrolled or recreational use of Vyvanse is not recommended. Vyvanse is not taken consistently, which makes a person more prone to a Vyvanse crash.    
 Getting through amphetamine withdrawal. (2004, May).  Getting through amphetamine withdrawal. (2004, May).  Misuse of prescription drugs. (2018, January).  Prescription stimulants (2018, February).  Timmerman, B. P., &amp; Roecker, A. M. (n.d.). Abuse of prescription stimulant drugs.  Vyvanse. Important safety information. (2017, September).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Coping with a Vyvanse crash."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321489.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, April 13). "Coping with a Vyvanse crash."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  