 Antihistamines can reduce allergy symptoms, such as  watering eyes , itchy skin,  hives , and swelling. They may also help with dermatitis or even mosquito bites, but manufacturers usually market them for specific allergies.  Zyrtec is a brand name for the drug cetirizine. Claritin is the brand name for loratidine. Zyretc and Claritin are in the same class of medications. Both are second-generation antihistamines, and they generally work the same way in the body. Neither is clearly better than the other.  In this article, we provide detail about the differences between Zyrtec and Claritin. We also compare them to two other popular brands of antihistamines: Benadryl and Allegra.  Zyrtec and Claritin are brand-name medications that people can buy over the counter. They are available in various forms, including pills, chewable tablets, and syrups.  Regardless of marketing claims, little scientific evidence shows that either is more effective.  People can purchase Zyrtec, Claritin, and other popular brands without a prescription from supermarkets, pharmacies, and  online  stores.   Active ingredients   Zyrtec and Claritin have different active compounds.  Zyrtec contains cetirizine hydrochloride, also called cetirizine HCL, while Claritin contains loratadine.   Drowsiness   Zyrtec and Claritin are second-generation antihistamines. They are less likely to make a person feel drowsy or otherwise affect alertness than older, first-generation antihistamines.  The labeling of Zyrtec says that a person should not take it when driving a vehicle or using machinery. People should avoid taking Zyrtec with alcohol or other medicines that could cause drowsiness.   Timescales   Zyrtec and Claritin are effective for about 24 hours. A person should only take one dose per day. The body absorbs both antihistamines quickly, but Zyrtec seems to work faster for some people.  A  2014 study  found that both drugs were absorbed into the bloodstream within 1–2 hours of taking the medication.  Researchers are often studying, comparing, and improving antihistamines. Other popular brands on the market today are Allegra and Benadryl.  When a person comes into contact with an allergen, their immune system reacts and produces a chemical called histamine.  Histamine causes many allergy symptoms, including  inflammation  of the skin or sinuses, pain, redness, and wheezing.  Immune responses also encourage extra mucus to develop, which helps to clear allergens from the nose and throat.  Allergy medications block histamine responses. This dulls the body's response to minor or harmless allergens, such as pollen, dust, and pet dander.  Claritin and Zyrtec are effective and safe for most people with minor allergies. However, as with all medications, there may be some side effects.  Loratadine—present in Claritin—may not be safe for people with severe liver conditions. The liver has to break down loratadine. The kidneys break down cetirizine—found in Zyrtec—and the body excretes it in the urine, largely unchanged.  Claritin is more likely to interact with other drugs than Zyrtec. Claritin is broken down in the liver by enzymes that other drugs can inhibit. This may lead to Claritin building up in the body, which increases the risk of side effects.  Everyone reacts to medications differently, but Claritin and Zyrtec may have the following side effects:  Some people experience a severe allergic response called  anaphylaxis  after taking antihistamines. A person should seek emergency medical attention if any of the following symptoms are present:  Some antihistamines are safe for children, but it is a good idea to talk with a doctor or check the label carefully before giving antihistamines to a child.  In 2012,  a review  found that some antihistamines may be problematic during pregnancy. However, the authors noted that there was no evidence linking cetirizine or loratidine to birth defects.  A study published in 2014 noted that  10–15 percent  of women use antihistamines during pregnancy. Most appear to be safe, but some may have adverse effects.  The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  urge people to ask a doctor before using an antihistamine or any other drug during pregnancy.  Claritin and Zyrtec are popular over-the-counter antihistamines. Doctors consider them safe and effective treatments for minor allergies.  Both are second-generation antihistamines. These cause less drowsiness than first-generation antihistamines.  No research has concluded that Zyrtec or Claritin is more effective, but some people report better responses with one or the other. The slight differences between the two may make one drug more appropriate for some people.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.   Article last updated on Mon 14 January 2019.  Visit our  Allergy  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Allergy.   
 Church, M. K., &amp; Church, D. S. (2013, May–June). Pharmacology of antihistamines.  Indian Journal of Dermatology ,  58 (3), 219–224.  Church, M. K., &amp; Church, D. S. (2013, May–June). Pharmacology of antihistamines.  Indian Journal of Dermatology ,  58 (3), 219–224.  Gilboa, S. M., Ailes, E. C., Rai, R. P., Anderson, J. A., &amp; Honein, M. A. (2014, October 11). Antihistamines and birth defects: A systematic review of the literature.  Expert Opinion on Drug Safety, 13 (12), 1667–1698.  Kar, S., Krishnan, A., Preetha, K., &amp; Mohankar, A. (2012, April–June). A review of antihistamines used during pregnancy. Journal of Pharmacology &amp; Pharmacotherapeutics, 3(2), 105–108.  Key findings: Antihistamines and birth defects. (2018, March 20).  Pawankar, R., Canonica, G. W., Holgate, S. T., Lockey, R. F., &amp; Blaiss, M. S. (2013). WAO white book on allergy: Update 2013 executive summary.  Sher, N., Siddiqui, F. A., Hasan, N., &amp; Mirza, A. Z. (2014, January 10). Simultaneous determination of antihistamine anti-allergic drugs, cetirizine, domperidone, chlorphenamine maleate, loratadine, meclizine and buclizine in pharmaceutical formulations, human serum and pharmacokinetics application.  Analytical Methods ,  6 (8), 2704–2714.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Zyrtec vs. Claritin for treating allergies."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Jan. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321465.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2019, January 14). "Zyrtec vs. Claritin for treating allergies."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  