 Bladder  endometriosis  is a rare form of the condition that can cause severe discomfort. When it forms only on the surface of the bladder, it is called superficial endometriosis, and if it develops inside the bladder lining or wall, it is called deep endometriosis.  During regular menstruation, endometrial tissue thickens and exits the body in the blood. However, when the tissue grows outside of the uterus, it cannot leave through the vagina, so it remains inside the body. This results in symptoms such as painful and heavy periods.  In this article, we look at the symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of bladder endometriosis. We also discuss other forms of bladder pain and interstitial  cystitis , which can have similar symptoms to bladder endometriosis.  Endometriosis affects  6 to 10 percent  of women during their reproductive years. The majority of women, therefore, receive their diagnosis during this time with the average age being  27 years .  Bladder endometriosis is rare. A  2014  study reports that as few as 1 to 2 percent of women with endometriosis may have endometrial growths in their urinary system, and the bladder is the organ most likely to be affected.  A 2012 study found that around  30 percent  of women who have bladder endometriosis experience no symptoms. A person may not be aware that they have the condition until it shows up as a result of tests they have for another reason, such as suspected  infertility .  A woman is more likely to notice any symptoms of endometriosis around the time she is due to have her period.  Symptoms of bladder endometriosis specifically may include:  When endometriosis develops in other parts of the pelvis, symptoms may include:  To diagnose bladder endometriosis, a doctor will initially check the vagina and bladder to ascertain whether there are any abnormal growths. They will also usually do a urine test to check for blood in the urine.  Other tests that a doctor may conduct include:  Once a diagnosis of endometriosis is confirmed, the doctor will see what stage the condition is at. Stages are defined according to how much tissue is present and how deeply it has grown into the person's organs.  There are four stages which are:   Stage 1 .  Minimal . A person with stage 1 endometriosis only has small amounts of the tissue growing, and it is only found on the surface or around the organs.   Stage 2 .  Mild . A person with stage 2 endometriosis has more extensive tissue growths, but they are still on the surface of the organs rather than inside them.   Stage 3 .  Moderate . A person with stage 3 endometriosis has more widespread tissue, which has begun to grow inside the pelvic organs.   Stage 4 .  Severe . A person with stage 4 endometriosis has lots of endometrial tissue, which is growing inside several of the pelvic organs.  There is no current cure for endometriosis. However, the condition can be managed through medication and sometimes surgery.  Surgery is the  most common  treatment for those with bladder endometriosis. During surgery, a doctor will try to remove all of the tissue growing in the bladder, and this should help relieve symptoms.  There are two types of surgery used for bladder endometriosis:  Doctors will likely prescribe hormone treatments to help slow the growth of endometrial tissue or manage pain. Hormone treatments may include gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) or  birth control  pills.  Bladder endometriosis does not have any effect on a woman's fertility. However, endometrial tissue often grows in parts of a woman's reproductive system such as the ovaries, which may affect a woman's likelihood of conception.  A person with interstitial cystitis may experience many of the same symptoms as those with bladder endometriosis. Both conditions can cause:  A person who does not respond to typical endometriosis treatments may, in fact, have undiagnosed interstitial cystitis. It is possible for a person to have both conditions.  The exact cause of interstitial cystitis is not known. Unfortunately,  antibiotics , which can treat other types of cystitis, are not effective.  Recommended treatment usually involves lifestyle changes, such as making dietary changes, stopping smoking, drinking less before bedtime, and scheduling planned toilet breaks to ensure the bladder does not get too full.  Other possible causes for a person to feel discomfort or pain in their bladder include:  If a person experiences bladder pressure or pain that does not go away, they should make an appointment with their doctor. The doctor will be able to perform tests to find out the cause.  Doctors are not sure of the exact cause of bladder endometriosis. Possible reasons include:  Without proper treatment, bladder endometriosis can cause kidney damage. It is also possible for cancerous tissue to grow from endometrial tissue in the bladder, though this is very rare.  A person's outlook depends on which stage of endometriosis they have. More severe cases are more difficult to treat.  Surgery to remove the tissue is often the most effective treatment, though endometriosis often returns after surgery. Multiple surgeries may therefore be required.    
 Bladder endometriosis: Ultrasound and MRI findings.  Radiology Case Reports ,  1 (3), 92–95.  Bladder endometriosis: Ultrasound and MRI findings.  Radiology Case Reports ,  1 (3), 92–95.  Burney, R. O., &amp; Giudice, L. C. (2012, September). Pathogenesis and pathophysiology of endometriosis.  Fertility and Sterility ,  98 (3), 511–519.  Butrick, C. W. (2007, April–June). Patients with chronic pelvic pain: Endometriosis or interstitial cystitis/painful bladder syndrome?  Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons ,  11 (2), 182–189  Endometriosis. (2018, March 16).  Endometriosis and the bladder. (n.d.).  Fuentes Pastor, J., Ballestero Diego, R., Correas Gómez, M. Á., Torres Díez, E., Fernández Flórez, A., Ballesteros Olmos, G., &amp; Gutiérrez Baños, J. L. (2014). Bladder endometriosis and endocervicosis: Presentation of 2 cases with endoscopic management and review of literature.  Case Reports in Urology ,  2014 .  Interstitial cystitis. (2015, August 13).  Kumar, S., Tiwari, P., Sharma, P., Goel, A., Singh, J. P., Vijay, M. K., ... &amp; Kundu, A. K. (2012, Jan–Apr). Urinary tract endometriosis: Review of 19 cases.  Urology Annals ,  4 (1), 6.  Liu, J. H., &amp; Bill, A. H. (2017, January). Endometriosis.  Maccagnano, C., Pellucchi, F., Rocchini, L., Ghezzi, M., Scattoni, V., Montorsi, F., … Colombo, R. (2012, October). Diagnosis and treatment of bladder endometriosis: State of the art.  Urology International, 89 (3), 249-58.  Maggiore, U. L. R., Ferrero, S., Candiani, M., Somigliana, E., Viganò, P., &amp; Vercellini, P. (2017, May). Bladder endometriosis: A systematic review of pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment, impact on fertility, and risk of malignant transformation.  European Urology ,  71 (5), 790–807.  Mettler, L., Gaikwad, V., Riebe, B., &amp; Schollmeyer, T. (2008, April–June). Bladder endometriosis: Possibility of treatment by laparoscopy.  Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons ,  12 (2), 162–165.  Practice committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. (2012, September). Endometriosis and infertility: A committee opinion.  Fertility and Sterility ,  98 (3), 591–598.  Pressure on bladder. (2017, January 27).  Saccardi, C., Vitagliano, A., &amp; Litta, P. (2017, October). Bladder endometriosis: A summary of current evidence.  Minerva Ginecologica ,  69 (5), 468–476.  Schenken, R. S. (2017, November 30). Endometriosis: Treatment of pelvic pain.  Schenken, R. S. (2018, Feb 1). Pathogenesis, clinical features, and diagnosis of endometriosis.  Schrager, S., Falleroni, J., &amp; Edgoose, J. (2013). Evaluation and treatment of endometriosis.  American Family Physician ,  87 (2), 107–113.  State of the art. (2012, October).  Urologia Internationalis ,  89 (3), 249–258.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Can endometriosis cause bladder pain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321439.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, April 9). "Can endometriosis cause bladder pain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  