 Experts have only recently begun to recognize how widespread  leg pain  may be in people with  endometriosis . A  2016 study  reports that as many as 50 percent of people with endometriosis may experience some form of leg pain.  A person with endometriosis may feel pain in their lower body if the condition affects the nerves in and around their pelvis. Diagnosing endometriosis-related leg pain can be tricky because a wide range of other medical conditions that are better understood and easier to diagnose can also cause leg pain.  In this article, we look at why endometriosis might cause leg pain, and what a person can do to treat it at home, or with a doctor's help.  Endometriosis is a chronic, noncancerous condition where cells that resemble the uterus lining, called endometrial cells, grow outside the uterus. This causes chronic  inflammation  and can lead to scarring.  It is difficult to estimate how many people have endometriosis because the condition often goes undiagnosed. By some estimates, at least  1 in 10  women in the United States have endometriosis.  Below is a fully interactive 3-D model showing endometrial tissue growing outside the uterus.  Explore the model using your mouse pad or touchscreen to understand more about endometriosis.  During regular menstruation, the uterus lining sheds and leaves the body through the vagina. This happens in response to changing hormone levels. When endometrial tissue grows outside the uterus, the cells still shed, but they cannot leave the body, causing painful symptoms.  In some cases, endometrial tissues grow in and around the many nerves that travel through the pelvis and hip. These nerves supply sensation to the leg.  Abnormal growths can put pressure on the pelvic nerves. This may cause pain and numbness in the hips, buttock, and legs. Nearly all of the documented cases of leg pain associated with endometriosis involve abnormal growths on the sciatic nerve or one of its branches.  The sciatic nerve is considered the largest and longest nerve in the human body. It begins in the lower back, runs through the pelvis, and down the leg into the foot, branching into several smaller nerves along the way. Pressure on this nerve can cause pain in the lower body.  The sciatic nerve provides sensation to most of the lower portion of the body. Pressure on the sciatic nerve can, therefore, cause a lot of different symptoms, most commonly pain, numbness, and tingling that radiates into the following areas:  There are several ways to help manage lower limb pain associated with endometriosis at home. Many of the methods that help reduce leg pain from endometriosis also help reduce the other common symptoms of the condition.  Everyday tips for finding relief include:  A person may also find that taking natural supplements that contain antioxidants and anti-inflammatory compounds can help with symptoms.  Natural supplements available for purchase online include:  A person with endometrial tissue growth on their pelvic nerves may also have growths on other organs and structures in the pelvic region. This means that people who have leg pain may also experience some of the more common symptoms of the condition.  Common symptoms of endometriosis include:  Some people with endometriosis experience symptoms randomly or sporadically, especially when the growths are blocking or restraining a pelvic or abdominal organ.  Individuals with chronic, untreated endometriosis may eventually feel pelvic or abdominal pain most of the time.  One of the most significant complications of endometriosis, aside from chronic pain and discomfort, is  infertility . Around  30 to 40 percent  of people with endometriosis are unable to become pregnant because of internal scarring.  The severity of the complications usually depends on the location, size, and thickness of the abnormal growths in the pelvis.  When endometriosis involves leg pain, additional complications may include:  In very rare cases, a person with leg, hip, and buttock pain caused by untreated endometriosis may lose some sensation in their legs or feet.  Endometriosis can affect a range of pelvic or abdominal organs and structures, including the pelvic nerves that supply sensation to the legs.  Though it was once considered rare, more people may experience leg pain linked to endometriosis than previously thought.  A person should talk to their doctor about chronic leg pain, especially if it gets much worse during menstruation. Left untreated, chronic endometriosis growths on the sciatic nerve or one of its branches can have more serious consequences.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bove, G. M. (2017, October 1). A model for radiating leg pain of endometriosis.  Journal of Bodywork and Movement Therapies ,  20 (4), 931–936.  Bove, G. M. (2017, October 1). A model for radiating leg pain of endometriosis.  Journal of Bodywork and Movement Therapies ,  20 (4), 931–936.  Chou, D. (2017, April 24). Endometriosis in and around the nerves — what can be done?  Endometriosis: What does the pain feel like? (2012, September 5).  Symptoms of endometriosis. (n.d.).  What is endometriosis? Causes, symptoms and treatments. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Can endometriosis cause leg pain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321457.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, April 10). "Can endometriosis cause leg pain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  