  Endometriosis  occurs when tissue that resembles the uterus lining grows elsewhere in the body. The tissue is called endometrial tissue. It may, for example, develop on the fallopian tubes, ovaries, bowel, or bladder.  Endometrial tissue gets thicker at the start of a woman's period and sheds during menstruation. When the tissue located outside of the uterus starts to drop away, it can cause pain, cramping, or scar tissue.  While there is no absolute cure for this condition, some home remedies can relieve the pain and discomfort it brings. In this article, we talk about 9 home remedies for endometriosis, causes, and when to see a doctor.  Taking a warm bath, or placing a heating pad or hot water bottle on the lower abdomen can help to relax cramping pelvic muscles, which should reduce pain.  This is a common treatment for menstrual cramps that can offer immediate relief.  A study from  2001  tested the effectiveness of heating pads on 81 women with painful periods. It found that using a low-level heating pad was as effective as ibuprofen for pain relief.  A  2010  study found that massaging the pelvic area, including parts of the abdomen, sides, and back, was helpful in reducing menstrual pain associated with endometriosis.  Doing this type of massage shortly before the menstrual period begins may be more comfortable. It may also be useful to use massage oil.  Over-the-counter (OTC) pain medications, such as acetaminophen, ibuprofen, or naproxen have been developed to fight  inflammation .  Reducing inflammation will often relieve cramping and pain. A doctor can determine the best dosing levels.  Turmeric has anti-inflammatory properties. Researchers in  2013  showed that turmeric might inhibit estradiol, a form of  estrogen . This may help to prevent growths.  Turmeric supplements are available as capsules. The spice is often found in teas and may be added to meals.  Altering the diet could reduce symptoms, though  more research is needed  to determine the best changes.  However, minimizing the consumption of red meat and increasing intake of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains  can help  to improve overall health.  Some experts recommend an elimination diet. This involves eating no foods that tend to cause inflammation, then reintroducing them slowly to determine which are problematic for the individual.  Potentially problematic foods include:  It is important to track symptoms so that potential triggers can be identified.  Regular exercise helps to release endorphins. These "feel good" hormones can reduce pain.  Exercise may also help to lower estrogen levels in the body and improve symptoms. Stretch before and after each workout.  Getting extra rest is important, especially during menstruation. Lying on the side with the knees pulled into the chest can help to relieve pain or pressure in the back.  Herbal or other supplements may help to reduce symptoms, though very little research has been done.  It is important to speak with a doctor before taking herbal supplements. Herbs are not monitored by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for quality, dose, or purity.   Omega-3  fatty acids may help to reduce inflammation. They are naturally found in fatty fish, such as salmon. They are also available as a daily supplement.  The medical community has yet to determine why endometriosis develops.  However, below are a few popular theories:  Symptoms of endometriosis vary. A person may be unaware that they have the condition. In other cases, symptoms may be so severe that a person requires bed rest for several days each month.  Regular checkups are important. Bring up any symptoms and report changes in menstrual periods.  A doctor should asses new or worsening pelvic pain. They will want to evaluate the pain by:  A doctor may require a laparoscopy. In this procedure, a surgeon will look for endometrial implants or other potential causes of symptoms or pain.  Endometriosis can cause difficulty in getting pregnant, and anyone wishing to become pregnant may want to consult a fertility doctor. Some treatments for endometriosis may also impact fertility, so it is important to discuss options.  Endometriosis is a chronic condition affecting the lives of millions. There is no cure, but a pain management program can help to relieve symptoms.  While the home remedies listed above are often useful, a person may require additional pain management or hormonal treatments to tackle some symptoms of endometriosis.    
 Akin, M. D., Weingand, K. W., Hengehold, D. A., Goodale, M. B., Hinkle, R. T., &amp; Smith, R. P. (2001, March). Continuous low-level topical heat in the treatment of dysmenorrhea [Abstract].  Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  97 (3), 343–349.  Akin, M. D., Weingand, K. W., Hengehold, D. A., Goodale, M. B., Hinkle, R. T., &amp; Smith, R. P. (2001, March). Continuous low-level topical heat in the treatment of dysmenorrhea [Abstract].  Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  97 (3), 343–349.  Endometriosis: Nutrition and exercise. (2017, January 20).  Endometriosis: Symptoms, treatment, diagnosis. (n.d.).  Jurkiewicz-Przondziono, J., Lemm, M., Kwiatkowska-Pamuła, A., Ziółko, E., Wójtowicz, M. K. (2017). Influence of diet on the risk of developing endometriosis [Abstract].  Ginekologia Polska ,  88 (2), 96–102.  Treatment options for endometriosis. (2017, October 19).  Valiani, M., Ghasemi, N., Bahadoran, P., &amp; Heshmat, R. (2010). The effects of massage therapy on dysmenorrhea caused by endometriosis [Abstract].  Iranian Journal of Nursing and Midwifery Research ,  15 (4), 167–171.  What causes endometriosis? (2017, October 19).  What is endometriosis? Causes, symptoms and treatments. (n.d.).  Zhang, Y., Cao, H., Yu, Z., Peng, H.-Y., &amp; Zhang, C. (2013, May). Curcumin inhibits endometriosis endometrial cells by reducing estradiol production.  Iranian Journal of Reproductive Medicine ,  11 (5), 415–422.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "Treating endometriosis symptoms at home."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321402.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, April 5). "Treating endometriosis symptoms at home."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  