 There are  17 types  of ragweed that grow in the United States, typically releasing pollen between August and September.  Just one plant can release as many as  1 billion pollen grains , which create future ragweed plants and cause significant seasonal allergies.  In this article, learn about the symptoms and causes of ragweed allergies, as well as how to treat them and prevent symptoms in the future.  A ragweed allergy can cause many symptoms, including:  Ragweed allergy symptoms tend to occur in the late summer to early fall when ragweed pollen starts to spread.  Ragweed pollen usually peaks in mid-September. A person may notice their symptoms subside after that time.  In addition to these symptoms, a ragweed allergy may irritate the upper airways, leading to coughing and wheezing in someone who has  asthma .  Ragweed tends to grow in rural areas in every state in the U.S. except Alaska. Common sites for ragweed to appear include riverbanks, roadsides, fields, and in vacant lots.  Ragweed seeds can stay dormant for 10 years or more and still grow into plants. Types of ragweed include:  Warm temperatures, winds, and humidity all help ragweed growth and transfer the pollen across large areas.  According to the  Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America , pollen has been found 400 miles out at sea and 2 miles up in the air.  Ragweed is particularly resistant to herbicides, making it very difficult for farmers to kill when it is on their land.  Ragweed pollen counts tend to be at their highest when the temperatures are warmest during the day, usually between 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.  People with ragweed allergies are often also sensitive to certain foods. This is because some plants can contain pollen that is similar to ragweed. The condition is known as oral allergy syndrome.  Foods that may cause symptoms in a person with a ragweed allergy include:  Some individuals may only experience mild symptoms, such as a runny nose or sneezing when eating these foods.  People can reduce the effects of oral allergy syndrome by cooking, peeling, or canning the fruits.  A ragweed allergy occurs if a person's immune system is sensitive to ragweed pollen.  When that person comes into contact with ragweed, their body will release immune system compounds that are called IgE. These compounds are meant to contain the pollen, but they also signal the release of inflammatory compounds called histamines.  The histamines go to the areas where the pollen was inhaled, often causing swelling and irritation in the nasal passages.  As a result, a person may experience sniffling, sneezing, and itching, usually around the nose and eyes.  Doctors can often diagnose a ragweed allergy based on a person's symptoms alone. They will usually ask when they first noticed symptoms and what makes them worse or better.  To confirm a ragweed allergy, a doctor can perform skin prick testing. This involves placing a small drop of diluted ragweed pollen on to the skin, then making a small scratch or prick.  If a person is allergic to ragweed, they will experience a mild reaction, including swelling, itching, or redness.  Another option to confirm an allergy is to have a blood test. A laboratory can test the blood for the presence of ragweed antibodies that indicate an allergy.  Unfortunately, there is no cure for a ragweed allergy. However, there are many treatments available to help manage the symptoms.  To reduce ragweed allergy symptoms, a person can:  Doctors may recommend immunotherapy injections for more severe symptoms. These involve injecting increasingly larger amounts of ragweed pollen to reduce a person's symptoms.  Immunotherapy injections can help someone find relief from ragweed allergy symptoms for many years.  If a person has a fear of needles, they may be able to talk to doctors about tablets or drops to help reduce allergy symptoms.  Fortunately, ragweed allergy season is not year-round. While it may cause unpleasant symptoms for several weeks, symptoms will subside when ragweed plants stop producing pollen.  Until then, over-the-counter treatments and limiting time outdoors can help reduce the symptoms.    
 French, J. (2016, September 1). All about ragweed: Signs, symptoms, and avoidance.  Allergic Living .  French, J. (2016, September 1). All about ragweed: Signs, symptoms, and avoidance.  Allergic Living .  Oral allergy syndrome. (n.d.).  Ragweed allergy. (n.d.).  Ragweed pollen allergy. (2015, September).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Ragweed allergy: What it is and foods to avoid."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321490.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, April 13). "Ragweed allergy: What it is and foods to avoid."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  