 RICE stands for:  Soft tissue injuries include sprains, strains, and contusions, which are commonly known as bruises.  These injuries are often sports-related. One study reported that sports are responsible for about  50 percent  of all musculoskeletal injuries sustained in the United States.  In this article, we describe the correct way to perform RICE and explore why it may be useful.  The benefits of the RICE method can be explained by stage:  A  review  of studies conducted in 2012 found that there was not enough data to prove that the RICE method effectively treated sprained ankles.  A  2015 review  associated with the Red Cross confirmed that ice was effective immediately after an injury. However, the researchers determined that immobilizing an injured limb may not be helpful. They found no evidence to support elevation. They also found indications that compression may not aid strains or sprains.  However, the RICE treatment method remains widely and frequently recommended for a wide variety of injuries.  It is not always necessary to see a doctor before trying the RICE method.  Following the steps below may help to treat a mild or moderate injury. Begin immediately after an injury, and continue treatment for the next 24–48 hours.  Seek medical care if:  Always exercise caution when returning to everyday activities.  It is most useful for mild to moderate injuries. Doctors usually recommend the RICE method for:  People often sustain sprains by tripping, falling, or through sudden twisting motions.  Repeated movements and lifting heavy objects the wrong way can cause strains.  The method is not recommended to treat broken bones or more serious injuries to soft tissue. These may require medication, surgery, or extensive  physical therapy .  The RICE method remains the most commonly recommended treatment for soft tissue injuries.  However, not all healthcare providers are completely on board.  Most support the idea of resting, or immobilizing, an injured body part immediately after an injury. Yet,  some studies  have shown that deliberate, guided movements can be helpful as recovery progresses.  This might involve:   Some  physical therapists take a dim view of applying ice and other efforts to prevent  inflammation . A  study from 2014  suggests that applying ice might actually interfere with the body's ability to heal.  Injuries are common. Between 2011 and 2014, people in the U.S. reported an average of  8.6 million  episodes of injury related to sports and recreation. Luckily, not all were serious. Approximately half required a visit to a doctor or clinician, but not emergency treatment.  The RICE method is best able to treat mild or moderate injuries, such as sprains, strains, and bruises.  If a person has tried the RICE method but experiences no improvement, or if they are unable to put any weight on the injured area, they should seek medical attention. This is also a good idea when an injured area is numb or misshapen.    
 Borra, V., De Buck, E., &amp; Vandekerckhove, P. (2015, October 3–7). RICE or ice: what does the evidence say? The evidence base for first aid treatment of sprains and strains.  Borra, V., De Buck, E., &amp; Vandekerckhove, P. (2015, October 3–7). RICE or ice: what does the evidence say? The evidence base for first aid treatment of sprains and strains.  Hock, L. (2011, August 3). Injured? the good, the bad, and the must-do.  Jam, B. (2014, May 20). Questioning the use of ice given inflammation is a perfectly healthy response following acute musculoskeletal injuries.  Laumonier, T., &amp; Menetrey, J. (2016, July 22). Muscle injuries and strategies for improving their repair.  Journal of Experimental Orthopaedics ,  3 (15).  R.I.C.E. Treatment. (2013).  Sheu, Y., Chen, L.-H., &amp; Hedegard, H. (2016, November 18). Sports- and recreation-related injury episodes in the United States, 2011–2014.  National Health Statistics Report, 2011–2014 , (99).  Sprains and strains. (2015, January 30).  Sprains, strains, and other soft tissue injuries. (n.d.).  van den Bekerom, M. P. J., Struijs, P. A. A., Blankevoort, L., Welling, L., van Dijk, C. N., &amp; Kerkhoffs, G. M. M. J. (2012, August). What is the evidence for rest, ice, compression, and elevation therapy in the treatment of ankle sprains in adults?  Journal of Athletic Training ,  47 (4), 435–443.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "What is the RICE method for injuries?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321469.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, April 11). "What is the RICE method for injuries?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  