 A crick in the neck can be temporary or chronic. It is often painless but may be connected to the chronic neck or shoulder pain.  In this article, we look at what causes a crick in the neck, as well as what treatment options are available.  Many people who develop a crick in their neck also have neck pain. This is because a crick in the neck is often  due to minor muscle injuries .  However, not all people with neck stiffness or a crick also have pain.  The most common sensations associated with a crick in the neck include:  Common causes of a crick in the neck include:  In many cases, a sedentary lifestyle, long periods spent sitting at a computer, or inadequate exercise make minor injuries worse or may prevent a crick in the neck from healing.  In about  15 percent  of cases, neck stiffness and pain is caused by an underlying medical problem. These causes include:  In very rare cases, a life-threatening neurological or blood vessel issue can cause a crick in the neck. These problems cause additional symptoms and require emergency medical attention:   Meningitis  is an infection in the meninges, the membranes that protect the brain and spinal cord. Symptoms often come on suddenly and include:   Heart attacks  and  strokes  sometimes cause sudden neck stiffness and can be life-threatening if not treated as soon as possible. A person should seek emergency medical attention if neck stiffness occurs with:  Cervical artery dissection is rare and happens when the arteries in the neck are torn, sometimes because the neck has been hyper-extended.  People with cervical artery dissection may feel a sharp pain at the base of the skull in addition to neck stiffness. Many people may also experience a sudden, intense headache.  A fall or blow to the head or back can injure the brain, the spinal cord, or both. These injuries are medical emergencies that can cause permanent brain damage or paralysis.  See a doctor immediately for:  Treatment for a crick in the neck depends on the underlying cause. If it is due to muscle stiffness or minor injuries, home treatment will often be enough to relieve symptoms.  Heat and ice can reduce  inflammation  and increase blood flow to the neck, helping the injury heal faster.  A person should try alternating heat and ice packs in 20-minute intervals. If one treatment helps more than the other, then continue using the one that works.  Exercise and stretching are highly effective because they fight the most common causes of neck stiffness: muscle weakness, poor posture, low flexibility, and muscle spasms.  A  2015 study  found that a 4-week neck and shoulder-stretching routine could fight chronic muscle pain and tension in office workers. A  2016 analysis  confirmed that exercise was an effective treatment for whiplash.  To relieve a crick in the neck, a person can try:  A person should never force a stretch or overextend the neck since this can make the pain worse.  It can also be helpful to take breaks every hour if work requires long periods of time at a desk.  A brisk walk during a lunch break may help fight generalized stiffness, including in the neck.  Over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medications, such as ibuprofen, can help reduce neck stiffness that causes pain.  Medications that fight inflammation can also help with stiffness due to inflammatory conditions, such as arthritis.  People who frequently have a crick in the neck may benefit from changing the way they sleep or sit.  Investing in a firm pillow, an ergonomic chair, or a neck cushion for long flights or drives can help prevent stiffness in the future.  People with chronic neck stiffness or pain sometimes find help from  acupuncture  or massage therapy. If home treatment fails, talk to a doctor before trying alternative medicine.  If the crick in the neck is caused by an underlying condition, such as osteoarthritis, it is essential to work with a doctor to find the best treatment.  A doctor may recommend a wide range of treatments, including  physical therapy , medication, exercise, steroid injections, and surgery.  If a person has meningitis, they may require  antibiotics  and a stay in the hospital. Likewise, someone who has a heart attack, stroke, or a broken artery will also require hospitalization. They will likely also need a variety of additional treatments, which may include medication, removing a blood clot, surgery, or blood thinners.  Most people recover from a crick in the neck within a few hours to a day or two. When the stiffness is due to an injury or associated with muscle pain, recovery can take longer.  Because a crick in the neck is often due to lifestyle factors, it may come back. It is essential, therefore, to make some lifestyle changes to prevent muscle stiffness and injuries occurring in the future.  While most people can treat a crick in the neck at home, people should see a doctor if a crick in the neck occurs with intense pain, other symptoms, or gets worse over several days.  The recovery time associated with more severe conditions will vary depending on the underlying problem and other factors, such as a person's overall health. For example, osteoarthritis is manageable but may require continuous treatment over many years.  A crick in the neck can be unnerving, especially if it has never happened before. For most people, however, it is not linked to a serious medical condition.  With a few stretches and a little patience, a crick in the neck should disappear. If it does not go away with home remedies, a person should speak to a doctor about treatment options.    
 Can you recognize a heart attack or stroke? (2014, August).  Can you recognize a heart attack or stroke? (2014, August).  Cianflocco, A. J. (n.d.). Neck pain.  Cianflocco, A. J. (2017, February). Evaluation of neck and back pain.  Meningitis. (2017, April 10).  Meningitis and septicaemia can kill in hours — know the symptoms. (n.d.).  Southerst, D., Nordin, M. C., Coté, P., Shearer, H. M., Varatharajan, S., Yu, H., … Taylor-Vaisey, A. L. (2016, December). Is exercise effective for the management of neck pain and associated disorders or whiplash-associated disorders? A systematic review by the Ontario Protocol for Traffic Injury Management (OPTIMa) Collaboration [Abstract].  The Spine Journal ,  16 (12), 1503–1523.  Tunwattanapong, P., Kongkasuwan, R., &amp; Kuptniratsaikul, V. (2015, March 16). The effectiveness of a neck and shoulder stretching exercise program among office workers with neck pain: A randomized controlled trial [Abstract].  Clinical Rehabilitation ,  30 (1), 64–72.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "How to treat a crick in the neck."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321444.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, April 9). "How to treat a crick in the neck."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  