 These spots can vary in color from yellowish-brown to black-brown. The shape and size can vary. Some people may notice irregular, blotchy patches, while others have brown lines.  In this article, we look at what causes discolored spots to form on the teeth. We also describe ways to prevent and remove them.  The following factors can lead to brown spots on the teeth:  Many dark-colored foods and drinks contain chemicals called chromogens. Like the tannic acid in red wine, these chemicals can stain tooth enamel.  Over time, these stains may become permanent, especially if a person has poor dental hygiene.  Foods and drinks containing artificial colors and dyes can also cause significant staining of the teeth.  These contain particles that can stick to microscopic pores in the tooth enamel. The particles build up with repeated use and can stain the teeth.  Stains resulting from smoking, chewing, or dipping tend to become darker and harder to remove over time.  The thousands of bacteria in the mouth continuously mix with saliva and food particles to form a sticky, translucent film called plaque.  We keep levels of plaque under control by brushing and flossing. Poor oral hygiene causes plaque to harden into a more permanent coating referred to as tartar or calculus. Once tartar has formed, only a dental professional can remove it.  Aside from poor oral hygiene, the following factors increase the risk of developing tartar:  Plaque and tartar bacteria eat the sugars that pass through the mouth. They then produce acids, which weaken enamel. The thick, filmy nature of plaque and tartar lead to these acids adhering to the teeth for long periods of time.  As the acids weaken the enamel, the yellowish layers of tooth below become more apparent. The teeth may then appear yellowish-brown. If the decay is severe enough, the acids can bore a hole, or cavity, through the tooth. This will be darkly colored.  Even tiny breaks and cracks in the teeth can allow bacteria to enter and lead to decay.  Many people develop dark spots of decay around the edges of dental fillings or crowns when bacteria has entered through crevices.  Dental cavities are often fairly uncomfortable and can be painful when large. Decay often leads to exposure of the root or nerve, so these teeth are often sensitive cold or hot foods and beverages.  As people age, the white enamel that protects the teeth slowly degrades, exposing the layers of yellow dentin underneath. This natural process can lead to yellowish-brown spots or large patches or discoloration.  Everyone's natural tooth color is different, and some may be darker than others.  Other genetic factors include:  Dental fillings, crowns, and bridges all eventually wear down and lose their color. Otherwise, the metal in fillings can transfer its color into the tooth over time.  Some medications cause tooth discoloration, particularly the  antibiotic  tetracycline and its relatives. This is common in young children.  Other medications associated with brown spots on the teeth include:  This condition is caused by a disruption in development which causes enamel to be hard but thin. The contours of teeth may contain chalky, white or yellowish-brown patches.  Enamel hypoplasia can be acquired, but it is sometimes present from birth. In this case, it is called amelogenesis imperfecta.  Common causes and risk factors for enamel hypoplasia include:  Dental symptoms are often the first noticeable indications of  celiac disease . They often include:  The issues often concern the molars and incisors. They will appear on both sides of the mouth.  Too much fluoride can stain enamel, especially in children younger than 8 years old.  This discoloration is called fluorosis. It may appear as white or greyish streaks across the teeth. In severe cases, fluorosis can cause dark brown spots and pits.  While symptoms may be similar to those of tooth decay, fluorosis is generally harmless.  The cause of brown spots on the teeth will determine the best treatment.  The following home remedies can eliminate stains caused by foods, drinks, or lifestyle habits such as smoking:  Many over-the-counter products can eliminate tooth discoloration. A person will usually see results after 1–2 weeks, though there is no guarantee.  Some over-the-counter options include:  If discoloration is caused by tartar or medical conditions, a person may need to visit a dentist.  A dentist or dental hygienist will use instruments to scrape, blast, or rub tartar and plaque away from teeth. A dentist may also perform minor procedures to whiten the teeth and protect them from further decay. These include bleaching and applying topical fluoride.  Tooth discoloration associated with celiac disease is permanent. Most stains and spots caused by fluorosis or tooth decay are likewise irreversible.  For permanent or stubborn brown spots on the teeth a dentist may be able to hide discolorations, or prevent further discoloration, with:  They may also recommend wearing a night guard or retainer.  The easiest way to prevent brown spots on the teeth is by practicing good oral hygiene.  The following tips may help:  The following can stain the teeth and weaken the enamel.  It is a good idea to avoid:  Some foods can help to strengthen enamel and prevent discoloration. Those rich in roughage or fiber can help to scrub bacteria and bits of plaque off the teeth. Others form barriers to plaque or contain chemicals that help to neutralize the acids that weaken enamel.  Foods that may help prevent tooth discoloration include:  Brown spots on the teeth are often the result of poor oral hygiene, smoking, or consuming many dark foods and drinks.  Spots on the outside of the tooth can often be removed and are easy to prevent.  Rarely, brown spots on the teeth signal a medical condition. Or, they may be side effects of medication.  If brown spots are accompanied by other symptoms or not responding to over-the-counter treatments, a person should seek medical advice.  It is a good idea to speak with a dentist or doctor any time a person is unsure of the cause of discoloration.  Some of the home remedies listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Carey, C. M. (2014, February 13). Tooth whitening: What we now know.  The Journal of Evidence-Based Dental Practice ,  14 , 70–76.  Carey, C. M. (2014, February 13). Tooth whitening: What we now know.  The Journal of Evidence-Based Dental Practice ,  14 , 70–76.  Dental enamel defects and celiac disease. (2014, September).  Fluorosis. (2016, June 1).  Kanchan, T., Machado, M., Rao, A., Krishan, K., &amp; Garg, A. K. (2015, April–June). Enamel hypoplasia and its role in identification of individuals: A review of literature.  Indian Journal of Dentistry ,  6 (2), 99–102.  Perry, R. (2016, March 18). What causes discolored teeth and is there any way to cure or prevent staining?  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What to do about brown spots on your teeth."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321480.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, April 12). "What to do about brown spots on your teeth."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  