 There are many reasons why someone may experience tingling in their feet and hands, most of which are temporary.  If a person sits or sleeps in an unusual position, it may put pressure on a nerve and cause a tingling sensation in the feet or hands. People often refer to this as "pins and needles."  Some causes of tingling in feet or hands are more serious and may require proper diagnosis and treatment.  A lot of causes of tingling sensations are linked to a condition called peripheral  neuropathy . This is a type of nerve damage that leads to tingling and numbness in the hands and feet.  Various conditions lead to peripheral neuropathy. It affects an estimated  20 million people  in the United States.  The causes of peripheral neuropathy and other reasons that feet or hands may tingle are explored here.  A person may experience tingling in their feet or hands because of a pinched nerve in the back. This may have happened as a result of injury or swelling.  Other symptoms of a pinched nerve include pain and limited movement. Treatment for a pinched nerve can involve:  Surgery is another option if none of these treatments are effective.  Swallowing something toxic or a toxin being absorbed through the skin may be a cause of tingling in the feet.  Toxins that may cause this include:  Treatment for toxin exposure needs to be carried out urgently and will depend on the substance.  Alcohol is a toxin and can damage nerve tissue. Drinking too much alcohol may lead to a type of peripheral neuropathy known as alcoholic neuropathy.  This condition can cause pain and tingling in the limbs, hands, and feet. These symptoms happen because the peripheral nerves have been damaged by alcohol.  From  25 to 66 percent  of people who are classified as long-term alcoholics experience alcoholic neuropathy, according to a study. Treatments focus on helping the individual reduce or stop their excessive drinking.  People who experience  anxiety  may hyperventilate, which can cause tingling in the feet.  Hyperventilating is a common symptom of anxiety and is characterized by breathing very rapidly. This causes an imbalance in carbon dioxide and oxygen levels, which may result in the feet tingling.  Tingling in the feet and anxiety may be linked psychologically. This is why, when a person feels anxious, they may be more aware of their bodily sensations.  Anxiety treatments include:  Tingling in the feet is often experienced when someone is pregnant. The uterus may put pressure on the nerves in a person's legs as their baby grows. This may cause tingling, often described as "pins and needles."  Staying hydrated, changing positions, and resting with the feet up can help relieve the sensation.  Someone should see a doctor if:  A doctor can ensure there is nothing else wrong if someone is pregnant and they experience tingling sensations.   Repetitive strain injury  or RSI may cause tingling in the hands. RSI happens when a person carries out repetitive activities for too long without rest.  RSI is also known as work-related upper limb disorder. It can be the result of poor posture.  RSI commonly affects:  Other symptoms of RSI may include:  Treatments for RSI include:  There is a selection of  cold packs  and  elastic supports  available for purchase online.  Deficiency of  vitamins  E, B-1, B-6, B-12 or niacin may cause tingling in the hands or feet. These vitamins are vital for nerve function.  Vitamin B-12 deficiency may lead to peripheral neuropathy. Other symptoms include:  Vitamin deficiencies can be treated by eating a more healthful diet or by dietary supplements.  Vitamin B supplements are available for purchase  online .   Multiple sclerosis  or MS is a long-term condition that affects the brain and spinal cord.  Numbness or tingling in the feet is an early symptom of MS, according to the  National Multiple Sclerosis Society . People with the condition may experience tingling before diagnosis.  Other symptoms of MS include:  If someone suspects they may have MS, they should speak to their doctor who can help to reach a diagnosis.  Treatments for MS include:  Certain medications may cause tingling in the hands or feet as one of their side effects.  Medications that may cause this symptom include those that treat:  Certain infections cause nerves to become inflamed. This  inflammation  may lead to tingling in the hands or feet.  Infections that may cause this include:  Anyone who suspects they may have an infection should speak to a doctor so that they can do the appropriate tests. These often involve a blood test.  A doctor can advise on the best course of treatment once they have diagnosed an infection.  Tingling in the feet or hands may be a sign of kidney failure.  Diabetes  and high blood pressure both increase the risk of kidney failure.  Other symptoms of kidney failure include:  Anyone who suspects they may have a problem with their kidneys should speak to their doctor for tests to reach a diagnosis.  Kidney failure can be treated through dialysis or a kidney transplant.  Autoimmune disease may cause tingling in the feet or hands. Autoimmune disease occurs when the body attacks itself.  Autoimmune diseases that may cause tingling include:  To diagnose an autoimmune disease, a doctor may:  Treatments for autoimmune diseases include medication and dietary changes.  Diabetes causes high blood sugar, which may lead to nerve damage. People with diabetes may experience persistent tingling in the feet as a result. This condition is called  diabetic neuropathy .  Other diabetes symptoms include:  Treatments for diabetes include:   Peripheral artery disease  or PAD affects the circulatory system, causing blood vessels to become narrower. This may lead to poor circulation, which can cause tingling in the feet or hands.  PAD may result in a  stroke  or  heart attack  due to plaque buildup in the arteries if it is left untreated. Treatments include medications, lifestyle changes, or surgery.  Tingling in the feet or hands may be a sign of a stroke.  Symptoms come on suddenly and may include:  People should call emergency services immediately if they experience one or more of these symptoms.  Treatments for stroke include thrombolytic drugs, which help to treat any blood clots.  People who experience tingling in their feet or hands regularly should speak to their doctor. They should also tell their doctor about any related symptoms. The doctor can help reach a diagnosis and recommend appropriate treatment.  People should call emergency services without delay if they suspect they or someone else may be having a stroke.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Chopra, K., &amp; Tiwari, V. (2012, March). Alcoholic neuropathy: Possible mechanisms and future treatment possibilities.  British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology ,  73 (3), 348–362.  Chopra, K., &amp; Tiwari, V. (2012, March). Alcoholic neuropathy: Possible mechanisms and future treatment possibilities.  British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology ,  73 (3), 348–362.  Numbness or tingling. (n.d.).  Peripheral neuropathy [Fact sheet]. (2017, May 9).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What could cause tingling in the feet or hands?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321423.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, April 6). "What could cause tingling in the feet or hands?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  