 This bubbling feeling is linked to a variety of conditions that range from mild to severe. The sensation may appear alone or occur alongside other signs and symptoms. People with a bubbling feeling in the chest should always see their doctor for a diagnosis.  Here, we explore 12 common causes of a bubbling feeling in the chest:  People with  asthma  may experience a bubbling sensation in the chest. Asthma is a lung condition that involves swelling and narrowing of the airways. It affects approximately  25 million Americans .  Other symptoms include:  Asthma may be triggered by:  Most people can manage their asthma with lifestyle changes and medication.   Atrial fibrillation  is an irregular heartbeat, often one that is faster than normal. It happens when the upper chambers of the heart are out of sync with the lower chambers.  Other symptoms can include:  Atrial fibrillation requires medical treatment. While it is not usually life-threatening, it can lead to complications, such as blood clots in the heart.   Bronchitis  causes  inflammation  of the tubes that connect the lungs to the mouth and nose (bronchial tubes). It may be short-term (acute) or last 3 months or more (chronic).  Other symptoms of bronchitis include:  Treatment depends on the type of bronchitis a person has. Acute bronchitis is usually treated in the same way as a cold, and symptoms will typically go away in 10 to 14 days. Treatment for chronic bronchitis may include inhalers and oxygen therapy.  A collapsed lung or pneumothorax happens when air leaks from the lung into the area between the lung and the chest wall.  As well as the bubbling feeling, a collapsed lung can cause:  A collapsed lung can occur suddenly for no reason or be caused by:  A collapsed lung should be considered a medical emergency even when symptoms are mild. Symptoms typically resolve quickly, and there are usually no future complications with prompt treatment.  Below is a 3-D model of a pneumothorax, which is fully interactive. Explore it using your mouse or touchscreen.   Inflammation of the gallbladder  or cholecystitis can be caused by blocked bile ducts, tumors, or infection.  Symptoms often flare up after eating, particularly if the meal was large or high in fat. Symptoms include:  Some people may also notice a bubbling feeling in the chest.  Treatment involves  antibiotics , painkillers, or gallbladder removal. Untreated gallbladder inflammation can lead to serious complications, some of which can be life-threatening.   GERD  involves the rise of stomach acid into the food pipe.  GERD can cause:  GERD can be caused by:  The usual treatments for GERD and heartburn are medications and lifestyle changes.   Indigestion  is pain or discomfort in your upper abdomen that can cause a bubbling sensation in the chest and gurgling in the abdomen after eating. Indigestion is also known as dyspepsia.  People may also experience:  Dyspepsia can be caused by:  Treatment involves lifestyle and dietary changes, as well as medications.   Pleurisy  or pleuritis involves inflammation of the thin membrane that lines the inside of the chest cavity and surrounds the lungs (pleura). It is caused by an underlying medical condition.  Symptoms include:  Treatment involves addressing the underlying condition and managing pain.  Pleural effusion occurs when fluid becomes trapped in the space between the lining of the lung and the chest wall. It is often a symptom of another condition, such as:  Symptoms include bubbling in the chest, cough, and shortness of breath.  A lung  tumor  may be linked to a bubbling feeling in the chest, in rare cases. Lung tumors may be harmless or cancerous.  Many people with a lung tumor do not develop symptoms until the tumor has been there for many months or even years.  When symptoms are present, they may include:  A condition called pneumomediastinum may lead to the symptom of a bubbling sensation in the chest, although this is an uncommon cause.  This condition is caused by trapped air in the middle of the chest under your breastbone and between your lungs that results from injury or air leakage.  There is not always an obvious explanation, but people with pneumomediastinum may experience:  Precordial catch syndrome arises when nerves in the chest are pinched or squeezed. It typically presents in children, adolescents, and people in their early 20s. It is not usually harmful, although alarming.  Symptoms include sharp chest pain that comes on suddenly and a bubbling sensation. Symptoms typically disappear with age, but there is no treatment.  A gurgling or bubbling feeling in the chest may also be linked to other conditions, such as:  If anyone experiences a bubbling feeling in their chest, it is crucial that they consult a doctor. Although the bubbling may merely be indigestion, it could be a sign of something serious, such as a tumor or collapsed lung.  Anyone who experiences the following symptoms should seek emergency medical treatment:  Prompt treatment can ensure a proper diagnosis and treatment plan is carried out.    
 Asthma facts and figures. (2018, February).  Asthma facts and figures. (2018, February).  Atrial Fibrillation. (n.d).  Currie, G. P., Alluri, R., Christie, G. L., &amp; Legge, J. S. (2007, June 29). Pneumothorax: an update [Abstract].  Postgraduate Medical Journal ,  83 , 461–465.  Gastritis: Overview. (2015, June 30).  Pnuemothorax. What is it? (2013, January).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Possible causes of a bubbling feeling in the chest."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321432.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 7). "Possible causes of a bubbling feeling in the chest."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  