 In this article, we look at the link between veganism and weight loss, including what foods to eat and if there are any risks. We also list some tips for people looking to lose weight with a vegan diet.   Research  has found that people who follow a vegan diet tend to have a lower body mass index ( BMI ). This could mean that a vegan diet helps with weight loss, or that a person who eats vegan is more likely to make other weight-conscious decisions.  However, a handful of studies have directly measured the effects of a vegan diet on weight loss, suggesting that a vegan diet may help a person to lose weight.  A  2016  study compared weight loss over 6 months among people who followed vegan, vegetarian, semi-vegetarian, and omnivorous diets. The results showed that people on a vegan diet lost more weight than other groups. They also decreased their consumption of saturated fats.  A  2016  review of studies examined 96 studies of vegan and vegetarian diets, and concluded that plant-based diets were more effective for weight loss compared to omnivorous diets.  Vegan and vegetarian participants also had other health improvements, including lower  cholesterol  and a lower risk of  cancer .  A  2015  study suggests that a vegetarian diet rich in vegetable fats may even boost metabolism. This means that vegetarians and vegans might burn more  calories  while at rest, making their weight loss efforts more effective.  As with all weight loss plans, one of the biggest concern is often whether or not a person will stick to it. Many people stop their diets after a few days or weeks, and some regain the weight they have lost because they go back to old eating habits once the diet is over.  It might seem difficult to plan out a vegan diet. However, a  2015  study found that people were no more likely to quit a vegan diet than they were to give up on other diets.  The study also found that vegans who did not fully adhere to their diet still lost more weight than omnivores who did not fully adhere to other weight loss diets.  Vegan diets eliminate many foods high in fat, cholesterol, calories, and saturated fat.  Many processed or pre-packaged foods contain animal products, so vegan diets help people to eat fresh, whole foods instead.   Research  has documented a number of health benefits that have been associated with vegetarian and vegan diets, including:  However, vegan diets may also present some health challenges. Animal products naturally contain  vitamin  B-12, so a person following a vegan diet will need to find other sources, such as:  Vegans may also become deficient in iron, vitamin C,  calcium ,  vitamin D , protein, and  omega-3  fatty acids if they do not consume enough foods with these nutrients.  The following foods can prevent nutritional deficits while helping a person feel satisfied on a vegan diet:  As with any other diet, one key to successful weight loss as a vegan is to consume fewer calories than are burned through exercise and daily activities.  To maximize weight loss and ensure good health while on a vegan diet, a person can try:  Any diet can cause weight gain, including a vegan one. It is possible to replace meat or dairy products with high-calorie processed foods that can put on weight.  It can be easy to rely on heavy vegan  carbohydrates  or carbs, such as pasta and bread, for regular meals. While carbs are important, it is essential to vary them with protein sources, such as beans, homemade vegan burgers, and tofu scrambles.  Also, as veganism grows more popular, there are increasing amounts of vegan junk food available, including cakes, candies, and ice cream. While it is fine to enjoy a treat every once in a while, a person on a vegan diet should be mindful that just because something is vegan does not mean it is healthy.  A vegan diet takes planning and careful attention to  nutrition . This can be a good thing since it helps people think about the foods they eat and make positive choices.  Many processed foods, meat, and dairy products are high in calories and low in other nutrients, so making the switch to veganism may help some people lose weight by eliminating these foods.  Anyone starting a vegan diet for weight loss should ensure they get adequate protein, iron, and vitamin B-12, and they may wish to speak to a doctor or nutritionist first.    
 Appleby, P. N., &amp; Key, T. J. (2016, August). The long-term health of vegetarians and vegans [Abstract].  Proceedings of the Nutrition Society ,  75 (3), 287–293.  Appleby, P. N., &amp; Key, T. J. (2016, August). The long-term health of vegetarians and vegans [Abstract].  Proceedings of the Nutrition Society ,  75 (3), 287–293.  Dinu, M., Abbate, R., Gensini, G. F., Casini, A., &amp; Sofi, F. (2016, February 6). Vegetarian, vegan diets and multiple health outcomes: A systematic review with meta-analysis of observational studies [Abstract].  Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition ,  57 (17), 3640–3649.  Mahmassani, H., Avendano, E. E., Raman, G., &amp; Johnson, E. J. (2017, April 1). Avocado consumption and risk factors of heart disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  The FASEB Journal ,  31 (Suppl 1).  Montalcini, T., De Bonis, D., Ferro, Y., Carè, I., Mazza, E., Accattato, F., … Pujia, A. (2015, July 17). High vegetable fats intake is associated with high resting energy expenditure in vegetarians.  Nutrients ,  7 (7), 5933–5947.  Moore, W. J., McGrievy, M. E., &amp; Turner-McGrievy, G. M. (2015, December). Dietary adherence and acceptability of five different diets, including vegan and vegetarian diets, for weight loss: The New DIETs study [Abstract].  Eating Behaviors ,  19 , 33–38.  Omega-3s. (n.d.).  Shah, B., Newman, J., &amp; Woolf, K. (2017, November 14). Anti-inflammatory effect of whole-food plant-based vegan diet vs the American Heart Association-recommended diet in patients with coronary artery disease: The randomized EVADE CAD trial [Abstract].  Circulation ,  136 (Suppl 1).  Turner-McGrievy, G. M., Davidson, C. R., Wingard, E. E., Wilcox, S., &amp; Frongillo, E. A. (2015, February). Comparative effectiveness of plant-based diets for weight loss: A randomized controlled trial of five different diets [Abstract].  Nutrition ,  31 (2), 350–358.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Can a vegan diet help you lose weight?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321477.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, April 12). "Can a vegan diet help you lose weight?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  