 The white spots may be accompanied by other symptoms such as pain or discomfort. The spots can occur individually or in a cluster.  In this article, we address the causes and symptoms of white spots on the gums and list some treatment options.  Some of the most common causes of white spots on the gums include:  Canker sores develop on the soft tissues of the mouth and around the gums. Also known as mouth ulcers, they tend to:  The cause is unclear, but they may be triggered by:  Canker sores can be minor or major. Minor sores are relatively widespread and usually heal within 2 weeks. Major sores tend to be deeper and more painful and can take up to 6 weeks to heal.  People with canker sores that persist for more than 14 days should consult a doctor or dentist.  Leukoplakia is characterized by thick, white patches in the mouth that cannot be scraped off with a toothbrush.  Doctors do not know what causes leukoplakia. But, it is likely that smoking or chewing tobacco contributes to its development. Ill-fitting dentures or long-term alcohol use may also cause leukoplakia.  Most cases of leukoplakia are benign, but some can be precancerous. However, it is areas with red lesions (erythroplakia) that are more likely to be cancerous or precancerous, according to the  American Cancer Society .  Oral  lichen planus  is an autoimmune condition that involves  inflammation  of the mucous membranes in the mouth. It tends to cause white, lacy patches.  There is no cure for oral lichen planus, but symptoms can be managed. Oral lichen planus can increase the risk of secondary infections and  oral cancer . It can also cause nutritional deficiencies, as some people may avoid a variety of healthful foods that aggravate their symptoms.  As a result, people with oral lichen planus should organize regular check-ups with their doctor.  This oral infection is caused by an overgrowth of the  Candida  fungus. It presents as slightly raised sores that are creamy white in appearance. They often have the texture of cottage cheese.  Babies and older adults are most commonly affected due to reduced immunity, but  oral thrush  can occur in anyone. People with uncontrolled  diabetes  or who are taking certain  antibiotics  are also more likely to get the infection.  Symptoms that accompany white spots on the gums vary depending on the underlying cause.  Canker sore symptoms include:  Leukoplakia patches may:  Oral lichen planus symptoms include:  Oral thrush may cause:  People should see a doctor or dentist if they experience any of the above symptoms alongside white spots on the gums.  A doctor or dentist will diagnose the cause of white spots on the gums by:  Sometimes a doctor may take a small sample of tissue from oral lesions to diagnose oral lichen planus or to check for cancerous or precancerous cells associated with leukoplakia.  Treatment depends on the underlying cause.  Minor canker sores typically resolve within 1 to 2 weeks. Major canker sores often require treatments such as:  A doctor can treat severe cases by sealing the sores or prescribing oral steroids. Lasers can also help to reduce pain and promote faster healing.  Doctors will advise people with leukoplakia to stop using tobacco products, as these contribute to the condition. The white patches may be removed with a scalpel, laser, or frozen off.  If a weak immune system causes the condition, a doctor may prescribe antiviral medications.  There is no cure for this condition, so treatment aims to reduce symptoms and improve quality of life. Treatment can include corticosteroids for inflammation and numbing gels to reduce pain.  Doctors usually prescribe an antifungal medication for oral thrush. It is available as a tablet, lozenge, or rinse. Persistent or widespread  Candida  infections may require a stronger antifungal medication.  The best method of prevention is good oral hygiene.  Suggestions include:  Although it is rare, white spots in the mouth can be caused by an allergic reaction to dental products. People should immediately stop using any new products that cause an allergic reaction.  The outlook for people with white spots on the gums depends on the underlying cause, the overall health of the person, and how quickly a person received treatment.  Careful monitoring and regular dental screenings can ensure oral conditions get prompt treatment. Early detection can prevent the problem from progressing and may reduce the risk of complications.  If anyone notices white spots or any other mouth sores that do not disappear within 2 weeks, it is essential they schedule an appointment with a doctor or dentist.    
 Kardam, P., Rehani, S., Mehendiratta, M., Sahay, K., Mathias, Y., &amp; Sharma, R. (2015, June 5). Journey of leukoplakia so far — an insight on shortcomings of definitions and classifications.  Journal of Dentistry, Oral Disorders &amp; Therapy ,  3 (2), 1–6.  Kardam, P., Rehani, S., Mehendiratta, M., Sahay, K., Mathias, Y., &amp; Sharma, R. (2015, June 5). Journey of leukoplakia so far — an insight on shortcomings of definitions and classifications.  Journal of Dentistry, Oral Disorders &amp; Therapy ,  3 (2), 1–6.  Wang, S. J., Sciubba, J. J., Silverman, S., Califano, J., &amp; Richmon, J. D. (2014, September 2). Cancer, canker sores, and more: High-risk oral cavity lesions [Abstract].  Otolaryngology — Head and Neck Surgery ,  151 (1), 15.  What are oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers? (2018, March 9).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Why do my gums look white?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321454.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 10). "Why do my gums look white?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  