 However, when a person is unable to get rid of the taste by rinsing and brushing, it may be wise to see a doctor or dentist. They can determine the underlying cause.  Read on to learn more about the causes and treatments of a persistent bad taste in the mouth.  What qualifies as bad varies from person-to-person. However, a bad taste in the mouth may be classified as:  Each of the health issues and medical conditions listed below can cause a persistent bad taste in the mouth.  Poor oral hygiene or dental health issues such as cavities and  gum disease , can contribute to a lingering bad taste. Infection,  inflammation , and abscesses may also be involved.  Other symptoms of problematic oral hygiene include:  Brush, floss, and use a mouth rinse every day to prevent dental problems. It is also important to schedule regular dental cleanings and screenings.  A dry or sticky mouth is caused by a lack of saliva. This symptom can accompany a lingering bad taste and bad breath.  Saliva is vital to oral health because it reduces the amount of bacteria and food particles in the mouth.   Dry mouth  can be caused by:  Some medical conditions, including nerve damage and  diabetes , can also lead to a lack of saliva.   Acid reflux  happens when stomach acid travels upward through the esophagus. A sour taste in the mouth is a common symptom of acid reflux.  Other symptoms include:  This infection is caused by an overgrowth of the  Candida  fungus.  Symptoms include:   Oral thrush  tends to occur in infants, older adults, people with diabetes, and people taking some  antibiotics . However, anyone can get oral thrush.  Infections of the tonsils, sinuses, and middle ear often cause an unpleasant metallic taste in the mouth.  People with respiratory infections may also have congestion, an earache, and a sore throat.  Hepatitis B is a viral infection of the liver, and it can cause a bitter taste in the mouth. Other symptoms include:  Hepatitis B is serious, and anyone who suspects it should seek treatment right away.  Hormonal changes in early pregnancy can impact the sense of taste and smell. Many report a metallic taste in the mouth, but it usually disappears as the pregnancy progresses.  Hormonal changes linked to  menopause  may also cause dry mouth, which is often accompanied by a bitter taste.  Medications that can cause a bitter or metallic taste in the mouth include:  Other medications may cause dry mouth, which affects the sense of taste.   Vitamins  and supplements known to cause a metallic taste in the mouth include:  Multivitamins and prenatal vitamins may contain some of these nutrients.  The bad taste should disappear as the body processes the supplement or if the dose is reduced.   Chemotherapy  and radiation are known to cause an unpleasant taste in the mouth. The taste is usually metallic or sour.  When nerves in the brain are damaged, the sense of taste may be altered. Neurological conditions that can cause a bad taste in the mouth include:  An injury to the head may have a similar effect.  A person exposed to high levels of mercury or lead may inadvertently inhale these chemicals,  causing  a metallic taste in the mouth.  Treatment for a lingering bad taste in the mouth depends on the cause.  Before making a diagnosis, a doctor will usually take a full medical history and inquire about other symptoms. They may need to order certain tests.  Treatment may not be necessary, for example, if the cause of the taste is changing hormones. Viral infections can also clear up without treatment, and the taste should disappear.  When treatment is required, options include:  If a medication or supplement is responsible for the taste, a doctor may suggest an alternative, or change the recommended dosage.  If a  cancer  therapy is causing the taste, it will usually go away as the treatment finishes.  Treating the underlying condition will usually put an end to the bad taste in the mouth.  If dental cavities, gum disease, or other oral health issues are causing the taste, a dentist will recommend a procedure, medication, or medicated mouth rinse.  In some cases, home remedies can help to resolve a bad taste in the mouth. These should usually be used in conjunction with medical or dental treatment.  Some effective home remedies include:  Many issues can cause a bad taste to linger in the mouth, but it is highly treatable. See a doctor for a diagnosis and to ensure that no further complications arise.  In the meantime, several home remedies can improve oral hygiene and provide temporary relief from a bad taste in the mouth.    
 8 possible causes for that metallic taste in your mouth. (2015, April 13).  8 possible causes for that metallic taste in your mouth. (2015, April 13).  Kabadi, A., Saadi, M., Schey, R., &amp; Parkman, H. P. (2017, July). Taste and smell disturbances in patients with gastroparesis and gastroesophageal reflux disease.  Journal of Neurogastroenterology and Motility ,  23 (3), 370–377.  Nordin, S., Broman, D. A., Olofsson, J. K., &amp; Wulff, M. (2004, June 1). A longitudinal descriptive study of self-reported abnormal smell and taste perception in pregnant women.  Chemical Senses ,  29 (5), 391–402.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Can a cavity cause a bad taste in the mouth?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321438.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 9). "Can a cavity cause a bad taste in the mouth?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  