 The normal bladder capacity is about 16 ounces (2 cups) of liquid and even less for a child. The bladder can stretch to hold more than this, but doing so too often can be dangerous.  Regularly putting off going to the bathroom is not recommended.  In this article, we look at the possible effects of holding in pee too long or too frequently.  In a healthy adult, occasionally holding in pee will not cause problems, but there may be some unwanted effects if it becomes a habit.  When the bladder fills about halfway with liquid, it sends a signal to the brain that it is time to pee. The brain creates the urge to urinate while telling the bladder to hold on.  Sometimes it is necessary to hold in urine. It may be difficult to access a restroom, or a person may be practicing exercises to retrain their bladder.  There are no hard rules for how and when it is safe to hold in pee. Some people may be more prone to side effects than others.  Below, we look at five potential side effects of holding in pee:  People who regularly ignore the urge to pee may feel pain in the bladder or kidneys. When a person finally does reach the bathroom, urinating may also hurt.  The muscles may also stay partially clenched after the urine is released, which can lead to pelvic cramps.  In some cases, holding in pee for too long can cause bacteria to multiply. This may lead to a  urinary tract infection  (UTI).  No research has shown that holding in pee causes UTIs, but many doctors recommend avoiding it, especially if a person has a history of frequent UTIs.  People who do not drink enough liquids may be more likely to develop a UTI because the bladder is not telling the body to pee often enough. This can cause bacteria to spread through the urinary tract, leading to infection.  Symptoms of a UTI include:  In the long term, regularly holding in pee can cause the bladder to stretch. This may make it difficult or impossible for the bladder to contract and release pee normally.  If a person has a stretched bladder, extra measures, such as a catheter, may be necessary.  Frequently retaining urine may harm the pelvic floor muscles.  One of these muscles is the urethral sphincter, which keeps the urethra closed, to prevent urine from leaking out. Damaging this muscle could lead to  urinary incontinence .  Doing pelvic floor exercises such as Kegels may help to strengthen these muscles and prevent leakage or repair muscle loss.  Holding in pee may cause  kidney stones  to form in people with a history of the condition, or people who have a high mineral content in their urine. Pee often contains minerals such as uric acid and  calcium  oxalate.  A common myth is that the bladder will burst if a person holds in their pee too long. Although this is extremely rare, it is possible.  It is much more likely that the bladder will simply override the muscles holding the urine in, causing the person to have an accident.  Some preexisting medical conditions can lead to urine retention. This is usually involuntary, and it tends to go unnoticed, but it can cause similar complications.  An enlarged prostate, weakened bladder muscles, or nerve damage in the urinary system may block the flow of urine or cause the body to retain it.  People with kidney disorders may also want to avoid holding in pee, to prevent possible complications.  In some cases, doctors may recommend retraining the bladder to pee less frequently. This involves resisting the urge to pee.  The goal is to increase the amount of fluid the bladder can hold before it triggers the urge to pee. If successful, this will extend the amount of time between trips to the bathroom.  A doctor will often develop a personalized retraining schedule. The following tips may help a person ease into the retraining process:  The key is to engage the brain and direct attention away from the urge to urinate.  Though it is best to pee whenever the bladder is full, a person may not have immediate access to a bathroom.  The following tips can help a person make it to a toilet in time:  Occasionally holding pee in will likely cause no harm. However, regularly doing so may increase the risk of infection or other complications.  It may help to have healthy and regular bathroom habits. Anyone who feels that they are urinating too much or too often should speak to a doctor.    
 Al-Badr, A., &amp; Al-Shaikh, G. (2013, August). Recurrent urinary tract infections management in women: A review.  Sultan Qaboos University Medical Journal ,  13 (3), 359–367.  Al-Badr, A., &amp; Al-Shaikh, G. (2013, August). Recurrent urinary tract infections management in women: A review.  Sultan Qaboos University Medical Journal ,  13 (3), 359–367.  Dubey, I. B., Mohanty, D., &amp; Jain, B. K. (2012, June). Diverse presentation of spontaneous rupture of urinary bladder: Review of two cases and literature [Abstract].  The American Journal of Emergency Medicine ,  30 (5), 832–832.  Dumoulin, C., Hay-Smith, J., Habée-Séguin, G. M., &amp; Mercier, J. (n.d.). Pelvic floor muscle training versus no treatment, or inactive control treatments, for urinary incontinence in women: A short version Cochrane systematic review with meta-analysis.  Neurourology and Urodynamics ,  34 (4), 300–308.  Fitzpatrick, J. M., Desgrandchamps, F., Adjali, K., Guerra, L. G., Hong, S. J., El Khalid, S., &amp; Ratana-Olarn, K. (2012, January). Management of acute urinary retention: A worldwide survey of 6074 men with benign prostatic hyperplasia.  BJU International ,  109 (1), 88–95.  Lee, H.-E., Cho, S. Y., Lee, S., Kim, M., &amp; Oh, S.-J. (2013, March 31). Short-term effects of a systematized bladder training program for idiopathic overactive bladder: A prospective study.  International Neurourology Journal ,  17 (1), 11–17.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Is it safe to hold your pee? Five possible complications."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321408.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, April 5). "Is it safe to hold your pee? Five possible complications."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  