 Mottled skin is also known as livedo reticularis. It can be a standalone condition or a symptom of another disorder. It may also be a side effect of certain medications, such as drugs prescribed for Parkinson's.  Mottled skin is characterized by purple or reddish patches that cover the legs, arms, or upper body. The exact appearance of these patches can vary. They may appear as follows:  When livedo reticularis occurs as a standalone condition, there is no known cause.  Livedo reticularis as a standalone condition most often affects middle-aged women, according to a  2015 study . It may also affect young women and newborn babies.  Mottled skin also occurs as a symptom of other conditions, including:   Lupus  is a rare autoimmune and inflammatory condition that may cause livedo reticularis.  Lupus is linked to sensitivity to sunlight, which may cause skin rashes. The most recognizable of these is a butterfly-shaped rash on the face. Lupus may also cause mottled skin.  Other symptoms of lupus include:  Research into lupus is ongoing. The  National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease  support many studies into the condition.  The   Indian Dermatology Online Journal   notes a link between mottled skin and poor circulation. A lack of oxygenated blood rich in hemoglobin may cause skin discoloration.   Rheumatoid arthritis  (RA) is another potential cause of mottled skin.  RA is an autoimmune disease that affects around  1.5 million Americans . The primary symptom is  inflammation  of the joints.  RA could also cause dark, patchy, or mottled skin, which may be due to the way the inflammatory condition affects the blood vessels.  Other symptoms of RA include:   Antiphospholipid syndrome , also known as Hughes syndrome, is an autoimmune condition that  mostly affects  young to middle-aged adults.  The primary symptom is mottled skin. As well as red or purple skin patches, the condition causes:  People who have antiphospholipid syndrome are at an increased risk of developing  deep vein thrombosis .  Mottled skin may also be a symptom of  hypothyroidism , according to the   Indian Dermatology Online Journal  .  This condition affects the thyroid. The thyroid is a gland that produces hormones that affect metabolic rate. Hypothyroidism is when the thyroid is underactive. This condition may lead to:   Acute pancreatitis  may cause mottled skin. This condition happens when the pancreas becomes inflamed.  Symptoms include:  Mottled skin is a secondary symptom of  pancreatitis  that may occur up to 3 days after the onset of primary symptoms.  Mottled skin may be a sign that a person's body is in shock. Shock is a medical term and does not refer to any feeling of surprise or experiencing something unexpected.  Shock is a medical emergency and may be caused by:  As well as cold, pale, or mottled skin, the symptoms of shock include:  If someone seems like they are in shock, contact emergency services immediately. Shock may be life-threatening without treatment.  Newborn babies sometimes have mottled skin, but this is not harmful and usually goes away by itself.  Exposure to the cold may cause babies to develop mottled skin. Keeping a baby wrapped up and warm helps avoid this.  The skin may appear mottled when an elderly or terminally ill person is close to dying. Other signs that someone is approaching death include:  People should speak to their doctor if they have mottled skin and are not sure why.  Discussing this and any related symptoms with a doctor will help them reach a diagnosis. Sometimes, doctors will require further tests to diagnose certain conditions.  There is no one treatment for mottled skin. The best treatment will depend on the underlying cause:   Shock   If shock is the cause of mottled skin, a person should seek immediate medical care. Treatment may include oxygen, intravenous fluids, and further tests.   Autoimmune disease   Several different autoimmune diseases may cause mottled skin. Treatment may include medication that controls the immune response and reduces inflammation.   Pancreatitis   Treatments for acute pancreatitis include intravenous fluids and anti-inflammatory medication. Lifestyle changes may also help in the long-term.   Poor circulation   If poor circulation causes mottled skin, exercise and other lifestyle changes may help.   End of life   When mottled skin develops as an end-of-life symptom, doctors will help make the person as pain-free and comfortable as possible.  Cold temperatures can make mottled skin worse. People with mottled skin should wrap up warm.  Eating well and taking regular exercise may reduce the risk of developing vascular problems. Avoiding smoking also reduces the risk of poor circulation.  Mottled skin is not harmful in and of itself. However, it may indicate an underlying condition.  The outlook for each condition that may cause mottled skin is different. As a general rule, the sooner a doctor diagnoses the condition, the better it can be treated or managed.    
  Arthritis by the numbers. (2018).   Arthritis by the numbers. (2018).  Atik, D., Atik, C., &amp; Karatepe, C. (2016, January 3). The effect of external apple vinegar application on varicosity symptoms, pain and social appearance anxiety: A randomized controlled trial [Abstract].  Evidence based complementary and Alternative Medicine .  Clinical research studies of systematic lupus erythematosus.  Dawid-Pać, R. (2013, June). Medicinal plants used in treatment of inflammatory skin diseases.  Advances in dermatology and allergology ,  30 (3), 170–177.  Ngan, V. (2017, April). Antiphospholipid syndrome.  Sajjan, V. V., Lunge, S., Swamy, M. B., &amp; Pandit, A. M. (2015, Sep–Oct). Livedo reticularis: A review of the literature.  Indian Dermatology Online Journal ,  6 (5), 315–321.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What does mottling of the skin indicate?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321422.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, April 6). "What does mottling of the skin indicate?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  