 In many cases, symptoms of a dog allergy are mild, and a person may still be able to live with a dog if they can manage their symptoms. Some home remedies can reduce symptoms. However, the only truly effective way to eliminate dog allergies is to avoid exposure to dogs.  In this article, we look at symptoms of allergic reactions to dogs and ways to manage them, including home remedies and medical treatments.  Specific symptoms and when they occur depend on the severity of the allergy. People who have severe allergic reactions to dogs may experience symptoms soon after exposure, while those with more minor allergies may take longer to develop symptoms.  Symptoms include:  If a person lives with a dog, it is difficult to make the environment allergen-free. Dog dander (dead skin cells) can linger in the air for a long time and can stick to household items, such as curtains, furniture, bedding, and carpets.  Hypoallergenic breeds of dogs shed less than others so they may be less likely to cause allergic reactions. However, some  studies  have found that homes with hypoallergenic breeds may still contain as many allergens as homes with other breeds.  The only sure way to eliminate dog allergies is by avoiding contact with dogs. However, if a person does spend time with dogs, the following home remedies may help them to manage symptoms:  Lifestyle tips that can reduce the impact of dog allergies include:  If anyone is considering bringing a dog into their home, they should do an allergy test or undertake a trial period before committing to this.  There are over-the-counter (OTC) and prescription medications available that can help reduce or resolve the symptoms for people who are allergic to dogs.  OTC remedies for dog allergies include:  Antihistamine medications block histamine, a compound that helps initiate local immune responses and cause allergy symptoms. Popular OTC brands for long-term exposure may contain loratadine, cetirizine hydrochloride, or fexofenadine hydrochloride.  Antihistamines can be  bought online  or obtained on prescription from a doctor.  These medications help reverse the  inflammation  caused by immune responses and relieve nasal congestion. Some nasal corticosteroids are now available without a prescription and can be purchased  online .  An allergist (a specialist in diagnosing allergies) may treat severe or chronic allergy symptoms using immunotherapy, also known as allergy shots.  Immunotherapy involves injecting allergens into a person in gradually increasing amounts. These allergy shots help a person to build a tolerance to allergens. It usually takes several sessions over several months to complete immunotherapy.  Many people with pet allergies also have  asthma , and exposure to the pet allergens can cause asthmatic episodes or worsen a person's symptoms. In these situations, a doctor may prescribe inhalable corticosteroids or bronchodilators that help keep the airways open.  Dogs produce a variety of proteins that cause allergies in some people. The highest concentrations of these proteins are in dog saliva, with lower amounts found in dander and urine.  Dander tends to build up on hair follicles, so dog hair usually carries a large number of allergens.  If a doctor thinks that a person may be allergic to dogs, they will refer them to an allergist.  In most cases, an allergist will use a skin-prick test to diagnose allergies.  During a skin-prick test, an allergist will put a droplet containing a tiny amount of dog proteins onto the skin. They will then make a small prick in the skin, allowing the mixture to enter the body.  Most people who are allergic to the mixture will have a response within 15 to 30 minutes.  Sometimes, an allergist will decide that an individual who thinks they are allergic to dogs is actually responding to other allergens commonly found on dogs or dog hair, such as dust or pollen.  People who are allergic to dogs can get relief from symptoms by avoiding dogs and places where there are dogs. Many people choose to manage their symptoms by making lifestyle adjustments, such as more frequent housecleaning, but this can be extremely challenging.  OTC medications, such as antihistamines and nasal decongestants, can also help a person reduce or manage their allergy symptoms.  People with more severe or chronic dog allergies should speak with a doctor about prescription medications and therapies that can help manage symptoms.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Allergy shots (immunotherapy). (n.d.).  Allergy shots (immunotherapy). (n.d.).  How to manage an allergic reaction to dogs. (n.d.).  Nicholas, C. E., Wegienka, G. R., Havstad, S. L., Zoratti, E. M., Ownby, D. R., &amp; Cole Johnson, C. (2011, July–August). Dog allergen levels in homes with hypoallergenic compared with nonhypoallergenic dogs.  American Journal of Rhinology &amp; Allergy ,  25 (4), 252–256.  Pet allergies. (n.d.).  Pet allergy: Are you allergic to dogs or cats? (2015, October).  Saline sinus rinse recipe. (n.d.).  Stansbury, J. (2014). Rosmarinic acid as a novel agent in the treatment of allergies and asthma.  Journal of Restorative Medicine ,  3 (1), 121–126.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Am I allergic to my dog?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321420.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, April 6). "Am I allergic to my dog?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  