 Several factors can influence how often an individual pees throughout the day. Medications, supplements, foods, and beverages can all play a role, as can certain medical conditions. Age and bladder size also matter.  The medical community uses the term urinary frequency to describe how often a person pees.  In this article, we discuss healthy and unhealthy frequencies, and how to manage associated symptoms.  Most people pee 6 or 7 times every 24 hours. Peeing between  4 and 10 times  daily may be considered healthy if the frequency does not interfere with the person's quality of life.  Urinary frequency depends on the following factors:  On average, a person who drinks 64 ounces of fluid in 24 hours will pee approximately seven times during that period.  The hormonal changes and pressure on the bladder involved in pregnancy can also increase urinary output. This high urinary frequency may continue for up to 8 weeks after giving birth.  Peeing too rarely or frequently may indicate an underlying condition, especially when accompanied by the following symptoms:  Treatment can resolve symptoms and prevent complications, so it is important to see a doctor.  Anyone who notices a dramatic change in urinary frequency or output, even if it still falls within the normal range, should seek medical advice.  If a person consumes high amounts of fluids, especially drinks containing caffeine, they may notice fluctuations in how much or how often they pee.  However, dramatic changes in urinary frequency can indicate a serious underlying condition.  The Cleveland Clinic has reported that  80 percent  of bladder problems are caused by factors beyond the bladder.  The following conditions may be responsible for changes in urinary frequency:  Drugs called diuretics will cause most people to pee more often. Diuretics take fluid out of the bloodstream and send it to the kidneys.  These medications are often prescribed for people with  high blood pressure , kidney problems, or heart conditions.  Examples of diuretics include:  Consuming a lot of fluid can increase urinary output, while not consuming enough can cause  dehydration  and diminished output.  Alcohol and caffeine have diuretic effects and increase urinary frequency. A person with no underlying condition may pee more frequently during or shortly after drinking alcoholic or caffeinated beverages.  Caffeine can be found in:  Many people urinate more frequently, especially at night, as they get older.  Most people over the age of 60 do not urinate more than  twice nightly , however. If a person wakes up to pee more than twice, they should consult a doctor.  Frequent urination does not require treatment if there is no underlying condition and the frequency is not affecting happiness or quality of life.  Pregnant women also do not require treatment, as the symptom should disappear a few weeks after giving birth.  Any treatment required will depend on the cause. If a condition such as diabetes or a UTI is responsible for frequent urination, treatment will resolve this symptom. It can also increase urinary flow and reduce the size of the prostate.  If treatment is causing a person to pee too often, a doctor can adjust the dosage or prescribe a different medication.  It may be helpful to record fluid intake, urinary frequency, urgency, and other symptoms for 3 or more days before an appointment. This can help a doctor when they are diagnosing and determining the best treatment.  Even after getting treatment, some people find the following strategies helpful:  Some people also find it helpful to stick to a bathroom schedule. This involves going to the bathroom at scheduled times and gradually increasing the time between visits until there is a regular 3-hour gap.  The outlook for peeing too often or not often enough depends on the underlying cause. Most causes of frequent urination can be treated with medications and lifestyle changes.  Anyone concerned about their urinary output should see a doctor as soon as possible, to reduce the risk of complications. Seeking treatment at an early stage may also improve the outlook.    
 Tani, M., Hirayama, A., Torimoto, K., Matsushita, C., Yamada, A., &amp; Fujimoto, K. (2014, January 9). Guidance on water intake effectively improves urinary frequency in patients with nocturia.  International Journal of Urology ,  21 (6), 595–600.  Tani, M., Hirayama, A., Torimoto, K., Matsushita, C., Yamada, A., &amp; Fujimoto, K. (2014, January 9). Guidance on water intake effectively improves urinary frequency in patients with nocturia.  International Journal of Urology ,  21 (6), 595–600.  Urinary frequency. (n.d.).  What your bladder is trying to tell you about your health. (2016, March 1).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "How many times a day should a person pee?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321461.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 11). "How many times a day should a person pee?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  