 Dermatologists have identified four factors that contribute to the development of acne:  A doctor or dermatologist can help to identify which factor or combination of factors is causing  acne . However, many methods of treatment and prevention are similar, regardless of the cause. The following tips can help to protect against acne and reduce the number of breakouts.  There are many things a person can do to prevent  pimples  and other forms of acne, including:  Acne is rarely the result of a dirty face, contrary to popular belief. However, it is important to remove excess dirt and oil from the skin by washing regularly.  Many people prefer to use a mild cleanser and warm water. Applying an oil-free moisturizer after washing can keep the skin from becoming too dry.  Over-washing the face may cause the skin to become dry, which can aggravate pimples.  Some people scrub the skin with rough cloth pads or washcloths. This can irritate the skin and cause inflammation, making acne breakouts worse.  Applying a gentle cleanser with clean hands or a soft brush intended for use on the face can help to prevent pimples.  If excess oil in the hair travels to the skin, it can worsen acne. Regularly washing the hair may stop acne from developing, especially close to the hairline.  Also, refrain from getting products such as hair gel or spray on the face. These can also clog pores and lead to breakouts.  It may be tempting to squeeze a pimple, but this usually results in inflammation and scarring.  To reduce the appearance of blemishes, use a topical treatment instead. They may take some time to work, but they can also prevent new pimples from forming.  Over-the-counter treatments, such as creams or serums, can reduce breakouts, particularly when they tend to occur in certain areas.  The following problem areas are common:  Treatments available for purchase online often contain  salicylic acid  or  benzoyl peroxide . These products are not as potent as prescription-strength treatments, but they can help to prevent mild acne and reduce breakouts.  Topical retinoids are products containing medicines derived from  vitamin  A, and dermatologists prescribe them to manage and prevent acne. These treatments can also get rid of excess dead skin cells and reduce inflammation.  Most topical retinoids are only available with by prescription, including tretinoin (Retin-A, Renova), and tazarotene (Tazorac).  However, one retinoid medication, adapalene (Differin), is  available for purchase online  or over the counter.  Topical  antibiotics  can fight an overgrowth of  P. acne  bacteria in the skin. Examples of antibiotics that treat this inflammatory acne include erythromycin and clindamycin, which are available by prescription.  A person can identify inflammatory acne by its very red, irritated appearance. It can also be painful.   Birth control  pills can help to prevent acne, by helping to regulate the hormones that may make acne worse.  However, these pills carry risks, so it is essential to review the benefits and side effects before making a decision.  Spironolactone, a medication often used to treat  high blood pressure , may also help in cases of severe acne. However, spironolactone has many possible side effects, so it is best to speak to a doctor.  Doctors are not certain of the connection between foods and acne. However, a growing body of  research  suggests that some foods may trigger acne in certain patients.  According to the   American Academy of Dermatology  , foods with a high glycemic index may increase the risk of developing acne or make acne worse.  These potentially problematic foods are sugary and high in  carbohydrates . Some examples include:  Dairy products, especially skim milk, may also increase a person's risk of developing acne. A person may want to cut back on a particular food group, to see if their skin improves.  Too much sun has many damaging effects on the skin.  Sunburn  can also lead to an overproduction of oils that make acne worse.  Using oil-free sunscreen with a protection factor of at least 15 may help to prevent sunburns and exacerbated acne.  A dermatologist or esthetician can provide these therapies, which aim to reduce the presence of  P. acne  bacteria on the skin.  Skincare products contain oil can clog the pores. These products are often intended for use on dry or mature skin that may not have as much natural oil.  Products that do not contain oil are usually labeled "non-comedogenic."  It may be a good idea to avoid touching household grease and cooking oils, which can also clog pores.  Exfoliation is the process of removing dead cells from the skin.  While some exfoliation can help to improve acne, too much can worsen breakouts. This happens when a person removes too much natural oil from the skin. The skin may compensate by producing more oil, which clogs pores and leads to more pimples.  If a person is exfoliating too much, the skin may become irritated or feel very tight after washing.   Stress  often causes inflammation, which can make breakouts worse.  Below are some means of reducing stress that may help to prevent acne:  Makeup and facial sponges and brushes should be cleaned regularly with soap and water to prevent a buildup of bacteria, which could lead to breakouts.  Make sure that brushes dry completely before use.  Cleaning the skin regularly and gently, selecting skincare products carefully and avoiding contact with oil can help to reduce acne.  If none of these methods show improvement in  6 to 8 weeks , see a dermatologist for further recommendations.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Acne. (n.d).  Acne. (n.d).  Acne. (2018, February 1).  American Academy of Dermatology issues new guidelines of care for acne treatment [Press release]. (2016, February 17).  Melnik, B. C. (2015, July 15). Linking diet to acne metabolomics, inflammation, and comedogenesis: An update.  Clinical, Cosmetic, and Investigational Dermatology ,  8 , 371–388.  Torjesen, I. (2018, March 15). The best and worst of acne treatment options.  Dermatology Times .  Why do I get acne? (2014, June).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How do you prevent pimples?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321411.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, April 5). "How do you prevent pimples?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  