 The diaphragm is the dome-shaped sheet of skeletal muscle that separates the abdomen from the chest and allows a person to breathe. When  endometriosis  affects the diaphragm, symptoms may include chest, shoulder, and neck pain.  In this article, we look at an overview of this condition, including its symptoms, complications, and the treatment of diaphragmatic endometriosis.  Diaphragmatic endometriosis is extremely rare. An estimated  0.6 to 1.5 percent  of those who undergo surgery for endometriosis have this form. More usually, endometriosis affects the pelvic organs and structures close to the uterus.  Endometriosis is estimated to affect between  6 and 10 percent  of women of menstruating age. Estimates are difficult, though, because some women who have no symptoms may never receive a diagnosis. Other women are suspected to have it based on symptoms, but may not have the diagnosis confirmed.  As well as discomfort and stiffness, the condition primarily causes pain, often described as a dull ache. The pain usually becomes worse at certain times of the menstrual cycle.  According to a  2007 study  which looked at symptoms in 47 women, diaphragmatic endometriosis occurred only on the right in 66 percent of women, bilateral in 27 percent, and on the left in 6 percent.  Symptoms include:  Symptoms are usually worse during or before menstruation. This may be because the glands producing growth respond to reproductive hormones, meaning they cycle and shed along with normal endometrial tissues.  Symptoms of endometriosis affecting the pelvic organs include:  Diaphragmatic endometriosis often occurs with other kinds of endometriosis, which can sometimes result in difficulty becoming pregnant or  infertility .  Surgery to remove tissue interfering with pregnancy may help increase the chances of conception.  Hormone therapies can help reduce the symptoms of endometriosis, but they cannot reverse infertility.  There may be a greater chance of pregnancy through in vitro fertilization (IVF), especially after surgery.  One complication of diaphragmatic endometriosis is an inability or difficulty becoming pregnant.  The surgical procedures used to treat endometriosis are associated with health risks, as with all surgeries.  Complications associated with endometriosis surgeries include:  Diaphragmatic endometriosis may cause additional complications in very rare cases because of the role the diaphragm plays in breathing.  Additional complications include:  Endometriosis may also contribute to someone developing  depression , as a symptom is a form of chronic pain. In these cases, a doctor may suggest a counselor or support group.  Researchers do not fully understand why endometriosis happens. There are many theories including:  Diaphragmatic endometriosis is usually suspected based on symptoms and tests, such as magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) scans, or pelvic  ultrasound .  During a pelvic ultrasound, an ultrasound wand is inserted into the vagina to look for  cysts  on the ovaries and other changes that may be associated with endometriosis.  To make the actual diagnosis, surgery is needed, at which time the tissue specimens that are seen and resemble endometriosis are sent to a pathology lab to confirm the diagnosis.  There is currently no cure for endometriosis, but there are treatments that have been shown to reduce symptoms markedly.  A doctor will determine the best treatment for endometriosis based on:  Mild symptoms may not need medical treatment. Minor symptoms may also respond to over-the-counter (OTC) anti-inflammatories.  For severe symptoms, a doctor will often prescribe hormone therapy, either in the form of a pill, injection, or vaginal ring.   Birth control  pills, which are commonly used, reduce the number of reproductive hormones released by the ovaries, slowing or stalling  ovulation . Slowing ovulation will usually reduce symptoms because the endometriosis tissue is stimulated less with the reduction of hormone fluctuations.  For severe symptoms or symptoms that do not respond to hormone medications, there are surgical procedures that can help.  The most common surgery for endometriosis is laparoscopy. During a laparoscopic procedure, a tube with a light and camera on one end is inserted into a tiny cut in the belly button. A surgeon will be able to see the location of the growths, as well as how large and thick they are.  Most surgeons will collect a biopsy or small piece of the abnormal tissues. If an individual has already given consent to have the tissues removed, a doctor may also remove the growths.  Diaphragmatic endometriosis may require abdominal surgery. This may be used instead of or in addition to laparoscopic surgery.  Surgeons will make cuts in the abdominal wall that allow them to peel back layers of tissue and access the diaphragm. The surgeons will then locate and remove growths.  Because abdominal surgery involves larger cuts, full anesthesia, and impacts a much wider area of the body, it is associated with more serious complications.  Only severe diaphragmatic endometriosis usually requires surgery.  Alternative therapies and lifestyle habits may help decrease symptoms in some patients, though these are not considered first-line treatment options. They include:  Endometriosis is a common condition that results from uterine lining tissue growing outside of the uterus, including on the diaphragm in rare cases.  While diaphragmatic endometriosis may not cause symptoms, severe growths can cause chest, neck, and shoulder pain and can interfere with breathing.  It is best to talk with a doctor about pain in the abdomen and chest, especially if it gets much worse during or before menstruation.    
 Ceccaroni, M., Roviglione, G., Rosenberg, P., Pesci, A., Clarizia, R., Bruni, F., … Minelli, L. (2012, June). Pericardial, pleural and diaphragmatic endometriosis in association with pelvic peritoneal and bowel endometriosis: A case report and review of the literature.  Videosurgery and Other Miniinvasive Techniques ,  7 (2), 122–131.  Ceccaroni, M., Roviglione, G., Rosenberg, P., Pesci, A., Clarizia, R., Bruni, F., … Minelli, L. (2012, June). Pericardial, pleural and diaphragmatic endometriosis in association with pelvic peritoneal and bowel endometriosis: A case report and review of the literature.  Videosurgery and Other Miniinvasive Techniques ,  7 (2), 122–131.  Cela, V., Simi, G., Obino, M. E. R., Uccelli, A., D'Isidoro, C., Morelli, L., ... Freschi, L. (2018, January 25). Diaphragmatic endometriosis: Review of the literature and first case of robot-assisted laparoscopic treatment.  Journal of Endometriosis and Pelvic Pain Disorders ,  6 (4), 219–224.  Endometriosis. (2017, December 22).  Endometriosis. (2015, November 9).  Gui, B., Valentini, A. L., Ninivaggi, V., Miccò, M., Zecchi, V., Grimaldi, P. P., … Bonomo, L. (2017, July 1). Shining light in a dark landscape: MRI evaluation of unusual localization of endometriosis.  Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology ,  23 (4), 272–281.  Perino, A., Calagna, G., Rotolo, S., Trapani, A., Triolo, M. M., Forlani, F., ... Cucinella, G. (2014, March 19). Laparoscopic management of diaphragmatic endometriosis: What can we learn.  Giornale Italiano di Ostetricia e Ginecologia ,  35 (6), 754–759.  Rogers, P. A. W., D'Hooghe, T. M., Fazleabas, A., Giudice, L. C., Montgomery, G. W., Petraglia, F., &amp; Taylor, R. N. (2013, May). Defining future directions for endometriosis research: Workshop report from the 2011 World Congress of Endometriosis in Montpellier, France.  Reproductive Sciences,   20 (5), 483–499.  Vercellini, P., Abbiati, A., Viganò, P., Somigliana, E. D., Daguati, R., Meroni, F., &amp; Crosignani, P. G. (2007, September 1). Asymmetry in distribution of diaphragmatic endometriotic lesions: Evidence in favour of the menstrual reflux theory.  Human Reproduction ,  22 (9), 2359–2367.  What are the treatments for endometriosis? (2017, January 31).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What to know about diaphragmatic endometriosis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321412.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, April 5). "What to know about diaphragmatic endometriosis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  