 Scientists from the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) discovered that adults who experienced one single night of  sleep deprivation  showed an immediate increase in levels of beta-amyloid.   Beta-amyloid  — also known as amyloid beta — is a sticky protein that can accumulate between brain cells and form "plaques." These plaques disrupt brain cell communication, and this is believed to play a key role in  Alzheimer's disease .  Study co-author Nora D. Volkow, of the Laboratory of Neuroimaging at the NIAAA, and colleagues recently published their  findings  in the  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .  Alzheimer's disease is a progressive cognitive disorder characterized by memory loss and changes in behavior. It is the most common form of  dementia , affecting around  5.7 million adults  in the United States alone.  Past  research  has associated disrupted sleep with an increase in beta-amyloid levels, but Volkow and colleagues note that there have been some shortfalls in research.  "Despite the evidence," say the researchers, "that acute sleep deprivation elevates [beta]-amyloid levels in mouse interstitial fluid and in human cerebrospinal fluid, not much is known about the impact of sleep deprivation on [beta]-amyloid burden in the human brain."  To help shed light on how acute sleep deprivation influences brain levels of beta-amyloid, the team studied 20 healthy adults aged 22–72.  Using positron emission tomography imaging, the researchers measured beta-amyloid burden in the brain after one night of rested sleep and after one night of sleep deprivation.   After a single night of sleep deprivation, the researchers noticed an increase in beta-amyloid levels in the right hippocampus of the subjects' brains, as well as in the thalamus.    The  hippocampus  is the brain region associated with long-term memory, and the  thalamus  is a brain region involved in processing sensory information.  According to the authors, these findings provide "preliminary evidence for the role of SD [sleep deprivation] on [beta-amyloid] accumulation in the human brain."  Volkow and her colleagues note that they are unable to say whether a night of rested sleep could negate the accumulation of beta-amyloid caused by a bad night's sleep, but this is something that they plan to investigate in future research.  Still, they believe that their new study suggests that getting a good night's sleep may be crucial to our brain health. The authors conclude:   " Our results highlight the relevance of good sleep hygiene for proper brain function and as a potential target for prevention of AD [Alzheimer's disease]."  