 Allergic contact dermatitis occurs when a red, itchy rash develops on skin that has touched an allergen. An allergy to nickel is among the  most common  causes of this reaction.  Rashes often occur on the earlobes or wrists, because many earrings and watches contain nickel. The reaction may occur immediately after contact, or it may develop after repeated exposure.  When a person with a nickel allergy comes into contact with the metal, their immune system mistakenly believes that it is causing harm. The immune system produces a hormone called histamine in response. This can cause a rash to develop, as well as other symptoms.  Here, we look into the everyday objects and foods that contain nickel and provide detailed information about the allergy, including symptoms, methods of diagnosis, and treatment options.  An allergic reaction usually occurs within  24–48 hours  of contact with nickel.  Symptoms include:  Often, the reaction will only affect the area of skin that touched the item containing nickel.  If a person with an allergy consumes food containing nickel, they may have similar symptoms, including:  A rash resulting from an allergic reaction tends to last  2–4 weeks . Broken or wet skin is more likely to react.  If an allergic reaction to nickel is very severe, it can cause  inflammation  of the nasal passages or an  asthma  attack.  The best way to manage a nickel allergy is to avoid anything containing the metal.  Nickel is commonly found in items such as:  A person with an allergy may have to carefully read labels or contact manufacturers to ensure that these types of items do not contain nickel.  The following foods may also be problematic:  People who work in certain industries are  more likely  to develop allergies to nickel. At particular risk are:  Anyone working in an industry that involves frequent exposure to nickel and other metals should notify their employer of an allergy.  It is also essential that people with nickel allergies inform their doctor before surgery.  There is no cure for an allergy to nickel. The best way to prevent a reaction is to avoid the allergen.  Several medications can help to treat a rash that results from an allergic reaction. These medicines control inflammation and reduce the body's histamine response.  Common medications include:  Antihistamines are available over the counter and can be  bought online . Mild-strength corticosteroid creams are also  available online . A doctor may prescribe stronger versions of these medications.  Some home remedies may help to soothe and calm the skin. These include:  Seek advice from a doctor as soon as possible if treatments do not relieve symptoms or make them worse.  If reactions to nickel are severe, see a doctor as soon as possible. Severe symptoms may include pain or blisters that leak  pus , and they can indicate an infection that requires treatment with  antibiotics .  Anyone unsure of the cause of a rash should contact a doctor or dermatologist for a diagnosis.  After asking questions about possible causes, the doctor will usually perform a patch test. This involves placing a small amount of nickel on the skin. The doctor will diagnose a nickel allergy if the skin reacts within  48 hours .  This type of test is usually safe and causes a severe reaction only in extremely rare cases.  A person with a nickel allergy will continue to be sensitive to the metal for the rest of their life. Raw, broken, or wet skin is more likely to react.  Symptoms will improve if a person avoids the everyday items and foods that contain nickel.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Allergic skin conditions. (n.d.).  Allergic skin conditions. (n.d.).  Brod, B. A. (2018, February 26). Management of allergic contact dermatitis.  Goldenberg, A., Vassantachart, J., Lin, E. J., Lampel, H. P., &amp; Jacob, S. E. (2015, September–October). Nickel allergy in adults in the U.S.: 1962 to 2015 [Abstract].  Dermatitis ,  26 (5), 216–223.  Lusi, E. A., Di Ciommo, V. M., Patrissi, T., &amp; Guarascio, P. (2015, March 30). High prevalence of nickel allergy in an overweight female population: A pilot observational analysis.  PLoS One ,  10 (3).  Nickel allergy. (n.d.).  Nickel allergy. (2016, October 31).  Nickel allergy: How to avoid exposure and reduce symptoms. (n.d.).  Oakley, A. (1997). Nickel allergy.  Sharma, A. D. (2013, May–June). Low nickel diet in dermatology.  Indian Journal of Dermatology ,  58 (3), 240.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "How to manage a nickel allergy."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321400.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, April 4). "How to manage a nickel allergy."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  