 An  asthma  attack occurs when these symptoms escalate, making it very difficult to breathe.  The following actions can help to manage an attack:  Asthma attacks are potentially life-threatening. Seek help if symptoms do not get better.  Sitting up straight will help to open the airways, making it easier for air to move through the lungs.  Remaining calm is essential. The body's natural  stress  response, sometimes called "fight or flight" mode, can make symptoms worse.  Breathing exercises can help. The purpose of these exercises is to reduce the number of breaths, keeping the airways open longer and making it easier to breathe.   Pursed lip breathing    Belly breathing   Many emergency home remedies are suggested on the internet. However, these are usually not supported by scientific evidence.  Examples include:  After a trigger causes symptoms to worsen, an attack happens. Symptoms may get worse gradually over a few days, sometimes without the person noticing.  Someone is experiencing an asthma attack if:  Symptoms of poorly managed asthma typically include:  The severity and number of symptoms vary. For example, a child with asthma may have all of the above symptoms or only a chronic cough.  Many factors and activities can cause asthma symptoms. These factors are called triggers, and they vary from person to person.  Common triggers include:  Some people find that asthma symptoms are worse during exercise, when they have a cold, or when they are feeling stressed.  The best way for a person with frequent or persistent asthma to prevent an attack is to take preventive asthma medication as prescribed by a doctor, even if they have very few or mild symptoms.  Anyone who has to use their rescue inhaler more three times a week should meet with an asthma specialist to review their treatment plan.  People with the condition are advised to identify their triggers and avoid them when possible.  It is also helpful to monitor symptoms, as asthma attacks often start slowly. Recognizing unusual symptoms can lead to earlier awareness of an impending attack.  Maintaining a healthy weight and not smoking will also help to prevent attacks, as will getting a  flu  vaccine every year.  Many find that exercising in cold weather can trigger asthma symptoms because frigid air irritates the airways in the lungs. Tying a scarf over the mouth can help to warm up the air before it hits the lungs.  There is no cure for asthma, but a person can keep symptoms under control. Taking medications and learning to identify and avoid triggers are the most effective ways to prevent asthma attacks.  Attacks are potentially life-threatening. A rescue inhaler is often enough to treat an attack but seek emergency medical attention if symptoms do not go away.  Even if no emergency care was necessary, anyone who has experienced an asthma attack is advised to see a doctor.    
 Asthma. (n.d.).  Asthma. (n.d.).  Asthma attacks. (2016, July).  Asthma attack. (2015, April 5).  Bara, A. I., &amp; Barley, E. A. (2001). Caffeine for asthma [Abstract].  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , (4).  Breathing exercises. (n.d.).  Common asthma triggers. (2012, August 20).  Exercise. (2016, May).  Gibbs, J. E. M. (2015, May 4).  Eucalyptus  pollen allergy and asthma in children: A cross-sectional study in south-east Queensland, Australia.  PLoS ONE ,  10 (5).  Sadlon, A. E., &amp; Lamson, D. W. (2010). Immune-modifying and antimicrobial effects of Eucalyptus oil and simple inhalation devices [Abstract].  Alternative Medicine Review ,  15 (1), 33–43.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "What to do at home for an asthma attack."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321441.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, April 9). "What to do at home for an asthma attack."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  