 People who are 19 to 64 years old should get  150 minutes  of moderate aerobic activity each week. Younger children should be physically active as well.  It is important to incorporate strength training exercises into any routine, to keep muscles strong and flexible. As health permits, this should be continued for as long as possible throughout life.  A person may choose swimming over another form of exercise for a range of reasons. It gives the body a thorough workout and has many advantages for people of all ages and levels of fitness.  Swimming offers a variety of benefits to mental and physical health. Fifteen are listed below.  Swimming engages almost every major muscle group, requiring a person to use their arms, legs, torso, and stomach.  Swimming also:  Cardiovascular exercise, often referred to as cardio, involves the heart, lungs, and circulatory system. A thorough workout routine, such as one that features swimming, will include this type of exercise.   Research  suggests that swimmers have half the mortality rate of inactive people. A  study  from 2016 indicates that swimming can help to lower  blood pressure  and control blood sugar levels.  Some types of exercise may be challenging for people who are new or feel very unfit.  However, swimming allows a person to go at their own pace, and it can be inviting for newcomers.  A person can learn to swim at a very young age, and most swimming pools have a designated area for beginners and people who prefer to swim slowly.  The benefits of learning to swim safely and confidently can extend beyond mental and physical fitness. In some cases, it may even be lifesaving.  Having an injury or conditions, such as  arthritis , can make it difficult to do high-impact exercise.  Because water gently supports the muscles, swimming is preferred by many who are unable to take part in high-impact, high-resistance exercises.  A physical disability, such as paraplegia, can limit workout options.  Because water provides resistance and support, many people find that swimming is an ideal option.  Because swimming can  boost confidence  and improve social skills, it may benefit people with mental disabilities.  In addition to building cardiovascular strength, swimming can increase lung capacity and improve control over breathing.  While the humid air of indoor pools may also help to improve  asthma  symptoms,  some studies  indicate that disinfectant chemicals used in pools can make symptoms worse.  They may also increase the likelihood of a swimmer developing the condition.  Water keeps limbs buoyant, so people with MS may benefit from the support and gentle resistance that water provides.   One study  noted a significant reduction in pain when people with MS took part in a 20-week swimming program.  Participants also reported improvements in MS-related  fatigue  and  depression .  Swimming is a  recommended  form of exercise for pregnant people.  Added weight can cause joint and muscle pain during pregnancy.  Swimming is especially popular with pregnant people because the water can support this weight.  This helps to feel more comfortable while staying fit.  It is always a good idea to consult a doctor when undertaking a new form of activity during pregnancy.  Swimming is an excellent way to burn  calories . The amount burned depends on a person's weight and how vigorously they swim.  Use this  calories calculator  to determine how many calories are burned while working out.  People tend to get bored with repetitive exercise, but there are many ways to keep swimming interesting.  There are several  strokes  to master and flotation aids to try. Also, classes in water aerobics and polo, as well as racing and diving, can help to add variety.  A  trial  involving older adults with  insomnia  reported improved sleep in those who exercised regularly.  A  2010 review  determined that around half of the older adult population reports difficulty sleeping. If accessible, swimming may benefit those who seek better sleep.  Exercise releases endorphins, which improve the mood. Swimming may also boost confidence and social skills, which can impact a person's self-esteem.  A  2014 pilot study  involving people with  dementia  showed that those who swam regularly in a 12-week period showed an improvement in mood.  Exercise is a great way to relieve stress and  anxiety . It can also redirect the mind away from troubling thoughts.  Though more research is needed, even  20 minutes  of physical activity a week may help a person to feel more relaxed.  Many towns and cities offer public pools with discounted rates. Some offer free access at certain times or free swimming lessons.  Swimming in a lake or ocean may be an attractive option. Always take safety precautions, such as ensuring supervision, when swimming in open waters.  Swimming burns calories and can help a person to lose weight, as well as tone muscles and improve overall health and fitness.  By engaging several different muscle groups and the cardiovascular system, swimming can provide an excellent workout for a wide variety of individuals.    
 Alkatan, M., Baker, J. R., Machin, D. R., Park, W., Akkari, A. S., Pasha, E. P., &amp; Tanaka, H. (2016, March). Improved function and reduced pain after swimming and cycling training in patients with osteoarthritis [Abstract].  The Journal of Rheumatology ,  43   (3), 666–672.  Alkatan, M., Baker, J. R., Machin, D. R., Park, W., Akkari, A. S., Pasha, E. P., &amp; Tanaka, H. (2016, March). Improved function and reduced pain after swimming and cycling training in patients with osteoarthritis [Abstract].  The Journal of Rheumatology ,  43   (3), 666–672.  Calories calculator. (n.d.).  Can my baby go swimming before or after vaccinations? (2016, November 15).  Castro-Sánchez, A. M., Matarán-Peñarrocha, G. A., Lara-Palomo, I., Saavedra-Hernández, M., Arroyo-Morales, M., &amp; Moreno-Lorenzo, C. (2012). Hydrotherapy for the treatment of pain in people with multiple sclerosis: a randomized controlled trial [Abstract].  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine , 2012.  Connolly, L. J., Nordsborg, N. B., Nyberg, M., Weihe, P., Krustrup, P., &amp; Mohr, M. (2016, October). Low-volume high-intensity swim training is superior to high-volume low-intensity training in relation to insulin sensitivity and glucose control in inactive middle-aged women [Abstract].  European Journal of Applied Physiology ,  116 (10), 1889–1897.  Ensari, I., Sandroff, B. M., &amp; Motl, R. W. (2016, January–February). Effects of single bouts of walking exercise and yoga on acute mood symptoms in people with multiple sclerosis [Abstract].  International Journal of MS Care ,  18 (1), 1–8.  Exercise in pregnancy. (2017, January 14).  Fisk, M. Z., Steigerwald, M. D., Smoliga, J. M., &amp; Rundell, K. W. (2015, March 13). Asthma in swimmers: a review of the current literature [Abstract].  The Physician and Sportsmedicine ,  38 (4), 28–34.  Guszkowska, M. (2004, July 1). Effects of exercise on anxiety, depression and mood [Abstract].  Psychiatria Polska ,  38 (4), 611–620.  Health benefits of water-based exercise. (2016, May 4).  Matthews, M. J., Green, D., Matthews, H., &amp; Swanwick, E. (2016, August 29). The effects of swimming fatigue on shoulder strength, range of motion, joint control, and performance in swimmers [Abstract].  Physical Therapy in Sport ,  23 , 118–122.  Neikrug, A. B., &amp; Ancoli-Israel, S. (2010, March). Sleep disorders in the older adult – a mini-review [Abstract].  Gerontology ,  56 (2), 181–189.  Neville, C., Henwood, T., Beattie, E., &amp; Fielding, E. (2013, July 3). Exploring the effect of aquatic exercise on behaviour and psychological well‐being in people with moderate to severe dementia: A pilot study of the Watermemories Swimming Club [Abstract].  Australasian Journal On Ageing ,  33 (2), 124–127.  Physical activity guidelines for adults. (2015, July 11).  Physical activity reduces stress. (2008, April 10).  Reid, K. J., Baron, K. G., Lu, B., Naylor, E., Wolfe, L., &amp; Zee, P. C. (2010, October). Aerobic exercise improves self-reported sleep and quality of life in older adults with insomnia [Abstract].  Sleep Medicine ,  11   (9), 934–940.  Sable, M., Viadya, S. M., &amp; Sable, S. S. (2012, January–March). Comparative study of lung functions in swimmers and runners [Abstract].  Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology ,  56 (1).  Sanches, E. F., Durán-Carabali, L. E., Tosta, A., Nicola, F., Schmitz, F., Rodrigues, A., ... &amp; Netto, C. (2017, May 31). Pregnancy swimming causes short-and long-term neuroprotection against hypoxia–ischemia in very immature rats [Abstract].  Pediatric Research ,  82 (3), 544–533.  Shir, D. (2015, August 3). Benefits of swimming for people with disabilities.  Swim England response to the health &amp; wellbeing benefits of swimming report. (2017, June).  Swimming for fitness. (2016, June 30).  Swimming safety tips. (n.d.).  Yuan, W.-X., Liu, H.-B., Gao, F.-S., Wang, Y.-X., &amp; Qin, K.-R. (2016, December 28). Effects of 8-week swimming training on carotid arterial stiffness and hemodynamics in young overweight adults.  BioMedical Engineering OnLine ,  15 (2), 151.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Physical and mental benefits of swimming."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321496.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, April 13). "Physical and mental benefits of swimming."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  