 As someone approaches death, their body begins to exhibit symptoms. The breathing patterns change and can create a rattling sound. This sound is known as the death rattle, and it is a part of the dying process.  The rattle can occur when a dying person is no longer be able to swallow, cough, or otherwise clear saliva and mucus from the back of the throat, and because secretions in the respiratory tract may be  increased .  The sound varies. It may be a crackling, wet noise that is amplified as the person breathes. In other cases, it may sound like a soft moaning with each breath, or a very loud gurgling or snoring.  While the sound may be unpleasant, the person emitting the death rattle usually feels no pain or discomfort.  The death rattle signals that death is very near. On average, a person usually lives for 23 hours after the death rattle begins.  The death rattle happens because the person can no longer remove secretions, such as saliva and phlegm, from the back of the throat.  People normally clear these secretions without any trouble, but a person nearing death may not have the strength.  Breathing patterns change as someone nears death.  Breaths may alternate from quiet to very loud.  A dying person may draw a sharp breath, then not breathe for several moments. This labored breathing may amplify the death rattle.  The death rattle is a sign that a person is approaching death. With each breath, a person may make a moaning, snoring, or rattling sound.  The following can also occur as a person nears death:  The death rattle can sound like the person is choking. However, no evidence suggests that the dying person is aware of the sound or experiences any related pain or unease.  The death rattle is not painful. However, it may be upsetting for the dying person's loved ones. A nurse may do the following to ease the sound:  Proposed treatments are unlikely to prevent a death rattle, emphasizing that it is a natural stage of dying.  Medical professionals caring for a dying person will explain the noise to any loved ones present.  Addressing the grief and needs of loved ones may help everyone to be more comfortable during the dying process.  When a terminally ill individual has a death rattle, it often means that death is very near.  The noisy breathing can be distressing to family and other loved ones witnessing the death, but there is no evidence that the dying person experiences pain or discomfort.   A look at feeling numb, a psychological condition resulting in emotional numbness. This involves a temporary feeling of dissociation or disconnection…    The identification of eight physical signs associated with death within 3 days for patients with advanced forms of cancer could help with clinical…    Euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide is when action is taken to end the life of a person who is experiencing long-term illness. Euthanasia is…    Death anxiety is something that many of us may have felt to some degree, but how is it defined, what are its causes, and how is best to deal with it?    Grief is a common yet unique human experience in the wake of loss. Learning to cope with it is a lengthy, difficult process, so how can we begin to do…  