 Hormones are chemicals that are produced by glands in the endocrine system. Hormones travel through the bloodstream to the tissues and organs, delivering messages that tell the organs what to do and when to do it.  Hormones are important for regulating most major bodily processes, so a hormonal imbalance can affect a wide range of bodily functions. Hormones help to regulate:  Men and women alike can be affected by imbalances in  insulin , steroids, growth hormones, and adrenaline.  Women may also experience imbalances in  estrogen  and  progesterone  levels, while men are more likely to experience imbalances in  testosterone  levels.  The symptoms of a hormonal imbalance depend on which glands and hormones are affected.  Symptoms associated with the more common causes of hormonal imbalances include:  Everyone will experience natural periods of hormonal imbalance or fluctuations at particular points in their life.  But hormonal imbalances can also occur when the endocrine glands are not functioning properly.  Endocrine glands are specialized cells that produce, store, and release hormones into the blood. There are several endocrine glands located throughout the body that control different organs, including the:  Several medical conditions are known to impact some, or several, of the endocrine glands. Certain lifestyle habits and environmental factors may also play a role in hormonal imbalances.  Causes of hormonal imbalances include:  Women naturally experience several periods of hormonal imbalance throughout their lifetime, including during:  Women are also at risk of developing different types of hormonal imbalance disorders than men because they have different endocrine organs and cycles.  Medical conditions causing irregular hormonal imbalances in women include:  Symptoms of hormonal imbalances in women include:  Men also experience natural periods of hormonal imbalance during their lifetime.  Natural causes of hormonal imbalances in men include:  Men are also at risk of developing different hormonal imbalances than women because they have different endocrine organs and cycles.  Medical conditions causing hormonal imbalances in men include:  Symptoms of hormonal imbalances in men include:  Treatment for hormonal imbalances may vary depending on the cause. Every person may require different types of treatment for hormonal imbalances.  Treatment options for women with hormone imbalances include:  Treatment options for anyone with hormonal imbalances include:  Treatment options for men with hormonal imbalances include:  People have used natural supplements to treat hormonal imbalances for thousands of years.  However, there are no natural remedies that have been consistently proven in clinical studies to treat hormonal imbalances and their causes, aside from lifestyle changes.  Natural supplements commonly used for the reduction of symptoms associated with hormonal imbalances include:  Lifestyle changes that may help reduce the likelihood and symptoms of hormonal imbalances include:  Nearly everyone experiences at least one or two periods of hormonal imbalance during their lifetime.  Hormonal imbalances are more common during puberty, menstruation, and pregnancy. But some people experience continual, irregular hormonal imbalances.  Many hormonal imbalances are caused by external factors, such as stress or hormone medications. However, hormonal imbalances can also be caused by any medical condition that impacts or involves the endocrine system or glands.  A person should speak to a doctor about long-term unexplained symptoms, especially those that cause pain, discomfort, or interfere with everyday activities.    
 Endocrine disruptors. (n.d.).  Endocrine disruptors. (n.d.).  Kirk, S., Shulman, D., &amp; Anawalt, B. D. (2013, May). Factors that affect endocrine function.  Margulies, P. (n.d.). Addison’s disease.  Natural remedies for hot flashes. (n.d.).  PCOS treatments. (n.d.)  Goldberg, L. (2016, August). Steroids and hormone abuse.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What to know about hormonal imbalances."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321486.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, April 12). "What to know about hormonal imbalances."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  