 Between  9.2 and 35.6 million people  in the United States get  influenza  or  flu  each year.  Unfortunately, flu viruses are constantly changing and mutating, which makes it hard for researchers to develop effective medications.  As a result, natural remedies such as essential oils are increasingly popular.  Traditional healthcare practitioners have used essential oils for centuries to treat many ailments.  Today, essential oils are used in a variety of ways, from making cosmetics smell good to improving quality of life for people with  cancer .  Some claims about the effects of essential oils are anecdotal, but  many studies  are beginning to confirm that some oils can help fight or prevent the flu.  Researchers are exploring both the effectiveness of essential oils for flu treatment and the best ways to apply these oils.   Research  has found that the following essential oils have significant anti-influenza virus properties:   Researchers  have found that a commercial blend of essential oils significantly reduced the influenza virus' ability to spread.  This product,  sold as doTERRA On Guard , contains essential oils of wild orange peel, clove bud,  cinnamon  leaf, cinnamon bark, eucalyptus leaves, and rosemary.  Most essential oils are regarded as safe in certain concentrations by the  U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) . However, people should use all of them with caution.  People can try using essential oils on their own, but it is best to get advice from an aromatherapist or an alternative healthcare practitioner first.  There are two basic methods for using essential oils:  Consuming essential oils is not usually safe and has significant risks. While it can sometimes be done under a doctor's or aromatherapist's care, it is not recommended at home.  Just because essential oils are natural products, it does not mean they are harmless.  Similarly to other medications, essential oils can cause severe side effects if taken improperly or in excessive amounts.  Potential hazards of essential oils include:  Women who are pregnant are sometimes advised to avoid using essential oils due to the possibility of active ingredients crossing the placenta.  Essential oils must be used carefully and in the right way. Diluted wintergreen oil can be used safely on the skin, but it can be dangerously toxic if swallowed.  Although eucalyptus can be helpful for flu symptoms if inhaled, it can also cause seizures if swallowed.  Anyone with potential allergies should also be cautious when using essential oils, as they can cause serious reactions.  Keep essential oils away from the eyes and open flames. Remember that essential oils, as with all medications, should be kept out of the reach of children and pets.  Many essential oils are dangerous for pets, especially cats, so people should research which oils are non-toxic for animals before infusing them at home.  While humans have used essential oils for hundreds of years, it is only recently that the application of essential oils for flu treatment and other medical conditions has been subjected to scientific study.  Both contemporary research and early home remedies suggest that essential oils can be effective tools in the battle against influenza, particularly as resistance to existing medications grows.  The flu can be a serious and even life-threatening condition. However, using essential oils for flu symptoms also comes with some risks and is best done under the care of a doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 3 common and dangerous essential oil mistakes. (2017, August 15).  3 common and dangerous essential oil mistakes. (2017, August 15).  Aromatherapy and essential oils (PDQ®). (2018, February 7).  Billings, M. (2005, February). The influenza pandemic of 1918.  Essential oils: Poisonous when misused. (n.d.).  Frequently asked flu questions 2017–2018 influenza season. (2018, March 1).  Key facts about influenza (flu). (2017, October 3).  Knezevic, P., Aleksic, V., Simin, N., Svircev, E., Petrovic, A., &amp; Mimica-Dukic, N. (2016, February 3). Antimicrobial activity of  Eucalyptus camaldulensis  essential oils and their interactions with conventional antimicrobial agents against multi-drug resistant  Acinetobacter baumannii  [Abstract].  Journal of Ethnopharmacology ,  178 , 125–136.  Pourghanbari, G., Nili, H., Moattari, A., Mohammadi, A., &amp; Iraji, A. (2016, June). Antiviral activity of the oseltamivir and  Melissa officinalis L.  essential oil against avian influenza A virus (H9N2).  VirusDisease ,  27 (2), 170–178.  Pyankov, O. V., Usachev, E. V., Pyankova, O., &amp; Agranovski, I. E. (2012, July 16). Inactivation of airborne influenza virus by tea tree and eucalyptus oils.  Aerosol Science and Technology ,  46 (12), 1295–1302.  Rauf, J. S., &amp; Karuppayil, S. M. (2014, December). A status review on the medicinal properties of essential oils [Abstract].  Industrial Crops and Products ,  62 , 250–264.  Research and references. (n.d.).  Safety information. (n.d.).  Vimalanathan, S., &amp; Hudson, J. (2014, August 25). Anti-influenza virus activity of essential oils and vapors.  American Journal of Essential Oils and Natural Products ,  2 (1), 47–53.  Wu, S., Patel, K. B., Booth, L. J., Metcalf, J. P., Lin, H. K., &amp; Wu, W. (2010, November 15). Protective essential oil attenuates influenza virus infection: An in vitro study in MDCK cells.  BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  10 , 69.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "What essential oils are good for the flu?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321401.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, April 4). "What essential oils are good for the flu?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  