 A malar rash may be flat or slightly raised, and it can feel rough and scaly. It may be itchy and, in severe cases, it may be painful.  Many health conditions can cause a malar or butterfly rash, including:  In this article, we examine the possible conditions that could be behind a malar rash, along with other symptoms that may occur. We also look at diagnosis and treatment options.  Causes of the malar rash include:  Lupus is a chronic autoimmune condition where a person's immune system attacks healthy tissue. It is also known as systemic lupus erythematosus or SLE.  Lupus results in  inflammation  of joints, skin, and other organs. While there is no cure, treatment can improve some of the symptoms.  Around half of all people diagnosed with lupus will develop a malar rash as a symptom. One study recorded a prevalence of  61 percent .  This common skin condition affects  16 million Americans  and  415 million people worldwide . It is characterized by:  Seborrheic dermatitis is a common inflammatory disease of the skin characterized by greasy or dry scales usually on the scalp, hairline, and face, although it can affect many other areas of the body.  When someone has  dandruff , they have a mild form of seborrheic dermatitis.   Cellulitis  is a type of bacterial infection that affects the deeper skin layers plus the layer of fat that is stored directly under the skin.  This is caused by a tick bite, which then transmits bacteria into the body. Other symptoms may include:  This is a condition involving inflammation of the muscles, connective tissues, and skin. Unlike SLE, the associated rash impacts the folds of skin that run from either side of the nose to the corners of the mouth.  When someone eats a diet that is extremely low in niacin, one of the B vitamins, it can lead to  Pellagra .  This condition causes a range of symptoms that affect the skin,  central nervous system , gastrointestinal system, and mucous membranes, such as the lining of the mouth. These symptoms can include pain and swelling.  Bloom syndrome, which is also called Bloom-Torre-Machacek syndrome, is an inherited disorder that is  characterized  by  short stature  and elevated rates of most  cancers .  Among other symptoms, it causes a malar rash and skin eruptions on other areas of the body.  Homocystinuria is a genetic disorder where the body is unable to process the amino acid methionine, leading to harmful levels of this and the chemical homocysteine in the blood and urine.  The condition can also result in vision problems, skeletal abnormalities, and intellectual disability.  Erysipelas is a skin infection caused by  Streptococcus  bacteria. It results in acute skin inflammation. This is a rare cause, but it may also affect the ears and the face.   Sunburn  or sensitivity to sunlight may cause a malar rash, and it may worsen one if it already exists.  Diagnosing the condition behind a malar rash can be difficult because of the wide range of possible causes.  A doctor will take a full and detailed medical history and investigate all other symptoms, as well as perform a thorough physical examination.  Infectious causes may be determined through a tissue biopsy or microbiological tests, while pellagra may be diagnosed through testing of niacin levels. Genetic studies may be carried out to confirm genetic disorders.  If the doctor suspects SLE, they will use blood and urine tests, such as:  Treatment of a malar or butterfly rash depends on its cause.  In the case of lupus, treatment involves:  Treatment for rosacea may include creams or gels to help soothe and repair the skin and reduce redness, as well as oral  antibiotics  to control inflammation.  Causes linked to bacterial infection are treated with oral or topical antibiotics.  Protecting the face from sun helps reduce malar rash. There are several ways people can help their skin to heal and prevent the rash from worsening, including:  People are advised to avoid foods that increase inflammation, including:  Malar rashes are relatively common, though rarely present a problem themselves.  Rashes caused by bacterial infections can be successfully treated and cured.  Chronic diseases or genetic conditions, such as SLE and Bloom syndrome, cannot be cured, but their rash symptoms may improve with treatment.    
 Campbell, M. B., Campbell, W. C., Rogers, J., Rogers, N., Rogers, Z., van den Hurk, A. M., … Zaslaw, P. (2018, April). Bloom syndrome: Research and data priorities for the development of precision medicine as identified by some affected families.  Cold Spring Harbor Molecular Case Studies ,  4 (2).  Campbell, M. B., Campbell, W. C., Rogers, J., Rogers, N., Rogers, Z., van den Hurk, A. M., … Zaslaw, P. (2018, April). Bloom syndrome: Research and data priorities for the development of precision medicine as identified by some affected families.  Cold Spring Harbor Molecular Case Studies ,  4 (2).  Cerovec, M., Anić, B., Padjen, I., &amp; Čikeš, N. (2012, April). Prevalence of the American College of Rheumatology classification criteria in a group of 162 systemic lupus erythematosus patients from Croatia.  Croatian Medical Journal ,  53 (2), 149–154.  Gether, L., Overgaard, L. K., Egeberg, A., &amp; Thyssen, J. P. (2018, February 25). Incidence and prevalence of rosacea: A systematic review and meta‐analysis [Abstract].  British Journal of Dermatology .  Lupus. (2017, August 30).  Rosacea now estimated to affect at least 16 million Americans. (2010, Winter).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Strudwick, Tracey Williams. "What is a malar rash?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321594.php&gt;    APA  Strudwick, T. (2018, April 24). "What is a malar rash?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  