 Almost  50 percent  of adults each year report  headaches , making them among the most common health complaints.  Read on to learn more about headaches on the right side of the head and remedies to help manage the pain.  A headache on the right side of the head may be caused by:  Various issues in the brain can cause a one-sided pain.  The following neurological conditions may be responsible for headaches on one side:  Headaches can occur as a side effect of prescription or over-the-counter (OTC) medications. They can also be caused by overusing medication, including OTC painkillers such as:  This type of headache is called a rebound headache. According to the  World Health Organization , it is the most common type of secondary headache disorder. A secondary headache is a headache that is caused by another condition.  Headaches caused by medication overuse are often at their worst upon waking.  Other causes of headaches can lead to pain across the entire head or just one side.  These include:  There are over  300 types  of headache, about 90 percent of which have no known cause.  However, a  migraine  or a  cluster headache  are the most likely causes of a headache on the right side of the head. Tension headaches may also cause pain on one side in some people.  Genetics are thought to play a role in migraine headaches — a type of severe headache that causes a pulsating sensation or throbbing pain in the head.  The severe pulsating sensations or throbbing are usually accompanied by:  Up to a third of people that get migraines experience visual disturbances or temporary loss of vision (known as an aura) before the onset of the pain. Symptoms can last for  up to 72 hours  if untreated, with the pain typically affecting only one side of the head.  The following factors can trigger migraines:  Early treatment is key to reducing the length and severity of symptoms. Treatments include OTC or prescription medicines. Prevention involves avoiding triggers and using preventative medications, in some cases.  Cluster headaches are rare but severe headaches that occur in cyclical patterns. The pain is intense and usually located around one eye. It may also radiate to other areas of the head and face, as well as the neck and shoulders.  People typically experience frequent headache attacks (clusters) for weeks or months before a period of remission.  Other symptoms of cluster headaches include:  Men tend to experience cluster headaches more often than women. The exact cause is unknown, but smoking, alcohol use, and a family history of cluster headaches may increase risk.  There is no cure for the condition, although treatments can reduce the number and severity of cluster headaches.  Tension headaches are the most common type of headache, occurring in  75 percent  of people.  They usually affect both sides of the head, but some people may have symptoms on one side only.  Signs include:  Symptoms usually last for a few minutes to a few hours and are mild to moderate in severity.  Occasional tension headaches can be treated with OTC pain relievers or home remedies. People with frequent tension headaches may need to change their lifestyle, identify and avoid triggers, or use prescription medications.  Many cases of headache will resolve on their own, without any intervention. People that experience headaches regularly should make an appointment with their doctor to identify the underlying cause.  Anyone who experiences the following symptoms alongside a headache must seek medical attention:  People who have headaches that are very severe or get progressively worse should also see a doctor.  Many headaches can be treated quickly and successfully at home by trying the following:  Headaches are a widespread health complaint, affecting the majority of people at least occasionally.  Most headaches are not cause for concern. Usually, symptoms will resolve within minutes to hours and can be eased with OTC medications, lifestyle changes, and home remedies.  See a doctor if headaches are severe, persist, or get progressively worse. Even if a migraine or a cluster headache is responsible for the pain, many treatments are available to manage symptoms and reduce the frequency of the headaches.    
 Headache disorders [Fact sheet]. (2016, April).  Headache disorders [Fact sheet]. (2016, April).  Headache: When to worry, what to do. (2017, August 12).  Migraine information page: What research is being done? (2017, May 25).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What does a right-sided headache mean?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321513.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 16). "What does a right-sided headache mean?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  