  Varicose veins  are larger-than-normal veins that commonly appear in the legs. They are raised and often twisted veins that can be blue, red, or flesh-colored. Sometimes, these veins can ache, swell, or itch.  There are several studies to suggest that essential oils, such as grape vine, lavender, or yarrow, may be able to reduce or shrink the appearance of varicose or spider veins. However, more research is needed in this area.  In this article, we look at the best oils to use and the evidence behind them. We also look at the causes and prevention of varicose veins, and other methods for reducing varicose veins.  Veins are responsible for returning blood that does not have oxygen back toward the heart. There are tiny valves periodically throughout the veins to stop the blood from flowing backward.  However, if these valves weaken or are damaged, blood can flow backward and pool. The result can be varicose veins.  Varicose veins most commonly appear in the legs because the leg veins are under the greatest pressure to return blood to the heart.  Several risk factors increase the likelihood a person will have varicose veins. These include:  Although varicose veins are not usually a major cause for concern, they can be irritating and sometimes painful. Sometimes, a person may experience sores or skin ulcers related to poor blood flow in the legs.  Essential oils are derived from plants, including flowers, herbs, or trees. These oils are often used for alternative therapies. The dosages and instructions that come with them are not regulated, so a person should talk to a doctor before they use essential oils.  Some of the essential oils that have been studied in relation to varicose veins and their symptoms, such as leg swelling, include:  Smelling lavender has been shown to help reduce pain, according to the journal   Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine  .  Lavender is thought to affect brain chemicals, such as  serotonin  and GABA, which are associated with pain relief.  Applying lavender to the skin may reduce pain and the size of skin ulcers when massaged on the feet or other affected areas.  Horse chestnut seed extract (HCSE) can be prepared as a topical gel, oral tincture, or tablet. It may be useful in reducing swelling, pain, and itchiness.  According to an article published in the journal   Advances in Therapy  , topical applications of HCSE helped to reduce varicose vein symptoms, including leg swelling,  leg pain , itching, and heaviness.  While the method of action is not known exactly, HCSE is thought to keep the small sections of veins known as capillaries from breaking down.   Research  has suggested that sea pine essential oil could reduce swelling, or  edema , in a person's legs.  Research from  2018  shows that sea pine bark essential oil, also known as maritime pine oil has anti-inflammatory action.  This study also found that sea pine bark oil was superior to horse chestnut extract for reducing edema related to chronic venous insufficiency that can cause varicose veins. However, this study only tested 40 people, so more research is needed.  Grape vine essential oil may reduce swelling in a person's legs, including swelling related to varicose veins.  According to a study published in the   Journal of the German Society of Dermatology  , taking red grape vine extract at dosages of 360 to 720 milligrams a day helped to reduce lower leg swelling related to weak blood flow through the veins, also called venous insufficiency, which is a common cause of varicose veins.  Essential oils extracted from the yarrow plant have been  used traditionally  for treating varicose veins. When a person applies yarrow to the skin above varicose veins, it may help to reduce their symptoms.  There are other treatments for varicose veins besides essential oils that people may wish to try.  Other treatments for varicose veins include:  Doctors are frequently inventing new treatments to treat varicose veins. However, varicose veins are normal, and if they are not causing a person significant symptoms and have no side effects, they usually do not require medical or invasive treatment.  Because genetics and hormones play a role in the development of varicose veins, it is not always possible to prevent them from forming. However, there are some steps a person can take to reduce their risk for varicose veins.  Possible steps for preventing varicose veins include:  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not regulate essential oils. However, these oils do fall under the "generally recognized as safe" or GRAS classification.  To be safe, essential oils must be diluted in a carrier oil before use. Put 3 to 5 drops of the essential oil in 3 tablespoons of sweet almond oil,  coconut oil  that has been warmed up, or olive oil and apply gently to the skin.  Essential oils do not often cause significant side effects, though they can be toxic when swallowed, leading to nausea and vomiting.  Applying essential oils to the skin may also cause allergic reactions or skin irritation in some people. A person should always do a patch test before they use the oil. This involves applying a small amount of essential oil to a small patch of skin and waiting overnight to test for swelling or allergic reactions.  Lastly, a person applying citrus oils may find that their skin becomes more sensitive to the sun.  Unless varicose veins cause medical problems for a person, they do not usually require invasive treatments.  If adding essential oils and leg massages do help a person experience reduced symptoms, then this can be of benefit.  A person should always talk to their doctor about using essential oils to treat varicose veins, and about other treatments if essential oils are not effective.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Aromatherapy and essential oils. (2018, February 23).  Aromatherapy and essential oils. (2018, February 23).  Koulivand, P.H., Ghadiri, M. K., &amp; Gorji, A. (2013, March 14). Lavender and the nervous system [Abstract].  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2013 , 681304.  Lawless, J. (2013, June 1).  The encyclopedia of essential oils: The complete guide to the use of aromatic oils in aromatherapy, herbalism, health &amp; well-being . London, UK: Harper Collins.  López, V., Nielsen, B., Solas, M., Ramírez, M. J., &amp; Jäger, A. K. (2017, May 19). Exploring pharmacological mechanisms of lavender ( Lavandula angustifolia ) essential oil on central nervous system targets.  Frontiers in Pharmacology ,  8 , 280.  Reuter, J., Wölfle, U., Korting, H. C., &amp; Schempp, C. (2010, October 22). Which plant for which skin disease? Part 2: Dermatophytes, chronic venous insufficiency, photoprotection, actinic keratoses, vitiligo, hair loss, cosmetic indications.  Journal der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft ,  8 (11), 866–873.  Sagorchev, P., Lukanov, J., &amp; Beer, A. M. (2010, July). Investigations into the specific effects of rosemary oil at the receptor level.  Phytomedicine ,  17 (8–9), 693–697.  Suter, A., Bommer, S., &amp; Rechner, J. (2006, January/February). Treatment of patients with venous insufficiency with fresh plant horse chestnut seed extract: A review of 5 clinical studies [Abstract].  Advances in Therapy ,  23 (1), 179–190.  Tümen, İ., Akkol, E. K., Tastan, H., Süntar, I., &amp; Kurtca, M. (2018, January 30). Research on the antioxidant, wound healing, and anti-inflammatory activities and the phytochemical composition of maritime pine ( Pinus pinaster  Ait) [Abstract].  Journal of Ethnopharmacology ,  211 , 235–246.  Varicose veins. (n.d.).  Varicose veins and spider veins. (2018, March 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Can essential oils reduce varicose veins?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321562.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, April 21). "Can essential oils reduce varicose veins?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  