 Most people pass gas between  13 and 21  times a day. When gas is blocked from escaping,  diarrhea  or  constipation  may be responsible.  Gas pain can be so intense that doctors mistake the root cause for  appendicitis ,  gallstones , or even  heart disease .  Luckily, many home remedies can help to release trapped gas or prevent it from building up. Twenty effective methods are listed below.  
 1. Let it out 
    Holding in gas can cause bloating, discomfort, and pain. The easiest way to avoid these symptoms is to simply let out the gas.   2. Pass stool   A bowel movement can relieve gas. Passing stool will usually release any gas trapped in the intestines.   3. Eat slowly   Eating too quickly or while moving can cause a person to take in air as well as food, leading to gas-related pain.  Quick eaters can slow down by chewing each bite of food 30 times. Breaking down food in such a way aids digestion and can prevent a number of related complaints, including bloating and  indigestion .   4. Avoid chewing gum   As a person chews gum they tend to swallow air, which increases the likelihood of trapped wind and gas pains.  Sugarless gum also contains artificial sweeteners, which may cause bloating and gas.   5. Say no to straws   Often, drinking through a straw causes a person to swallow air. Drinking directly from a bottle can have the same effect, depending on the bottle's size and shape.  To avoid gas pain and bloating, it is best to sip from a glass.   6. Quit smoking   Whether using traditional or  electronic cigarettes , smoking causes air to enter the digestive tract. Because of the range of health issues linked to smoking, quitting is wise for many reasons.   7. Choose non-carbonated drinks   Carbonated drinks, such as sparkling water and sodas, send a lot of gas to the stomach. This can cause bloating and pain.   8. Eliminate problematic foods   Eating certain foods can cause trapped gas. Individuals find different foods problematic.  However, the foods below frequently cause gas to build up:  Keeping a food diary can help a person to identify trigger foods. Some, like artificial sweeteners, may be easy to cut out of the diet.  Others, like cruciferous vegetables and legumes, provide a range of health benefits. Rather than avoiding them entirely, a person may try reducing their intake or preparing the foods differently.   9. Drink tea   Some herbal teas may aid digestion and reduce gas pain fast. The most effective include teas made from:  Anise acts as a mild laxative and should be avoided if diarrhea accompanies gas. However, it can be helpful if constipation is responsible for trapped gas.   10. Snack on fennel seeds   Fennel is an age-old solution for trapped wind. Chewing on a teaspoon of the seeds is a popular natural remedy.  However, anyone pregnant or breast-feeding should probably avoid doing so, due to conflicting reports concerning safety.   11. Take peppermint supplements   Peppermint oil capsules have long been taken to resolve issues like bloating, constipation, and trapped gas. Some  research  supports the use of peppermint for these symptoms.  Always choose enteric-coated capsules. Uncoated capsules may dissolve too quickly in the digestive tract, which can lead to  heartburn .  Peppermint inhibits the absorption of iron, so these capsules should not be taken with iron supplements or by people who have  anemia .   12. Clove oil   Clove oil has traditionally been used to treat digestive complaints, including bloating, gas, and indigestion. It may also  have  ulcer-fighting properties.  Consuming clove oil after meals can increase digestive enzymes and reduce the amount of gas in the intestines.   13. Apply heat   When gas pains strike, place a hot water bottle or heating pad on the stomach. The warmth relaxes the muscles in the gut, helping gas to move through the intestines. Heat can also reduce the sensation of pain.   14. Address digestive issues   People with certain digestive difficulties are more likely to experience trapped gas. Those with  irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS) or inflammatory bowel disease, for example, often experience bloating and gas pain.  Addressing these issues through lifestyle changes and medication can improve the quality of life.  People with  lactose intolerance  who frequently experience gas pain should take greater steps to avoid lactose or take lactase supplements.   15. Add apple cider vinegar to water   Apple cider vinegar aids the production of stomach acid and digestive enzymes. It may also help to alleviate gas pain quickly.  Add a tablespoon of the vinegar to a glass of water and drink it before meals to prevent gas pain and bloating. It is important to then rinse the mouth with water, as vinegar can erode tooth enamel.   16. Use activated charcoal   Activated charcoal is a natural product that can be bought in health food stores or pharmacies without a prescription. Supplement tablets taken before and after meals can prevent trapped gas.  It is best to build up the intake of activated charcoal gradually. This will prevent unwanted symptoms, such as constipation and nausea.  One alarming side effect of activated charcoal is that it can turn the stool black. This discoloration is harmless and should go away if a person stops taking charcoal supplements.   17. Take probiotics   Probiotic supplements add beneficial bacteria to the gut. They are used to treat several digestive complaints, including infectious diarrhea.  Some  research  suggests that certain strains of probiotics can alleviate bloating, intestinal gas, abdominal pain, and other symptoms of IBS.  Strains of  Bifidobacterium  and  Lactobacillus  are generally considered to be most effective.   18. Exercise   Gentle exercises can relax the muscles in the gut, helping to move gas through the digestive system. Walking or doing  yoga  poses after meals may be especially beneficial.   19. Breathe deeply   Deep breathing may not work for everyone. Taking in too much air can increase the amount of gas in the intestines.  However, some people find that deep breathing techniques can relieve the pain and discomfort associated with trapped gas.   20. Take an over-the-counter remedy   Several products can get rid of gas pain fast. One popular medication, simethicone, is marketed under the following brand names:  Anyone who is pregnant or taking other medications should discuss the use of simethicone with a doctor or pharmacist.  Trapped gas can be painful and distressing, but many easy remedies can alleviate symptoms quickly.  People with ongoing or severe gas pain should see a doctor right away, especially if the pain is accompanied by:  While everyone experiences trapped gas once in a while, experiencing regular pain, bloating, and other gastrointestinal symptoms can indicate the presence of a medical condition or food sensitivity.  Some of the remedies listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Khanna, R., MacDonald, J. K., &amp; Levesque, B. G. (2014, July). Peppermint oil for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  Journal of Clinical Gastroenterology ,  48 (6), 505–512.  Khanna, R., MacDonald, J. K., &amp; Levesque, B. G. (2014, July). Peppermint oil for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  Journal of Clinical Gastroenterology ,  48 (6), 505–512.  Santin, J. R., Lemos, M., Klein-Júnior, L. C., Machado, I. D., Costa, P., de Oliveira, A. P., ... &amp; de Andrade, S. F. (2011, February). Gastroprotective activity of essential oil of the Syzygium aromaticum and its major component eugenol in different animal models [Abstract].  Naunyn-Schmiedeberg's Archives of Pharmacology ,  383 (2), 149–158.  Symptoms and causes of gas in the digestive tract. (2016, July).  Verna, E. C., &amp; Lucak, S. (2010, September). Use of probiotics in gastrointestinal disorders: What to recommend?  Therapeutic Advances in Gastroenterology ,  3 (5), 307–319.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "How to get rid of trapped gas."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321504.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 16). "How to get rid of trapped gas."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  