 Telogen effluvium is different from the permanent  hair loss  disorder called  alopecia areata . Large amounts of a person's hair might fall out, but it is often temporary, and the hair usually grows back.  In this article, we look at the causes, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of telogen effluvium, including dietary changes that may help.  A person is described as having chronic telogen effluvium if they frequently experience periods of hair shedding for more than  6 months . Telogen effluvium is generally reversible.  A person with this condition does not lose all their hair, although it may become noticeably thin.  Telogen effluvium is a form of hair loss characterized by hair thinning or an increase in hair shedding. It occurs  more often  in women and is usually triggered by a disturbance to the hair cycle.  The hair cycle typically has three phases:  Telogen effluvium is associated with the telogen phase. Normally,  5 to 10 percent  of a person's hair is in the telogen phase at any one time.  With telogen effluvium, the anagen phase slows down, meaning that fewer hairs enter the next two stages. With this condition, around  30 percent of hair follicles  move into the telogen phase, which means that hair shedding occurs.  The main symptom of telogen effluvium is an increase in the amount of hair a person sheds.  Someone may notice that more hair than usual is falling out when they wash or brush their hair. They may also find more hair in the drain or on their pillow.  Disturbances to the hair cycle can be caused by a number of triggers, including:  Treatment for telogen effluvium depends on what is triggering the hair loss. Once the trigger has been established and addressed, the hair cycle should normalize and hair will begin to grow back.  Treatment options include:  A person should try to avoid chemical or heat treatments that could damage the hair. They should also avoid heat styling and heat treatment, such as curling or perming the hair.  Dietary considerations include the following:  For professional advice, a person can contact a dermatologist or trichologist.  With telogen effluvium, it is common for hair to grow back within  3 to 6 months  after the cause has been dealt with. Sometimes, the rate of shedding slows down but does not stop entirely. In most cases, no more than 50 percent of the hair is lost.  When diagnosing telogen effluvium, a doctor will examine the hairs that have fallen out.  Several tests can be performed to diagnose telogen effluvium:  A dermatologist might be able to diagnose telogen effluvium and offer advice. They will look at other indicators of hair health, such as the appearance of the scalp, any patches of  baldness , or more generalized hair thinning.  Telogen effluvium is a common cause of temporary hair loss. It is characterized by an abrupt onset of hair shedding usually seen several months after a triggering event.  It usually lasts for around  6 months , except for cases of chronic telogen effluvium, which last longer. No specific treatment exists, but lifestyle and dietary changes can be effective in beginning hair regrowth.    
 Alopecia areata [Fact sheet]. (2016, October).  Alopecia areata [Fact sheet]. (2016, October).  Aziz, A. M. A., Hamed, S. S., &amp; Gaballah, M. (2015, July). Possible relationship between chronic telogen effluvium and changes in lead, cadmium, zinc, and iron total blood levels in females: A case-control study.  International Journal of Trichology ,  7 (3), 100–106.  Gizlenti, S., &amp; Ekmekci, T. R. (2013, May 20). The changes in the hair cycle during gestation and the post partum period [Abstract].  Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology ,  28 (7), 878–881.  Golouch-Koniuszy, Z. S. (2016, March). Nutrition of women with hair loss problem during the period of menopause.  Menopause Review ,  15 (1), 56–61.  Malkud, S. (2015, September). Telogen effluvium: A review.  Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research ,   9 (9), 1–3.  Rebora, A. (2017, March). Intermittent chronic telogen effluvium.  Skin Appendage Disorders ,  3 (1), 36–38.  Rebora, A., Guarrera, M., &amp; Baldari, M. (2005, October). Distinguishing androgenetic alopecia from chronic telogen effluvium when associated in the same patient: A simple noninvasive method.  Archives of Dermatology ,  141 (10), 1243–1245.  Telogen effluvium [Fact sheet]. (2016, December).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  RNutr, Jo Lewin. "Is telogen effluvium reversible?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321590.php&gt;    APA  RNutr, J. (2018, April 23). "Is telogen effluvium reversible?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  