 Essential oils are made from the leaves, flowers, or roots of specific plants. Through a process known as distillation, essential oils are extracted as a highly concentrated form of the plant. They contain many of the plants' original medicinal properties.  Essential oils have a long history of being used in alternative medicine to treat conditions as diverse as skin conditions to  depression . This article will examine 10 essential oils that could be helpful in treating a  sore throat .  The following essential oils may help with a sore throat:  Peppermint is among the most popular essential oils for treating a sore throat. A  2013 study  found peppermint oil to have antimicrobial properties against pathogens that enter the body through the mouth.  A  more recent study  suggested that peppermint oil also acts as an antibacterial agent, meaning it may help fight off bacteria. Peppermint also contains menthol, which is the base ingredient of many sore throat medications, such as lozenges.  A  review in 2005  suggested that lavender has anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial properties. These properties could support lavender as a treatment for a sore throat.  A  2007 review  argued that parts of the Echinacea plant may help to treat cold symptoms. The essential oil is derived from the Echinacea plant and could have similar benefits.  Eucalyptus has been widely used in cosmetics, cleaning, and alternative medicine. Studies have shown that the oil from eucalyptus leaves is  antibacterial . Some  studies  have even suggested its use as a natural  antibiotic  to treat infections.   Ginger  is a common ingredient in many different cuisines. It has also been used widely in alternative medicine, particularly for treating gastrointestinal problems, such as nausea and vomiting.  Research suggests that ginger has  anti-inflammatory  properties, which could also be helpful in treating a sore throat.

  Many throat medicines, including sore throat lozenges, are flavored with lemon. A  2017 study  found that lemon essential oils have antimicrobial and  antioxidant  properties, which may help treat a sore throat and prevent infection.  Studies from  2008  and  2014  found that thyme essential oils have strong antimicrobial properties, which may help fight off harmful pathogens. Thyme could be useful in treating sore throats caused by bacterial infections.  Bitter orange has previously been used as a dietary supplement to aid weight-loss.  One study  suggested that it may also have antimicrobial and antioxidant properties, which could help to relieve a sore throat.  Tea tree oil is most commonly used in skin products but could also be useful for treating a sore throat. A  2013 study  found tea tree oils to have antimicrobial properties that protect against the pathogens that enter the body through the mouth.  The combination of  echinacea  and sage  has been shown  to relieve discomfort from a sore throat. When used as an essential oil, they may have the same effect.  Essential oils can be used aromatically by diffusing them into the air or diluted in a carrier oil and applied topically, but they should never be ingested.  Essential oils may be used aromatically, which means a person inhales them. This can be done in several different ways, including:  People should be very cautious about using essential oils around children and pets. Many essential oils are toxic or deadly for pets, especially cats.  Mix a few drops of essential oil with a carrier oil, such as warmed coconut or sweet almond oil, and apply directly to the outside of the throat. Gently massaging the area will help absorption.  It is recommended to start with 1 or 2 drops before increasing the dose. This will help to prevent adverse skin reactions, such as rashes or itching.  It is important to note that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not monitor or regulate the quality of essential oils. This means that it is not always possible to know exactly what ingredients the manufacturers have used. For this reason, people should be sure to buy oils from a reputable source.  People should always do a test patch before using oils on their body, as they may have an allergic reaction. To do a test patch, put a dime-size spot of the diluted oil on the inner arm. If there is no reaction after 24 hours, the oil is safe to use.  Essential oils are highly concentrated and should only be used in small quantities. Even in small doses, they are not entirely safe and can cause adverse side effects, including:  If anyone experiences any adverse side effects, they should stop using essential oils and speak to a doctor. Anyone who is taking medications should also talk to a doctor to check whether the essential oils will react with the medicines.  It is unclear whether many essential oils are safe for pregnant women or children.  Essential oils are a promising alternative to over-the-counter medications for treating sore throats. However, more high-quality evidence is needed to support the use and effectiveness of essential oils.  Essential oils are often mistaken for being a risk-free form of therapy. It is important to remember that they are highly concentrated substances and can have adverse side effects.    
 Bachir, R. G., &amp; Benali, M. (2012, September). Antibacterial activity of the essential oils from the leaves of  Eucalyptus globulus  against  Escherichia coli  and  Staphylococcus aureus .  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  2 (9), 739–742.  Bachir, R. G., &amp; Benali, M. (2012, September). Antibacterial activity of the essential oils from the leaves of  Eucalyptus globulus  against  Escherichia coli  and  Staphylococcus aureus .  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  2 (9), 739–742.  Cavanagh, H. M., &amp; Wilkinson, J. M. (2005, March). Lavender essential oil: A review.  Australian Infection Control ,  10 (1), 35–37.  El Abed, N., Kaabi, B., Smaali, M. I., Chabbouh, M., Habibi, K., Mejri, M., ... Ben Hadj Ahmed, S. (2014, February 25). Chemical composition, antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of  Thymus capitata  essential oil with its preservative effect against  Listeria monocytogenes  inoculated in minced beef meat.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2014 .  Hsouna, A. B., Hamdi, N., Halima, N. B., &amp; Abdelkafi, S. (2013, April 22). Characterization of essential oil from  Citrus aurantium  L. flowers: Antimicrobial and antioxidant activities.  Journal of Oleo Science ,  62 (10), 763–772.  Hsouna, A. B., Halima, N. B., Smaoui, S., &amp; Hamdi, N. (2017, August 3).  Citrus lemon  essential oil: Chemical composition, antioxidant and antimicrobial activities with its preservative effect against  Listeria monocytogenes  inoculated in minced beef meat.  Lipids in Health and Disease ,  16 (1), 146.  Moghaddasi, M. S., &amp; Kashani, H. H. (2012, July 11). Ginger ( Zingiber officinale ): A review.  Journal of Medicinal Plants Research ,  6 (26), 4255–4258.  Mulyaningsih, S., Sporer, F., Reichling, J., &amp; Wink, M. (2011, September). Antibacterial activity of essential oils from  Eucalyptus  and of selected components against multidrug-resistant bacterial pathogens [Abstract].  Pharmaceutical Biology ,  49 (9), 893–899.  Schapowal, A., Berger, D., Klein, P., &amp; Suter, A. (2009, September 1). Echinacea/sage or chlorhexidine/lidocaine for treating acute sore throats: A randomized double-blind trial.  European Journal of Medical Research ,  14 (9), 406.  Shah, S. A., Sander, S., White, C. M., Rinaldi, M., &amp; Coleman, C. I. (2007, June 27). Evaluation of echinacea for the prevention and treatment of the common cold: A meta-analysis [Abstract].  The Lancet Infectious Diseases ,  7 (7), 473–480.  Singh, R., Shushni, M. A. M., &amp; Belkheir, A. (2015, May). Antibacterial and antioxidant activities of  Mentha piperita  L.  Arabian Journal of Chemistry ,  8 (3), 322–328.  Solomakos, N., Govaris, A., Koidis, P., &amp; Botsoglou, N. (2008, February). The antimicrobial effect of thyme essential oil, nisin, and their combination against  Listeria monocytogenes  in minced beef during refrigerated storage [Abstract].  Food Microbiology ,  25 (1), 120–127.  Thosar, N., Basak, S., Bahadure, R. N., &amp; Rajurkar, M. (2013, September). Antimicrobial efficacy of five essential oils against oral pathogens: An  in vitro  study.  European Journal of Dentistry ,  7 (1), S71–S77.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "Essential oils for a sore throat: Lemon, peppermint, and more."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321598.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, April 24). "Essential oils for a sore throat: Lemon, peppermint, and more."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  