 The cervix is a narrow passage that connects the uterus and vagina. Every month, menstrual blood comes out of the uterus through the cervix and into the vagina. When a woman has a baby, the cervix expands to allow the baby to move into the birth canal.  If something irritates the cervix and it becomes inflamed, the condition is called cervicitis. This article explores the symptoms, causes, and treatments, including natural remedies for this condition.  Symptoms of cervicitis may include:  Some women may not experience any symptoms when they have cervicitis. Severe cervicitis may lead to a thick, yellow or green vaginal discharge that resembles  pus .  Cases of cervicitis may be mild or severe. Cervicitis is often caused by a  sexually transmitted infection  (STI), such as:  Other causes of cervicitis include:  Cervicitis may be either acute or chronic. Acute cervicitis is typically caused by an infection and is best treated medically.  Chronic cervicitis is not typically caused by an infection. Symptoms may be milder but last longer. Some people may want to treat chronic cervicitis at home, using natural remedies that will complement medical treatments.  However, it is essential to discuss this strategy with a healthcare provider to ensure the person receives the correct treatment.  Doctors commonly prescribe  antibiotics  as a treatment for cervicitis. These drugs help to clear the infection, which helps to treat symptoms.  If cervicitis is caused by an STI, the doctor can advise on the best course of treatments. STIs are often treatable with antibiotics.  If a foreign body is irritating the cervix, a doctor will remove the object and may prescribe antibiotics.  Acute cervicitis that is caused by an infection is best treated medically, as it is essential to clear up the infection.  If a woman has chronic cervicitis with mild symptoms, she may choose to use home remedies to help ease the symptoms.  A person should always use home remedies alongside medical treatments. They are not intended to replace them.  Home remedies that may help treat cervicitis include:  It is a good idea to seek a diagnosis and advice from a doctor before deciding on a course of treatment. These alternative treatments need further studies as they are not considered first-line treatment for cervicitis or vaginal infections at this time.  Home remedies that support vaginal and cervical health and may prevent cervicitis include:  If a woman thinks that she may have cervicitis, it is a good idea to see a doctor to get a full diagnosis.  The doctor will carry out a pelvic exam to examine the cervix and may take a swab. This helps the doctor to collect cells and fluids. These may be tested for abnormalities or examined under a microscope.  To reach a full diagnosis, the doctor may also test for STIs. Treating these may heal the  inflammation .  If left untreated, cervicitis may lead to complications. These may include:  Cervicitis is typically treatable. Home treatments and prevention strategies should be used alongside, not instead of, medical treatment.  Acute cervicitis caused by infections is best treated medically to avoid complications.  If someone thinks they may have cervicitis, they should speak to their doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Butler, L. M., &amp; Wu, A. H. (2014, November 17). Green and black tea in relation to gynecologic cancers.  Molecular Nutrition and Food Research ,  55 (6), 931–940.  Butler, L. M., &amp; Wu, A. H. (2014, November 17). Green and black tea in relation to gynecologic cancers.  Molecular Nutrition and Food Research ,  55 (6), 931–940.  Homayouni, A., Bastani, P., Ziyadi, S., Mohammad-Alizadeh-Charandabi, S., Ghalibaf, M., Mortazavian, A. M., &amp; Mehrabany, E. V. (2014, January). Effects of probiotics on the recurrence of bacterial vaginosis: A review [Abstract].  Journal of Lower Genital Tract Disease ,  18 (1), 79–86.  Liu, C., Zhang, Y., Kong, S., Tsui, I., Yu, Y., &amp; Han, F. (2014, February 4). Applications and therapeutic actions of complementary and alternative medicine for women with genital infection.  Evidence-based Complementary and Alternative Medicine .  Marrazzo, J. (2017, May 10). Acute cervicitis.  Mattson, S. K., Polk, J. P., &amp; Nyirjesy, P. (2016, July). Chronic cervicitis: Presenting features and response to therapy [Abstract].  Journal of Lower Genital Tract Disease ,  20 (3), e30–3.  Mohammadzadeh, F., Dolatian, M., Jorjani, M., Majd, H. A., &amp; Borumandnia, N. (2014, July 5). Comparing the therapeutic effects of garlic tablet and oral metronidazole on bacterial vaginosis: A randomized controlled clinical trial.  Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal ,  16 (7), e19118.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What is cervicitis and what causes it?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321573.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, April 22). "What is cervicitis and what causes it?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  