 A  vitamin  K deficiency is serious and can lead to a range of health issues. Even getting less than the recommended dosage over a prolonged period may be bad for a person's overall health, and could lead to problems such as:  The recommended intake of vitamin K is at least 90 micrograms (mcg) a day for women and at least 120 mcg a day for men. Most people can easily achieve these levels by adding the foods below to a balanced, healthful diet.  There are two types of vitamin K: vitamin K-1 and vitamin K-2. Vitamin K-1 is present in a higher number of foods and is particularly abundant in green vegetables and the oils of some plants.  Vitamin K-2 is found in just a few animal sources and some fermented vegetables, such as natto, a fermented soybean dish.  Listed below are some of the foods that contain high levels of vitamin K. It is important to note that the levels of vitamin K are measured per 100 grams (g) of food. Although some of the herbs, such as basil and thyme, seem to contain very high amounts of vitamin K, it is unlikely that a person would use such large quantities while cooking.  100 g of the following foods contain high levels of Vitamin K-1.  100 g of the following foods contain high levels of vitamin K-2.  Adding more vitamin K-rich foods to the diet may have some protective benefits.  One study  noted that people who had a higher intake of vitamin K-2 had a reduced risk of cancer.  Vitamin K-2 also appears to improve bone quality, which could lead to a reduction in broken bones. As a  2017 review  noted, bone density is not always affected by vitamin K-2 intake, but people who took vitamin supplements that included  calcium ,  vitamin D , and vitamin K-2 were 25 percent less likely to have a  bone fracture  in their lifetime.  The same review also noted the importance of vitamin K for keeping  insulin  levels balanced. Participants who took vitamin K-1 supplements showed improved  insulin resistance  in one study. Another study indicated that an increased intake of vitamin K-1 led to a decreased risk of developing  diabetes .  While consuming more vitamin K may help improve glycemic control in some people, it should not replace any medications for diabetes.  Vitamin K may play also play a role in preventing  Alzheimer's disease , as older adults taking vitamin K  were found  to have improved cognitive abilities and less difficulty recalling memories.  While most dietary guidelines to do not currently differentiate between vitamins K-1 and K-2, it may be best to provide the body with sources of both types.  Most people eating a balanced diet rich in whole fruits and vegetables are sure to get enough vitamin K in their diets, especially vitamin K-1. One of the simplest ways to include additional vitamin K-1 into the diet is to eat dark, leafy greens.  Vitamin K-2 may be more challenging to incorporate into a healthful diet, as it is found most commonly in meat and animal products. Healthful gut bacteria produce some vitamin K-2, but the best way to ensure the body gets enough is by eating it. Common sources of vitamin K-2 include meat, liver, and some dairy products.  While meat and dairy eaters can often find sources that contain vitamin K-2, vegetarians and vegans may be limited. A Japanese fermented soybean dish called natto is an excellent source of vitamin K-2.  Getting both vitamin K-1 and K-2 in the diet is essential for ideal overall health, and some foods make it easy to hit the daily-recommended values.  Incorporating every food containing vitamin K is not necessary, but it is helpful to know which foods contain the vitamin to be sure the body gets enough each day.  On the other hand, people taking anticoagulants or the blood-thinning medications should be cautious about consuming too much vitamin K. People taking these medications should speak to a doctor about their vitamin K levels.  For people taking medication, knowing which foods contain high sources of vitamin K is the best way to avoid them. However, the most important thing is keeping the levels of vitamin K consistent each day.    
 Fu, X., Harshman, S. G., Shen, X., Haytowitz, D. B., Karl, J. P., Wolfe, B. E., &amp; Booth, S. L. (2017, June 1). Multiple vitamin K forms exist in dairy foods.  Current Developments in Nutrition ,  1 (6).  Fu, X., Harshman, S. G., Shen, X., Haytowitz, D. B., Karl, J. P., Wolfe, B. E., &amp; Booth, S. L. (2017, June 1). Multiple vitamin K forms exist in dairy foods.  Current Developments in Nutrition ,  1 (6).  Kamao, M., Suhara, Y., Tsugawa, N., Uwano, M., Yamaguchi, N., Uenishi, K., ... Okano, T. (2007, March 26). Vitamin K content of foods and dietary vitamin K intake in Japanese young women.  Journal of Nutritional Science and Vitaminology ,  53 (6), 464–470.  Nimptsch, K., Rohrmann, S., Kaaks, R., &amp; Linseisen, J. (2010, March 24). Dietary vitamin K intake in relation to cancer incidence and mortality: Results from the Heidelberg cohort of the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC-Heidelberg).  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  91 (5), 1348–1358.  Nutrient lists: Vitamin K (phylloquinone)(µg) ; Menaquinone-4(µg). (n.d.).  Riphagen, I. J., Keyzer, C. A., Drummen, N. E. A., de Borst, M. H., Beulens, J. W. J., Gansevoort, R. T., ... Bakker, S. J. L. (2017, December 8). Prevalence and effects of functional vitamin K insufficiency: The PREVEND study.  Nutrients ,  9 (12), 1334.  Schwalfenberg, G. K. (2017, June 18). Vitamins K1 and K2: The emerging group of vitamins required for human health.  Journal of Nutrition and Metabolism ,  2017 .  Shea, M. K., &amp; Booth, S. L. (2016, January 2). Concepts and controversies in evaluating vitamin K status in population-based studies.  Nutrients ,  8 (1), 8.  Van Ballegooijen, A. J., &amp; Beulens, J. W. (2017, July 10). The role of vitamin K status in cardiovascular health: Evidence from observational and clinical studies.  Current Nutrition Reports ,  6 (3), 197–205.  Walther, B., Karl, J. P., Booth, S. L., &amp; Boyaval, P. (2013, July). Menaquinones, bacteria, and the food supply: The relevance of dairy and fermented food products to vitamin K requirements.  Advances in Nutrition ,  4 (4), 463-473.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Best 40 foods for vitamin K."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321586.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, April 23). "Best 40 foods for vitamin K."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  