 The Family Planning Association (FPA) in the UK, claim that up to  90 percent  of sexually active women will become pregnant in 12 months if they do not use  contraception . A person risks becoming pregnant every time they have sex without contraception, including the first time they ever have sex.  Some methods are available without a prescription, but most require one. Each form of birth control has advantages and disadvantages. Read on to learn more about the different types of contraception designed to help people avoid pregnancy.  Barrier methods prevent sperm from reaching the egg. They include:  Male and female condoms are the only types of contraception that protect against  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs).  When used correctly, male condoms are more than  80 percent  effective against pregnancy, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  To use a male condom correctly:  Most male condoms are made of latex, but other types are available for those with a  latex allergy . If using a lubricant, check that it is compatible with the kind of condom being used. For example, latex condoms can only be used with water-based lube.  Condoms are available over-the-counter (OTC), without a prescription, from supermarkets, drugstores, or  online . Latex-free condoms are also available to buy  online .  Female condoms are also available without a prescription. They can be used instead of a male condom, but should never be used with one.  According to the CDC, female condoms are about  79 percent  effective for contraception.  Many drugstores now sell female condoms, but if local stores do not stock them, they are available  online .  A diaphragm is a barrier method of contraception that a person places inside the vagina. It is important to apply spermicide to the diaphragm before each use.  When used with spermicide, the CDC estimate that the diaphragm is close to  90 percent  effective.  A person must insert the diaphragm a few hours before intercourse, leave it in place for 6 hours after sex, and remove it after 24 hours. Diaphragms do not protect against STIs.  A cervical cap (sold as FemCap in the United States) is a soft silicone cup that is placed deep inside the vagina. It covers the cervix to stop sperm from reaching an egg.  This effectiveness of the cervical cap varies according to sources, but Planned Parenthood estimate that its effectiveness ranges from about  70 to 85 percent . It does not protect against STIs.  Cervical caps are available in drugstores and  online .  The contraceptive sponge is a method of birth control that a person can buy without a prescription. Made of polyurethane foam and containing spermicide, the sponge is placed deep inside the vagina to block entry to the uterus.  Used alone, the sponge is  76 to 88 percent  effective, but using it with a condom further reduces the risk of pregnancy and STIs.  Contraceptive sponges are available to buy  online .  Spermicide is a chemical that inactivates sperm. It is available to buy without a prescription and is used with forms of barrier contraception, such as condoms, but not with the sponge.  If used alone, spermicide should be inserted close to the cervix at least  10 minutes  before sex. It remains effective for 60 minutes and is approximately  71 percent  effective.  Spermicide gels can be found at drugstores or purchased  online . Talk to a doctor about the most effective ways to use spermicide as a contraceptive.  Hormonal forms of birth control prevent conception by stopping  ovulation , which is the release of an egg from the ovaries. This type of contraception does not protect against STIs.  Most hormonal contraceptives are only available with a prescription from a doctor and, except for emergency contraception, it is not usually available online.  Birth control pills are one of the  most commonly used  methods of contraception in the U.S.  There are various brands of pill available, and according to the  National Health Service (NHS)  in the UK, they are over 99 percent effective if taken as prescribed.  However, with typical use, they are approximately 95 percent effective.  There are two forms of the pill:  According to the NHS, the contraceptive patch is  99 percent  effective when used correctly. With typical use, it is closer to  90 percent  effective.  A person can place a contraceptive patch on the:  A person must wear each patch for 3 weeks, before removing it for 1 week to allow for a menstrual period. There is a small risk of skin irritation.  The contraceptive shot (Depo-Provera) is usually given by a doctor every 12 weeks. According to the CDC, when used correctly, and assuming that a person gets their shot on time, it is over  90 percent  effective at preventing pregnancy.  According to Planned Pregnancy, it may take up to  10 months , or sometimes longer, for fertility to return to normal after a person stops getting the contraceptive shot.  According to the NHS, the birth control ring known as the NuvaRing is over  99 percent  effective when used correctly, but is typically less than  95 percent  effective due to human error.  This small, plastic ring is placed in the vagina for 3 weeks. It releases hormones into the body to prevent pregnancy.  The ring must be removed for 7 days to allow for a menstrual period before a inserting a new ring.  Intrauterine devices (IUDs) and implants are long-term contraceptive devices. The NHS state that they are over  99 percent  effective at preventing pregnancy because there is little room for human error. However, they do not protect against STIs.  An IUD is a small device that a doctor inserts into the uterus. There are two types of IUDs:  Adverse reactions include spotting between periods,  irregular periods , and menstrual cramps.  Implants are another form of hormonal birth control. A nurse or doctor inserts a matchstick-sized rod into a person's arm to protect against pregnancy.  Implants work by releasing the hormone progestin into the body, which prevents ovulation. The CDC estimate that implants are also greater than  99 percent  effective for contraception.  Implants must be replaced about every 3 years.  The natural method of contraception involves tracking the menstrual cycle and avoiding sex when a person is in the fertile phase of the menstrual cycle.  An individual's "fertile window" lasts for around 6 to 9 days per month and coincides with ovulation, which is the release of the egg.  Several methods are possible for natural family planning. Many people use the following signals to work out whether they are ovulating or are in their fertile window:  Each person's fertile window is different, so a person should pay attention to their body's signals. According to the CDC, natural family planning methods are about  76 percent  effective when followed accurately.  In the case of unprotected sex or failed birth control, such as a broken condom or a failure to take the contraceptive pill, it is possible to use emergency contraception to reduce the risk of pregnancy.  Emergency contraception should not be used in place of regular birth control methods.  There are two forms of emergency contraception:  Both women and men can undergo procedures to reduce their fertility permanently. The  NHS  state that these procedures are typically over 99 percent effective at preventing pregnancy, but they do not protect against STIs.  Men can get a vasectomy, which involves snipping the tubes that carry sperm. It is a minor procedure that does not require hospitalization. A vasectomy reversal is possible in some cases. However, fertility after reversal is not always fully restored.  Women can have a sterilization procedure known as tubal ligation. It involves clamping or sealing the fallopian tubes. The effects are usually permanent. In rare cases, tubes can reconnect and result in pregnancy.  A woman can take a pregnancy test if she suspects she is pregnant, especially if her usual method of contraception has failed recently.  Signs of pregnancy include:  Home pregnancy tests are inexpensive and available in pharmacies, drugstores, and from reputable websites  online . It is a good idea to have the results confirmed by a doctor.  There are many contraceptive options to help avoid pregnancy, ranging from barrier methods to hormonal pills, patches, and IUDs.  Different methods may work better for different people, and a person may try several options before working out the contraceptive strategies that work for them.  Methods of contraception vary in terms of their effectiveness. People who are sexually active should speak with their doctor about the available options, so they can choose the method that is best for them.  Finally, remember that male and female condoms are the only types of contraception that prevent STIs.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Barrier methods of birth control: Spermicide, condom, sponge, diaphragm, and cervical cap. (2018, March).  Barrier methods of birth control: Spermicide, condom, sponge, diaphragm, and cervical cap. (2018, March).  Birth control sponge. (n.d.).  Cervical cap. (n.d.).  Contraceptive diaphragm or cap. (2017, November 28).  Contraceptive implant. (2018, January 22).  Contraceptive patch. (2018, January 22).  Contraceptive use in the United States [Fact sheet]. (2016, September).  How effective are birth control methods? (2017, February 9).  How effective are cervical caps? (n.d.).  How effective are female condoms? (n.d.).  Intrauterine device (IUD). (2018, February 22).  IUD. (n.d.).  Natural family planning. (2014, January).  Spermicide. (n.d.).  The contraceptive injection. (2018, February 7).  Vaginal ring. (2018, January 22).  What are the benefits of the birth control shot? (n.d.).  Which method of contraception suits me? (2016, February 25).  Your contraception guide. (2016, February 25).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "15 ways to prevent pregnancy."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321558.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 20). "15 ways to prevent pregnancy."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  