 Serum  cholesterol  levels also show the amount of triglycerides present. Triglycerides are another lipid that can be measured in the blood.  According to the  American Heart Association , low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol is often considered bad, while high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol is considered good.  A person's serum cholesterol level can indicate their risk for conditions such as  heart disease .  In this article, we explore what serum cholesterol shows, what healthy ranges are, and how to improve levels with changes to lifestyle and diet.  Cholesterol is a waxy, fatty substance. Some cells in the liver produce it and release it into the bloodstream.  LDL cholesterol can build up in a person's arteries, clogging them and reducing blood flow. This is why cholesterol is often linked to heart disease.  With a blood test, a doctor can measure levels of:  Total serum cholesterol is calculated by adding the HDL level, the LDL level, and 20 percent of the triglyceride level present in a blood sample.  Cholesterol plays a vital in many of the body's processes, including:  While LDL cholesterol tends to build up and block arteries, HDL cholesterol helps to mop up other cholesterol in the blood and unstick it from artery walls. This is why HDL cholesterol is considered good.  Doctors once determined whether a person's serum cholesterol level was healthy by comparing it to established normal ranges.  Previously used guidelines, reported in milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) of blood, include:  Doctors now take a  wider range of factors  into account before deciding if someone's cholesterol levels are unhealthy or require treatment.  Some risk factors a doctor may consider when evaluating a serum cholesterol level include:  Overall, a person with higher levels of HDL cholesterol and lower levels of LDL cholesterol will have a healthier serum cholesterol measurement.  This is because HDL cholesterol helps to reduce the presence of LDL cholesterol in the blood. It can also prevent LDL cholesterol from collecting and forming hard deposits called plaques, which stick to artery walls and reduce blood flow.  Plaques can become so large that they cause the arteries to narrow and stiffen, which can contribute to heart disease.  A significant amount of LDL cholesterol in arteries can prevent enough blood and oxygen from reaching organs and tissues, causing severe health complications.  A chunk of a plaque, known as a thrombus or blood clot, can also break off and become stuck in a narrower or restricted artery. This will make the blockage of blood more severe.  Complications associated with high serum cholesterol levels include:  Less is known about how triglycerides impact health. However, people with high levels of triglycerides tend to be at risk for similar conditions, including  diabetes , high blood pressure, and heart disease.  Below is a 3-D model of high cholesterol, which is fully interactive.  Explore the model, using your mouse pad or touchscreen, to understand more about the impact of high cholesterol levels.  The liver produces enough cholesterol to meet all of the body's needs. Any cholesterol consumed in foods and drinks, known as dietary cholesterol, is excess. This extra, unnecessary cholesterol is more likely to build up in the bloodstream.  Changing the diet is the most effective way to reduce levels of unhealthy cholesterol and increase levels of healthy cholesterol.  Saturated and trans fats should account for no more than between  5 and 6 percent  of a person's daily intake of  calories .  If a person consumes 2,000 calories per day, they should only take in between 11 and 13 grams of saturated fat each day.  A person can also achieve and maintain healthy cholesterol levels by making changes to their lifestyle.  The following tips can help a person to reduce their levels of LDL cholesterol:  Keeping a food diary can help a person to identify room for improvement and develop more healthful habits.  The following activities can boost a person's levels of HDL cholesterol:  A doctor may prescribe medications, often statins, for people with high cholesterol that does not respond to dietary and lifestyle changes.  Cholesterol may have a bad reputation, but it is crucial to many bodily processes. However, the liver produces all the cholesterol a person needs.  Serum cholesterol can give an overview of a person's cholesterol levels. The amount of triglycerides and LDL and HDL cholesterol in the blood can indicate the risk of a severe heart condition, such as a heart attack or stroke.  The  American Heart Association  recommend that adults older than 20 have their serum cholesterol levels and other indicators of heart disease checked every 4 to 6 years.  A person with a higher risk of complication related to high blood pressure may need to have their serum cholesterol levels checked more frequently.    
 About cholesterol. (2018, January 11).  About cholesterol. (2018, January 11).  HDL (good) and LDL (bad) cholesterol and triglycerides. (2018, February 20).  Prevention and treatment of high cholesterol (hyperlipidemia). (2018, February 19).  Screening and prevention. (n.d.).  The skinny on fats. (2017, September 19).  What your cholesterol levels mean. (2018, March 30).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What is serum cholesterol?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321519.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, April 17). "What is serum cholesterol?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  