 These calcifications are common, particularly in the pelvis. They are not usually a cause for concern and are rarely painful. However, if they do cause pain, treatments are available.  In this article, we look at the causes, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of phleboliths.  Phleboliths are round clusters of  calcium  that develop in the walls of a vein. They can vary in size but are usually around 5 millimeters across. They most commonly appear in the veins surrounding the pelvis.  Phleboliths are a type of vascular calcification. They are considered a sign of abnormality in the vein.  Phleboliths typically do not move and are harmless, but they may signal the presence of another condition. Many adults have phleboliths and are unaffected by them.  These lumps are  more common  in adults aged over 40 and appear at the same rate in men and women. Their frequency increases with age.  Researchers are uncertain why phleboliths form. They are usually present from birth, or congenital.  Non-genetic causes of phleboliths include:  Phleboliths often occur without any symptoms. A person may only learn of them after undergoing an unrelated X-ray or  ultrasound .  However, depending on their size and location, phleboliths can cause the following signs and symptoms:  Because the symptoms are similar to those of other conditions, phleboliths may be overlooked or misdiagnosed.  These lumps are typically detected on routine X-rays, are frequently occur with other vein abnormalities.  On an X-ray, phleboliths appear white or pale. A doctor may require additional scans, such as those from an ultrasound or  MRI , to determine the exact location and extent of the phleboliths.  Depending on where the phleboliths are, they can be misdiagnosed as  kidney stones . If a person experiences sharp pain in the abdomen, they may have kidney stones, rather than phleboliths.  Most often, phleboliths require no treatment and do not indicate any risk of disease. If phleboliths are causing intense pain, a doctor may suggest the following treatment options:  Phleboliths are small clusters of calcium found in veins. They are normally present from birth and can occur with vein abnormalities that require treatment.  In most cases, phleboliths do not indicate the presence of a severe condition. If these lumps are detected, a person may be referred to a specialist, to discuss treatment options.    
 Lima, G., Moraes, R., Carvalho, Y., &amp; Anbinder, A. L. (2015, July). An isolated phlebolith on the lip: An unusual case and review of the literature.  Case Reports in Pathology ,  2015 , 1–5.  Lima, G., Moraes, R., Carvalho, Y., &amp; Anbinder, A. L. (2015, July). An isolated phlebolith on the lip: An unusual case and review of the literature.  Case Reports in Pathology ,  2015 , 1–5.  Luk, A. C., Cleaveland, P., Olson, L., Neilson, D., &amp; Srirangam S. J. (2017, April). Pelvic phlebolith: A trivial pursuit for the urologist? [Abstract].  Journal of Endourology ,  31 (4), 342–347.  Mandel, L., &amp; Perrino, M. A. (2010, August). Phleboliths and the vascular maxillofacial lesion [Abstract].  Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery ,  68 (8), 1973–1976.  Soulez, G., Dubois, J., &amp; Oliva, V. L. (2009).  Comprehensive vascular and endovascular surgery (2nd ed.) . St Louis, MO: Mosby Ltd. 842–861.  Uzun, C., Celenk, P., &amp; van der Stelt, P. F. (2017, January 3). Venous malformation with multiple phleoboliths: A case report [Abstract].  Quintessence International ,  48 (1), 51–56.  Varicose veins. (2017, March 23).  Zengin, A. Z., Celenk, P., &amp; Sumer, A. P. (2013, January). Intramuscular hemangioma presenting with multiple phleboliths: A case report [Abstract].  Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology, Oral Radiology ,  115 (1), 32–36.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lewin, Jo. "What are phleboliths and are they safe?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321585.php&gt;    APA  Lewin, J. (2018, April 23). "What are phleboliths and are they safe?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  