 The medical term for sleeping with the eyes open is nocturnal lagophthalmos. Up to  20 percent  of people are affected. One reason that it happens is problems with the facial nerves or muscles that make it difficult to keep the eyes fully closed. It can also occur because of problems with the skin around the eyelids.  If people keep their eyes open while sleeping, their eyes can dry out. Without enough lubrication, the eyes are more susceptible to infections and can become scratched and damaged.  People may experience the following:  Most people realize they have slept with their eyes open because another person tells them they have done so.  There are several treatment options.  A doctor might also prescribe medications, including:  A person can also wear moisture goggles at night, which can help.  These work by moisturizing the eyes during sleep. Sleeping with a humidifier in the bedroom can also keep the surrounding air moist and less likely to dry out the eyes.  A doctor may recommend using an external eyelid weight. This is attached to the outside of the upper eyelids to keep them closed. Applying surgical tape to the eyelids also serves the same purpose.  Another option is surgery, though this is usually only recommended for severe cases.  There are multiple surgeries that can treat lagophthalmos.  In one type of surgery, a gold surgical implant is inserted into the eyelid that works like an eyelid weight to keep the eye closed while someone is sleeping.  This surgery involves making a small incision on the outside of the eyelid above the lashes. This creates a small pocket where the implant is inserted. The implant is held in place with stitches, which seal the pocket.   Antibiotic  ointment is applied to the eyelid to help it heal. As a result of the surgery, a person may experience:  These symptoms should reduce over time as the eyelid heals.  People usually sleep with their eyes open because of a problem with the facial muscles, nerves, or skin around the eyelids.  Paralysis or weakening of the muscle that closes the eyelids, known as the orbicularis oculi, can cause someone to sleep with their eyes open.  Conditions that can cause muscle weakness or paralysis of the facial nerves include:  Trauma, injury, or surgery can also result in damage and paralysis to facial muscles and nerves.  Infections can be less common causes, and these may include:  Graves' ophthalmopathy, where the eyes bulge or protrude, can also make it difficult to close the eyes.  Very thick upper or lower eyelashes may also prevent the eyelid from closing completely, though this is rare.  There is not always a reason or underlying condition that causes nocturnal lagophthalmos. It may also  be genetic .  If someone suspects they have nocturnal lagophthalmos they should visit their doctor.  A doctor will ask whether any recent trauma or illness could be the cause, how long symptoms have been going on for, and when symptoms are at their worst.  If a doctor believes nocturnal lagophthalmos is the cause of the symptoms, they will see what happens to the eyelids after they close.  They will observe the eyes for a few minutes to see whether the eyelids begin to twitch or open.  Other tests a doctor may perform can include:  It is possible that serious problems may occur if the eyes become dry or dehydrated. These include:  Nocturnal lagophthalmos is linked to reduced sleep quality. A person may not sleep as long or as well due to the pain and discomfort caused by the eyes drying out throughout the night.  People should make an appointment with their doctor if nocturnal lagophthalmos is 
suspected. A doctor can then help them find appropriate treatment.  People who sleep with their eyes open do not usually experience severe complications or damage to their eyes. However, if left untreated for an extended period, the risk of serious damage to the eyes increases and may result in loss of vision.  Treatment for sleeping with the eyes open is usually straightforward, and eye drops, eyelid weights, and air humidifiers can all help.  In some cases, nocturnal lagophthalmos is a sign of an underlying condition. Therefore, a person who suspects they are sleeping with their eyes open should contact their doctor to rule out a more significant problem and get treatment quickly.    
 Ayaki, M., Kawashima, M., Negishi, K., Kishimoto, T., Mimura, M., &amp; Tsubota, K. (2016, October 12). Sleep and mood disorders in women with dry eye disease.  Scientific Reports ,  6 , 352276.  Ayaki, M., Kawashima, M., Negishi, K., Kishimoto, T., Mimura, M., &amp; Tsubota, K. (2016, October 12). Sleep and mood disorders in women with dry eye disease.  Scientific Reports ,  6 , 352276.  Can you really sleep with your eyes open? (n.d.).  Lagophthalmos: The inability to fully close the eyelids [Fact sheet]. (2001).  Lawrence, S. D, &amp; Morris, C. L. (2008, April). Lagophthalmos evaluation and treatment.  Little, C. (2013, March). Eyes wide open – A case of nocturnal lagophthalmos.  Moebius syndrome. (2018, April 11).  Tsai, S. H., Yeh, S.-I., Chen, L.-J., Wu, C.-H., &amp; Liao, S.-L. (2009, June). Nocturnal lagophthalmos.  International Journal of Gerontology ,  3 (2), 89–95.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What happens if you sleep with your eyes open?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321517.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, April 16). "What happens if you sleep with your eyes open?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  