 Some mucus in the chest is normal, and having excess mucus from occasionally is usually not a cause for concern. However, if a person regularly has an uncomfortable amount of chest congestion, or if it is accompanied by other symptoms, they should see a doctor.  The following issues can cause mucus in the chest to build up:  In this article, we describe ways to relieve chest congestion at home.  A person can soothe symptoms and get rid of bothersome mucus using the following methods:  Staying hydrated thins mucus, making it easier to expel by coughing.  According to a  2008 study , hot beverages provide "immediate and sustained relief" from congestion and accompanying symptoms, such as sneezing, a nagging cough, a  sore throat , and chills.  A person can benefit from drinking:  Some of these drinks are available for purchase online, including  decaffeinated tea  and  herbal teas .  Keeping the air moist can loosen mucus and reduce congestion and coughing.  The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute  recommend using a cool-mist humidifier or steam vaporizer.  People with difficulty sleeping may wish to use a humidifier at night. To maximize the effects, keep windows and doors closed.  Humidifiers must be cleaned regularly to remove bacteria and other pathogens that can make symptoms worse and lead to infection.  Other ways to increase moisture in the air include:  Breathe in the steam for as long as is comfortable, then drink a glass of water to prevent  dehydration .  Gargling with a mixture of salt and warm water can remove phlegm and mucus from the back of the throat and ease symptoms.  Add half a teaspoon of salt to a cup of warm water. Stir until the salt dissolves.  Gargle with the mixture and allow it to sit in the back of the throat momentarily. Repeat several times a day as needed.  Honey is a popular home remedy, and research suggests that it has antiviral and antibacterial properties.  A  2007 study  tested the effects of buckwheat honey on upper respiratory tract infections in children. Parents consistently reported that honey provided the best relief from symptoms, compared with standard medication or no treatment.  However, a  2016 review  of three studies concluded that honey treats acute coughs in children less effectively than medication.  A person can consume 1 tablespoon of honey every 3 to 4 hours, until the symptoms ease. Honey is not suitable for infants under 12 months of age. A range of honey products is available for  purchase online .  Foods most commonly used to alleviate coughs, colds, and a buildup of mucus include:  Some  research  suggests that the following can help to treat respiratory viruses that may be responsible for excess mucus:  People taking prescription medications should speak with a doctor before trying new supplements.  A range of these supplements are available for purchase online, including  ginseng ,  echinacea ,  licorice root , and  zinc .  Some essential oils can ease breathing and loosen mucus in the chest.  Some  may even stop the growth of bacteria infecting the respiratory tract.  Beneficial essential oils available for purchase online include:  Essential oils can be inhaled directly from the bottle, used in a diffuser, or added to the hot water in a steam inhalation.  Oils can also be applied topically in a homemade vapor rub. Mix a quarter cup of  coconut oil  with 12 drops of one or more of the essential oils listed above. Apply the mixture to the chest, but never on broken or irritated skin.  If a person is using an essential oil for the first time, they should test for skin irritation. Apply a small amount of oil to a 1-inch patch of skin on the inner arm. If no reaction occurs after 24 hours, the oil can be used more liberally.  Essential oils should not be taken internally.  If an excess of mucus in the chest is disrupting sleep, it may help to elevate the head using extra pillows. Elevation promotes mucus drainage and reduces coughing and discomfort.  NAC is a supplement that can be used to thin the mucus in the airways and reduce the frequency and severity of a cough.  After analyzing  13 studies , researchers found that people with chronic bronchitis can benefit from taking 600 milligrams (mg) of NAC daily if no airway obstruction is present. Those with an airway obstruction may need to take up to 1,200 mg daily.  N-acetylcysteine products are available for  purchase online .  Home remedies often relieve mucus in the chest, but they may not work for everyone. Over-the-counter (OTC) or prescription treatments are sometimes required.  Vapor rubs have been  found  to provide significant relief from coughs and congestion. They are available for purchase over the counter or  online .  Decongestants can reduce mucus in the chest. Decongestants are available as a liquid, tablet, or nasal spray. They can be purchased over the counter or  online . They may interfere with sleep if taken later in the day.  Stronger decongestants are available by prescription.  When there is also congestion in the nose, a nasal decongestant spray may be recommended. These should not be used for more than 3 days at a time, as they cause rebound symptoms.  The following tips can prevent mucus from building up:  See a doctor if:  See a doctor immediately if congestion in the chest is accompanied by:  Having excess mucus in the chest is usually a sign of an infection or another underlying condition. Symptoms tend to resolve within a week, and home remedies should ease symptoms for most people.  If symptoms are severe or get worse, see a doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Barker, S. J. (2016, May). Honey for acute cough in children.  Paediatrics &amp; Child Health ,  21 (4), 199–200.  Barker, S. J. (2016, May). Honey for acute cough in children.  Paediatrics &amp; Child Health ,  21 (4), 199–200.  Cazzola, M., Calzetta, L., Page, C., Jardim, J., Chuchalin, A. G., Rogliani, P., &amp; Matera, M. G. (2015, September). Influence of N-acetylcysteine on chronic bronchitis or COPD exacerbations: A meta-analysis [Abstract].  European Respiratory Review ,  24 (137), 451–461.  Cough. (2014, June 11).  Inouye, S., Takizawa, T., &amp; Yamaguchi, H. (2001, May 1). Antibacterial activity of essential oils and their major constituents against respiratory tract pathogens by gaseous contact.  Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy ,  47 (5), 565–573.  Mousa, H. A.-L. (2017, January). Prevention and treatment of influenza, influenza-like illness, and common cold by herbal, complementary, and natural therapies.  Journal of Evidence-Based Complementary &amp; Alternative Medicine ,  22 (1), 166–174.  Paul, I. M., Beiler, J. S., King, T. S., Clapp, E. R., Vallati, J., &amp; Berlin, C. M. (2010, November). Vapor rub, petrolatum, and no treatment for children with nocturnal cough and cold symptoms.  Pediatrics ,  126 (6), 1092–1099.  Paul, I. M., Beiler, J., McMonagle, A., Shaffer, M. L., Duda, L., &amp; Berlin, C. M. (2007, December). Effect of honey, dextromethorphan, and no treatment on nocturnal cough and sleep quality for coughing children and their parents.  Archives of Pediatrics &amp; Adolescent Medicine ,  161 (12), 1140–1146.  Sanu, A., &amp; Eccles, R. (2008, December). The effects of a hot drink on nasal airflow and symptoms of common cold and flu [Abstract].  Rhinology ,  46 (4), 271–275.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What causes mucus in the chest?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321549.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 19). "What causes mucus in the chest?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  