 Some essential oil advocates claim that certain oils can treat or prevent  urinary tract infections  (UTIs). A handful of preliminary studies suggest that essential oils can treat UTIs in some cases.  However, most doctors do not support this method of treatment, no major medical organization recommends it.  Use essential oils to treat a UTI only if a doctor has recommended it. Seek prompt medical treatment if symptoms do not improve.  UTIs develop when a person has an overgrowth of bacteria in their urinary tract, usually the bacteria  Escherichia coli  ( E. coli ).  To heal a UTI, an essential oil has to kill this type of bacteria.  A person can use essential oils in a few ways. The oils can be spread through the air in a diffuser or applied directly to the skin, often after being mixed with a carrier oil. Some oils should not be applied directly to the skin or should only be used if diluted.  The following essential oils may help to fight the bacteria that causes UTIs:  Preliminary studies of clove oil's antibacterial effects are promising. A  2016 study  suggests that clove oil may help to kill  E. coli , particularly when the bacteria have become resistant to  antibiotics .  A  2012 study  found that oregano oil could slow or stop the growth of  E. coli  and other bacteria. The bacteria strains used in the study resisted other treatments, which means oregano oil may also kill antibiotic-resistant bacteria.  A  2015 study  that compared the effectiveness of oregano and lavender oils found that oregano had higher antimicrobial properties, suggesting that it can fight bacteria such as  E. coli .  Cinnamaldehyde, the chemical that gives  cinnamon  its flavor, may  inhibit the growth  of  E. coli . The oil and the spice may also help to prevent UTIs from recurring. In addition to using cinnamon oil, a person might consider adding powdered cinnamon to their diet.  Research suggests that lavender can kill bacteria, fungi, viruses, and other sources of infections. It may also act as an  antioxidant .   Research published in 2015 , for example, found that lavender and oregano oils, separately and in combination, may inhibit the growth of, including  E. coli  and  Staphylococcus aureus  ( S. aureus ).   Authors of a 2013 study  propose that some herbal oils are effective against  E. coli  and other bacteria. These include:  Eucalyptus oil may combat a wide range of bacteria. This makes it a good option when a person is unsure which type of bacteria is causing the infection.   A 2016 study  identified compounds in eucalyptus oil that may explain its antibacterial properties. The researchers found that eucalyptus may kill or slow the growth of  E. coli ,  S. aureus ,  Listeria innocua , and several other pathogens.  Cumin oil may help to fight  E. coli  and some other bacterial infections. Another  study from 2016  compared the effects of cumin oil to those of chamomile and  onion  oils. Cumin oil killed the most bacteria.  Cumin oil became even more effective when used in combination with some antibiotics, suggesting that it may be a complementary treatment.  The  same study  found that coriander oil was best able to kill a combination of  S. aureus  and  E. coli . Coriander oil also fought bacteria resistant to multiple drugs. Like cumin oil, coriander oil was more effective when paired with antibiotics.  The right way to use an essential oil depends on the type and concentration of the oil and an individual's health. Consult a doctor or expert in essential oils before beginning home treatment for a UTI.  Do not drink essential oils. Many are toxic if ingested and can cause serious side effects.  Do not apply essential oils directly to the vagina, penis, urethra, or any exposed skin. They can irritate the skin and cause an intense burning sensation.  When applied topically, essential oils must be diluted in a carrier oil. The usual recipe is 3 to 5 drops of essential oil per 1 ounce of carrier oil. Carrier oils are nontoxic. Warmed  coconut oil  is a popular choice. However, a person may have an allergic reaction to carrier oils, especially those derived from nuts.  Diluted essential oils can be safely used in a warm compress on skin near the affected area. Also, adding a few drops of diluted oils to a bath may promote relaxation and provide temporary relief from pain.  Anyone concerned about the effects of oils on the skin should consider aromatherapy, as essential oils have  fewer side effects  when inhaled. It is best to use small amounts of high-quality essential oils diluted in a carrier oil.  Children are more vulnerable to negative side effects associated with essential oils. Use the oils on younger people only when following a doctor's advice.  Some essential oils are dangerous for people who are pregnant or breast-feeding, and they should discuss any planned use with a doctor or midwife.  Proponents of essential oils often highlight the fact that they are "natural." However, this does not mean that they are always safe.  Risks associated with essential oils include:  Some oils can be harmful or even deadly for pets, especially cats. Keep essential oils stored in a safe cupboard, and ask a veterinarian before using them in a diffuser.  Some people may find that using essential oils can speed healing from a UTI or prevent an infection from coming back.  Like any remedy, certain doses may be safe, but it is crucial to speak with an expert and research the oil before using it.  People considering this type of remedy should be aware that improperly treated UTIs can lead to  sepsis , a dangerous infection of the blood. The infection may spread to other areas of the body, including the kidneys. As the bacteria spread, the infection may be harder to treat.  People with severe or frequent UTIs, a history of kidney problems, or allergies should only use treatments recommended by doctors.    
 3 common and dangerous essential oil mistakes. (2017, August 15).  3 common and dangerous essential oil mistakes. (2017, August 15).  Dabrowski, M., Sienkiewicz, M., Zielinska-Blizniewska, H., Dabrowska, M., Seredynska, M., &amp; Kochan, E. (2016). Antibiotic resistance among Escherichia coli urinary isolates and their susceptibility to clove essential oil [Abstract].  Annales Biologia ,  71 (2).  Endocrine Society. (2018, March 17). Chemicals in lavender and tea tree oil appear to be hormone disruptors [Press release].  Exploring aromatherapy: Safety information. (n.d.).  Gould Soloway, R. A. (n.d.). Essential oils: Poisonous when misused.  Herman, A., &amp; Herman, A. P. (2015, December 31). Essential oils and their constituents as skin penetration enhancer for transdermal drug delivery: A review.  Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology ,  67 (4), 473–485.  How do I choose and use essential oils? (n.d.).  Lob, S. H., Nicolle, L. E., Hoban, D. J., Kazmierczak, K. M., Badal, R. E., &amp; Sahm, D. F. (2016, August). Susceptibility patterns and ESBL rates of Escherichia coli from urinary tract infections in Canada and the United States, SMART 2010–2014 [Abstract].  Diagnostic Microbiology and Infectious Disease ,  85 (4), 459–465.  Mahmoud, A. M., El-Baky, R. M. A., Ahmed, A. B. F., &amp; Gad, G. F. M. (2016, January). Antibacterial activity of essential oils and in combination with some standard antimicrobials against different pathogens isolated from some clinical specimens.  American Journal of Microbiological Research ,  4 (1), 16–25.  Martucci, J. F., Gende, L. B., Neira, L. M., &amp; Ruseckaite, R. A. (2015, September). Oregano and lavender essential oils as antioxidant and antimicrobial additives of biogenic gelatin films [Abstract].  Industrial Crops and Products ,  71 , 205–213.  Nazzaro, F., Fratianni, F., De Martino, L., Coppola, R., &amp; De Feo, V. (2013, December). Effects of essential oils on pathogenic bacteria.  Pharmaceuticals ,  6 (12), 1451–1474.  Prashar, A., Locke, I. C., &amp; Evans, C. S. (2004, June). Cytotoxicity of lavender oil and its major components to human skin cells [Abstract].  Cell Proliferation ,  37 (3), 221–229.  Sepsis and urinary tract infections. (2017, December 14).  Sienkiewicz, M., Wasiela, M., &amp; Głowacka, A. (2012). The antibacterial activity of oregano essential oil (Origanum heracleoticum L.) against clinical strains of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa [Abstract].  Medcyna Doswiadczalna I Mikrobiologia ,  64 (4), 297–307.  Si Said, Z. B.-O., Haddadi-Guemghar, H., Boulekbache-Makhlouf, L., Rigou, P., Remini, H., Adjaoud, A., … Madani, K. (2016, October 30). Essential oils composition, antibacterial and antioxidant activities of hydrodistillated extract of  Eucalyptus globulus  fruits [Abstract].  Industrial Crops and Products ,  89 , 167–175.  Urinary tract infection. (2015, April 17).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Can essential oils treat a UTI?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321582.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, April 23). "Can essential oils treat a UTI?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  