 Allergies can cause symptoms that are very similar to a cold or  flu , such as a runny nose,  sore throat , or sneezing. However, allergies do not cause a  fever . Because each allergy has a different underlying cause, it is essential that a person receives the right diagnosis, so that they can get the best treatment.  In this article, we look at the relationship between allergies, colds, and flu. We also look at ways to treat the symptoms of an allergy.  Some symptoms of allergies and colds are the same, such as a runny nose and sneezing. However, according to the  National Institutes of Health , allergies should never cause fever.  Allergy symptoms occur when a person's immune system overreacts and tries to fight off a harmless substance, such as pollen or pet dander. These substances then trigger an inflammatory immune system reaction.  Cold and flu symptoms are caused by viruses that affect the respiratory system. These viruses attack the body, causing the immune system to work overtime to keep the harmful virus at bay.  Symptoms associated with allergies include the following:  Allergies are more likely to occur seasonally, such as when molds release their spores or grasses, trees, and weeds release pollen that aids in plant fertilization.  A doctor who specializes in allergy treatments called an allergist can perform tests to see if a person is allergic to a specific substance. When the allergist performs a skin prick test, they expose the skin to common allergens to see if any trigger an allergic response.  They may also test the blood for the presence of specific allergy-related antibodies using ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) tests, or less commonly, RAST (radioallergosorbent) tests.  Symptoms associated with a cold or flu may include:  A fever is the body's way of trying to increase the temperature to kill off bacteria or viruses. Because these germs are not present in an allergic reaction, a fever does not occur.  Differences between a cold, flu, and an allergy include:  An allergy is an inflammatory immune response to specific foods or something in the environment, known as an allergen. Colds and flu are caused by viruses or bacteria. Therefore, a cold or flu cannot cause an allergy.  Sometimes, allergies can lead to a sinus infection, which may develop into a fever. Sinus infections are the result of excess mucus and debris getting trapped in the air-filled sinus passages. However, the infection develops due to the bacteria or viruses present rather than the allergens.  Knowing what a person is allergic to can help in treating the allergies. A person can be allergic to several allergens at once. Some of the key steps to reducing allergy symptoms include:  A person with severe allergies may benefit from immunotherapy. This approach involves injecting increasing amounts of allergens in the body to de-sensitize the body's immune response. A doctor must prescribe these injections.  Seasonal allergy symptoms are unpleasant and share some similar symptoms as colds or flu. However, a fever or extreme  fatigue  are uncommon symptoms of allergies.  Treatments are available and limiting one's exposure to the outdoors when allergen counts are at their highest can help to reduce the incidence of allergy symptoms.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Allergic rhinitis. (n.d.).  Allergic rhinitis. (n.d.).  Cold, flu, or allergy. (2014, October).  Common seasonal allergy triggers. (2017, December 28).  National allergy bureau. (n.d.).  Outdoor allergens. (n.d.).  Seasonal allergies (hay fever). (2016, October).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Can allergies cause a fever?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321502.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, April 16). "Can allergies cause a fever?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  