 Known as  ADHD , the condition is a  mental health  disorder that affects both adults and children and is recognized by the American Psychiatric Association (APA).  Signs of ADHD are different in adults and children. This article explains what to look for and how to source help and treatment.  ADHD is thought to affect  1 in 10  children between 5 to 17 years old. Children are usually tested and diagnosed because they have problems at school.  Signs in children include:   Inattention, such as:    Hyperactivity and impulsivity, such as:   A child who is diagnosed with ADHD will often have symptoms for  more than 6 months  and behave in ways not considered normal for a child of their age.  As many as  60 percent  of people diagnosed with ADHD as children continue to have symptoms as adults. For many, these symptoms become less intense with age.  Treatment to manage symptoms is essential as the condition can negatively impact someone's life without it.  ADHD in adults can affect relationships, careers, and day-to-day functioning. Symptoms affect aspects of daily life, such as time management and can cause forgetfulness and impatience.  It is difficult to diagnose ADHD in children under 4 years old because their behavior continually changes. They may be very energetic and distracted one day and calmer and focused other days.  Toddlers with ADHD may show early signs, including:  It is important to note that many young children have short attention spans, may have tantrums, and can be full of energy during different developmental stages.  A parent should make an appointment with their doctor if they are concerned about their child's behavior and feel it is having a negative impact on family life.  Boys are  three times more likely  than girls to be diagnosed with ADHD, which may be because boys display classic signs of hyperactivity more obviously than girls.   Research  has shown boys with ADHD are more likely to show externalized signs, such as hyperactivity, where girls are more likely to display internalized signs, such as low self-esteem. Boys are also more likely to be physically aggressive where girls are more often verbally so.  Girls with ADHD may exhibit signs of hyperactivity. In many cases, symptoms are subtler. Girls with ADHD may:  It can be difficult to notice that girls have the condition while recognizing ADHD in boys may be easier due to more obvious signs.  However, not all boys with the disorder are diagnosed. Boys are traditionally considered to be more energetic and boisterous. Their behavior could be dismissed as 'boys being boys.'  Boys with ADHD may:  Prompt diagnosis is vital even though boys and girls may display different symptoms of ADHD.  This is because ADHD can affect schoolwork, home life, and relationships.  Children who remain undiagnosed are also more likely to develop:  Prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment can improve symptoms and help prevent additional complications.  Doctors and researchers are still uncertain about what causes ADHD. It is  thought  to be associated with chemicals in the brain and may have links to genetics.  A doctor will ask about the child's symptoms and assess their behavior to diagnose ADHD.  There is no single test for ADHD. A doctor will instead gather evidence from parents, teachers, and family members. They will then base their diagnosis on the answers and information given about behavior over the previous 6 months.  A physical examination will also be carried out to check for any additional or underlying health problems.  Treatment can be medication or behavioral therapies or a combination of the two.  The two types of medications used to help people with ADHD are stimulants and nonstimulants.   Central nervous system  (CNS) stimulants, such as methylphenidate (Ritalin) and amphetamine-based stimulants (Adderall), are the most commonly prescribed medications to treat ADHD.  These drugs work by increasing the amount of the dopamine and norepinephrine in the brain.  Nonstimulant medications, such as atomoxetine (Strattera), and  antidepressants , such as nortriptyline (Pamelor), are also sometimes used. These drugs work by increasing levels of norepinephrine in the brain.  Parents can help their child manage ADHD symptoms. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  recommend  changes, including:  Days that are structured and where children understand what they will be doing may help to reduce symptoms.  ADHD cannot be prevented. However there are ways to support children and adults to enable them to manage the condition, so it has a minimal impact on their day-to-day lives.  Organizations like  Children and Adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder  or the  Attention Deficit Disorder Association  provide information about the disorder and tips to manage it.  The more parents educate themselves about the condition, the better equipped and more able to deal with it they will feel.    
 About ADHD. (n.d.).  About ADHD. (n.d.).  Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. (n.d.).  Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. (2016, March).  Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). (2016, April 25).  Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). (2017, May 3).  Attention-deficit / hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): Basic information. (2017, May 31).  Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): Data &amp; statistics. (2018, March 20).  Bader, A., &amp; Adesman, A. (2012, December). Complementary and alternative therapies for children and adolescents with ADHD [Abstract].  Current Opinion in Pediatrics ,  24 (6), 760–769.  Bonath, B., Tegelbeckers, J., Wilke, M., Flechtner, H. H., &amp; Krauel, K. (2018, May 1). Regional gray matter volume differences between adolescents with ADHD and typically developing controls: Further evidence for anterior cingulate involvement [Abstract].  Journal of Attention Disorders ,  22 (7), 627–638.  Connolly, J. J., Glessner, J. T., Kao, C., Elia, J., &amp; Hakonarson, H. (2015, September 1). Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and pharmacotherapy—past, present, and future: A review of the changing landscape of drug therapy [Abstract].  Therapeutic Innovation &amp; Regulatory Science ,  49 (5), 632–642.  Daviss, W. B. (2010, September 7). A review of co-morbid depression in pediatric ADHD: Etiologies, phenomenology, and treatment [Abstract].  Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology ,  18 (6), 565–571.  Does vitamin D in pregnancy prevent ADHD? (2016, October 10).  For parents and caregivers. (n.d.).  Hasson, R., &amp; Fine, J. G. (2012, April 1). Gender differences among children with ADHD on continuous performance tests [Abstract].  Journal of Attention Disorders ,  16 (3), 190–198.  Jacobson, R. (n.d.). How girls with ADHD are different. And the emotional costs of being overlooked.  Knouse, L. E., Zvorsky, I., &amp; Safren, S. A. (2013, December). Depression in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): The mediating role of cognitive-behavioral factors [Abstract].  Cognitive Therapy and Research ,  37 (6), 1220–1232.  Kolar, D., Keller, A., Golfinopoulos, M., Cumyn, L., Syer, C., &amp; Hechtman, L. (2008, April). Treatment of adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.  Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment ,  4 (2), 389–403.  Levy, S., Katusic, S. K., Colligan, R. C., Weaver, A. L., Killian, J. M., Voigt, R. G., &amp; Barbaresi, W. J. (2014, August 27). Childhood ADHD and risk for substance dependence in adulthood: A longitudinal, population-based study.  PloS ONE ,  9 (8), e105640.  Parekh, R. (2017, July). What is ADHD?  Mahone, E. M. (2012, October 4). Neuropsychiatric differences between boys and girls with ADHD.  Psychiatric Times ,  29 (10), 1–7.  Rostain, A., Jensen, P. S., Connor, D. F., Miesle, L. M., &amp; Faraone, S. V. (2015, February 1). Toward quality care in ADHD: Defining the goals of treatment [Abstract].  Journal of Attention Disorders ,  19 (2), 99–117.  Rucklidge, J. J. (2010, June). Gender differences in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder [Abstract].  Psychiatric Clinics of North America ,  33 (2), 357–373.  Southammakosane, C., &amp; Schmitz, K. (2015, August). Pediatric psychopharmacology for treatment of ADHD, depression, and anxiety.  Pediatrics ,  136   (2), 351-359.  Taylor, A. F., &amp; Kuo, F. E. M. (2011, August 4). Could exposure to everyday green spaces help treat ADHD? Evidence from children's play settings [Abstract].  Applied Psychology: Health and Well‐Being ,  3 (3), 281–303.  Volkow, N. D., Wang, G.-J., Kollins, S. H., Wigal, T. L., Newcorn, J. H., Telang, F., ... Swanson, J. M. (2009, September 9). Evaluating dopamine reward pathway in ADHD: Clinical implications.  JAMA ,  302 (10), 1084–1091.  Vande Voort, J. L., He, J. P., Jameson, N. D., &amp; Merikangas, K. R. (2014, July). Impact of the DSM-5 attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder age-of-onset criterion in the US adolescent population [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry ,  53 (7), 736–744.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What are the early signs of ADHD?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321507.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, April 16). "What are the early signs of ADHD?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  