 In this article, we explore the benefits of avocado oil for the skin and describe the best ways to apply it.  Avocado oil is loaded with  omega-3  fatty acids and  vitamins  A, D, and E. Below are some of the ways it can benefit the skin:   1. Moisturizes and nourishes   In addition to vitamin E, avocado oil contains  potassium , lecithin, and many other nutrients that can nourish and moisturize the skin.  The outermost layer of skin, known as the epidermis, easily absorbs these nutrients, which also help to form new skin.   2. Relieves inflammation from psoriasis and eczema   The  antioxidants  and vitamins in avocado oil may help to heal the dry, irritated, and flaky skin associated with  eczema  and  psoriasis .  A person with a skin condition may wish to test a patch of skin first, to ensure that the oil does not trigger or aggravate their symptoms.   3. Prevents and treats acne   When left on for short periods of time and rinsed off with warm water, avocado oil can keep skin hydrated without leaving an oily residue. This may reduce the risk of  acne .  Avocado oil also has  anti-inflammatory effects , which can help to reduce the redness and  inflammation  associated with acne.   4. Accelerates wound healing   Avocado oil may help wounds to heal more quickly. One  2013 study  found that the essential fatty acids and oleic acid in avocado oil can promote  collagen  synthesis, which is the process of creating new connective tissue.  The essential fatty acids in avocado oil were also found to help reduce inflammation during the healing process.  More studies are needed in humans, however, to determine whether avocado oil can be used to treat wounds.   5. Treats sunburned skin   The antioxidants in avocado oil may help to ease the symptoms of a  sunburn . According to a  2011 review , the vitamin E,  beta carotene ,  vitamin D , protein, lecithin, and essential fatty acids in the oil can support healing and soothe the skin.  Other  small studies  have shown that consuming avocados may help to protect the skin from harmful UV radiation.   6. Reduces signs of aging   The first signs of aging usually appear on the skin. Some studies have shown that consuming healthful fats, such as those found in avocados, can help the skin to retain its elasticity.  However, researchers have yet to address whether applying avocado oil to the skin has the same effect.   7. Improves nail health   While some people use avocado oil to heal dry, brittle nails, little scientific evidence confirms this benefit.  However, using natural oils to keep the nails and surrounding skin soft may help to reduce breakage.   8. Improves scalp health   Applying avocado oil to the scalp as a hot oil mask can help to reduce  dandruff  and other problems caused by a dry, flaky scalp.  Avocado oil can be massaged into the skin, used in a face mask, or added to lotions, creams, shower gels, or bath oils. It can be used on skin daily without adverse effects.   As a facial moisturizer   To use avocado as a facial moisturizer, a person can take the inside of an avocado peel and massage it onto their face. Leave the residue on for about 15 minutes, then rinse the face with warm water.  Bottled avocado oil can also be used to moisture the face at night. Wash it off the following morning.   In the bath   Adding a few tablespoons of avocado oil to a bath can leave the whole body feeling soft and help to prevent hot water from drying out the skin.  It can also be mixed with a person's favorite bath oil, such as lavender or aloe vera.   As a moisturizer   Combine avocado oil with other essential oils and massage the mixture into the skin after a bath. Pat the skin dry with a towel before using the oil.  Avocado oil is also effective on its own and can be applied all over the body to keep skin soft.   For scalp care   A person with a dry scalp may benefit from using avocado oil in a hot oil treatment. To heat the oil, pour 3–5 tablespoons into a small glass jar, and place the jar in a saucepan of recently boiled water.  Test the temperature of the oil frequently, to prevent it from getting too hot. When the oil is warm, remove the jar from the water and gently massage the oil into the scalp.  The oil can be left overnight and shampooed out in the morning. This may help to reduce dandruff and dry, flaky skin on the scalp.   Treating dry, inflamed skin   To heal and soften rough, dry skin, mix equal amounts of avocado and olive oils, and apply the mixture to the skin once or twice a day.  To give the mixture a scent, try one or two drops of an essential oil, such as lavender.  Research suggests that avocado oil can help to prevent several health issues, including  diabetes  and high  cholesterol . A  study from 2014  found avocado oil to have as many healthful benefits as olive oil.  A  2017 study  concluded that avocado oil could reduce the oxidative damage that causes kidney damage in people with  type 2 diabetes . The result stems from oleic acid, a "healthy" fat, which is the primary component of the oil. More research is needed in humans, however, before this claim can be fully supported.  In addition to fighting kidney damage, oleic acid  is known  for its ability to lower the risk of developing some  cancers , preventing flare-ups of some autoimmune diseases, speeding up cell regeneration to promote healing, aiding in eliminating microbial infections, and reducing inflammation throughout the body.  Another  study  reported that oleic acid may help to reduce inflammation and pain associated with  arthritis .  Side effects of avocado oil are rare, but it is possible to be allergic or avocados or their oil.  The best way to rule out an allergy is to do a patch test. Apply a small amount of avocado oil to a 1-inch patch of skin on the inside of the arm. If no irritation occurs over a 24-hour period, the oil can be safely used on other parts of the skin.  Anyone allergic to avocados should avoid contact with avocado oil.  Organic avocado oil is easy to incorporate into a skincare regimen. It can be  purchased online  or at many health food stores.  There are few risks to using avocado oil, but anyone with a preexisting skin condition may wish to speak with a doctor before trying a new home remedy.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Carvajal-Zarrabal, O., Nolasco-Hipolito, C., Aguilar-Uscanga, M. G., Melo-Santiesteban, G., Haywood-Jones, P. M. &amp; Barradas-Dermitz, D. M. (2014, February 25). Avocado oil supplementation modifies cardiovascular risk profile markers in a rat model of sucrose-induced metabolic changes.  Disease Markers ,  2014 .  Carvajal-Zarrabal, O., Nolasco-Hipolito, C., Aguilar-Uscanga, M. G., Melo-Santiesteban, G., Haywood-Jones, P. M. &amp; Barradas-Dermitz, D. M. (2014, February 25). Avocado oil supplementation modifies cardiovascular risk profile markers in a rat model of sucrose-induced metabolic changes.  Disease Markers ,  2014 .  Carvajal-Zarrabal, O., Nolasco-Hipolito, C., Aguilar-Uscanga, M. G., Melo Santiesteban, G., Haywood-Jones, P. M. &amp; Barradas-Dermitz, D. M. (2014, April 17). Effect of dietary intake of avocado oil and olive oil on biochemical markers of liver function in sucrose-fed rats.  BioMed Research International ,  2014 .  de Oliveira, A. P., de Souza Franco, E., Barreto, R. R., Cordeiro, D. P., de Melo, R. G., de Aquino, C. M. F., … de Sousa Maia, M. B. (2013, March 19). Effect of semisolid formulation of Persea Americana mill (avocado) oil on wound healing in rats.  Journal of Evidence-Based Complementary &amp; Alternative Medicine ,  2013 .  Dreher, M. L., &amp; Davenport, A. J. (2013, May 2). Hass avocado composition and potential health benefits.  Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition ,  53 (7), 738–750.  Gavazzoni Dias, M. F. R. (2015, January–March). Hair cosmetics: An overview.  International Journal of Trichology ,  7 (1), 2–15.  Halvorsen, B. L., &amp; Blomhoff, R. (2011, June 10). Determination of lipid oxidation products in vegetable oils and marine omega-3 supplements.  Food &amp; Nutrition Research ,  55 .  Korać, R. R., &amp; Khambholjal, K. M. (2011, July–December). Potential of herbs in skin protection from ultraviolet radiation.  Pharmacognosy Reviews ,  5 (10), 164–173.  Ortiz-Avila, O., Figueroa-García, M. D., García-Berumen, C. I., Calderón-Cortés, E., Mejía-Barajas, J. A., Rodriguez-Orozco, A. R., … Cortés-Rojo, C. (2017, April). Avocado oil induces long-term alleviation of oxidative damage in kidney mitochondria from type 2 diabetic rats by improving glutathione status [Abstract].  Journal of Bioenergetics and Biomembranes ,  49 (2), 205–214.  Sales-Campos, H., Souza, P. R., Peghini, B. C., da Silva, J. S., &amp; Cardoso, C. R. (2013, February). An overview of the modulatory effects of oleic acid in health and disease [Abstract].  Mini-Reviews in Medicinal Chemistry ,  13 (2), 201–210.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "Eight benefits of avocado oil for the skin."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321543.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, April 19). "Eight benefits of avocado oil for the skin."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  