 According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), more than  50 million  Americans experience an allergic reaction each year, and the best treatment will depend on the cause and severity of the reaction.  In this article, we take a close look at a range of treatments for allergic reactions, depending on a person's symptoms and their severity, including  anaphylaxis .  An allergic reaction occurs when cells in the immune system interpret a foreign substance or allergen as harmful.  The immune system overreacts to these allergens and produces histamine, which is a chemical that causes allergy symptoms, such as  inflammation , sneezing, and coughing.  Mild allergic reactions can usually be treated with home remedies and over-the-counter (OTC) medications.  However, chronic allergies need treatment from a medical professional. Severe allergic reactions always require emergency medical care.  Many mild to moderate allergic reactions can be treated at home or with OTC medications. The following treatments are commonly used to reduce the symptoms of an allergic reaction:  Antihistamines can help to treat most minor allergic reactions regardless of the cause. These drugs reduce the body's production of histamine, which reduces all symptoms, including sneezing,  watering eyes , and skin reactions.  Second-generation antihistamines, including Claritin (loratadine) and Zyrtec (cetirizine), are less likely to cause drowsiness than first-generation antihistamines, such as Benadryl.  Antihistamines come in several forms, usually to help deliver the medication closer to the source of the reaction or make it easier to consume, such as:  Antihistamines in these forms are available from pharmacies, to  buy online , or on prescription from a doctor.  Antihistamines can also be taken to prevent allergies. Many people with seasonal or pet allergies will begin taking antihistamines when they know they are going to be exposed to an allergen.  A person who is pregnant or has a liver disorder should consult their doctor before taking antihistamines.  Nasal decongestant pills, liquids, and sprays can also help reduce stuffy, swollen sinuses and related symptoms, such as a  sore throat  or coughing.  However, decongestant medications should not be taken continuously for more than 72 hours.  Nasal decongestants are available over the counter and  online .  Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications ( NSAIDs ) may also be used to help temporarily reduce pain, swelling, and cramping caused by allergies.  The best way to treat and prevent allergic reactions is to know what triggers the reaction and stay away from it, especially food allergens.  When this is not possible or realistic, using antihistamines or decongestants when in contact with allergens can help to treat the symptoms.  When allergies cause sinus problems, the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma &amp; Immunology (AAAAI)  recommend  a person rinse their sinuses with saline. This can remove allergens and clear the airways.  The AAAAI recommend the following saline recipe:  Sinus rinsing devices can be purchased  online  or from a pharmacy.  For airborne allergens, such as pollen, dust, and mold spores, additional treatment options include:  For allergic reactions that cause skin symptoms, including those associated with allergens found in animal saliva, poisonous plants, drugs, chemicals and metals, additional treatment options include:  People should speak to a professional if they have or suspect that they have severe or chronic allergies.  A doctor or allergy specialist can prescribe medications that contain much stronger doses of the compounds found in OTC products.  Treatment options for chronic or severe allergies include:  Many traditional medicine systems use herbal supplements and extracts to both treat and prevent allergic reactions, especially seasonal allergies.  Though there is little scientific evidence to support the use of most alternative or natural remedies, some people may find that some can provide relief from their symptoms.  The American Association of Naturopathic Physicians  recommend  the following natural treatments for allergies:  A very severe allergic reaction can lead to a condition called anaphylaxis, or anaphylactic shock.  Anaphylaxis occurs when the body's immune response to an allergen is so severe and sudden that the body goes into a state of shock.  Anaphylaxis can impact multiple organs and if left untreated lead to  coma , organ failure, and death.  The early symptoms of anaphylaxis can be fairly mild and similar to those of minor to moderate allergic reactions, but they often rapidly worsen.  Symptoms unique to anaphylaxis include:  Anyone who suspects anaphylaxis should call 911 and seek emergency medical care.  If the person carries an EpiPen, which is a self-injectable dose of epinephrine that is designed to treat anaphylaxis, inject this into their thigh, as soon as possible.  First aid for anaphylaxis includes:  If a person does not have an EpiPen, a doctor or paramedic will give an injection of the hormone epinephrine, or adrenaline. This will immediately increase the output of the heart and blood flow throughout the body.  A person should seek medical care each time anaphylaxis occurs. Even if they start to feel better or their symptoms go away, a second severe allergic reaction can occur up to 12 hours after the initial response.  The symptoms associated with an allergic response depend on the specific allergen, how severe the allergy is, and whether a person has touched, swallowed, or inhaled the allergen.  Not everyone responds the same way to each allergen. But there are similar sets of symptoms most people experience when exposed to specific allergens.  Common symptoms associated with different type of allergens include:  Many people experience allergic reactions when they are exposed to specific allergens, ranging from pet dander and pollen to compounds in foods, drinks, and personal hygiene products.  The best way to treat an allergic reaction depends on the cause, though most minor cases can be treated with OTC antihistamine and anti-itch products.  A person should seek immediate medical attention for chronic or severe allergic reactions, especially those that involve swelling of the throat or changes in heart rate. Anaphylaxis should always be treated as a medical emergency.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Allergies. (2017, September 15).  Allergies. (2017, September 15).  Allergies. (2018, March).  Anaphylaxis. (2018, January 29).  Drug allergies. (n.d.).  Lewis, L. (n.d.). Natural treatments for seasonal allergies.  Saline sinus rinse recipe. (n.d.).  Symptoms of an allergic reaction to food. (n.d.).  Treating severe allergic reactions. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "How do you treat an allergic reaction?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321500.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, April 14). "How do you treat an allergic reaction?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  