 Sneezing is often the result of inhaling something that irritates the nose, but it can also be caused by breathing in cold air, looking into bright lights, plucking eyebrow hair, or eating food.  In this article, we look specifically at the causes for sneezing while eating, and how to prevent this from happening.  There are several possible causes for a person to sneeze after meals. These include:  Gustatory  rhinitis  is a condition that specifically causes a person to sneeze after eating. Rhinitis is a general term for irritation or swelling that happens in the nose.  Gustatory rhinitis is not related to allergies, so it is known as nonallergic rhinitis. It happens when the nasal nerves are hypersensitive to environmental triggers.  Symptoms of gustatory rhinitis usually come on within minutes of eating and can include:  Gustatory rhinitis is especially common after eating spicy or hot foods including:  According to an article in the journal   Current Opinions in Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery  , there are special receptors in the lining of the nose that detect capsaicin, a compound found in chili peppers. When these fibers detect the presence of capsaicin, they can trigger one or more sneezes.  A person can prevent these symptoms by avoiding trigger foods. They may wish to keep a food and symptom diary to find out what foods cause their gustatory rhinitis.  Some people may sneeze after eating a large meal. This is known as the snatiation reflex, which is a combination of the words 'sneeze' and 'satiation.'  A person experiences this reflex when their stomach is full and becomes stretched. This may result in one sneeze or a sneezing fit. The cause is unknown, but there may be a genetic component.  Sometimes when a person eats foods they are especially sensitive or allergic to, they can sneeze. Other symptoms may include itchy eyes or a mild skin rash.  In severe instances, a person may have a severe allergic reaction known as  anaphylaxis  that causes extreme swelling and difficulty breathing. Some of the most common foods that can trigger allergies are milk, eggs, peanuts, soy, and tree nuts.  Also, sometimes a person may have a cold or other illness that can cause them to sneeze after eating. The two occurrences – eating and sneezing – may seem related but are separate.  A person cannot always prevent sneezing after eating from occurring. However, there are some tips to try that may reduce sneezing. These include:  Sneezing after eating is rarely cause for medical concern, but can be annoying, distracting, and irritating at times. It can also cause droplets to spread in the air, which risks the spread of viruses and bacteria, so a person may wish to reduce the likelihood they will sneeze after eating.  Currently, there is no cure for gustatory rhinitis or snatiation. In many cases, a person can prevent this reflex by steering clear of certain foods or avoiding eating large meals.  If a person thinks they may have a  food allergy  that is contributing to their sneezing, they can talk to their doctor about allergy testing or other interventions based on their overall health.    
 Aronson, S. M. (2014, May). The origins of the sneeze: Divine gift or mere goldenrod pollen? [Abstract].  Rhode Island Medical Journal ,  97 (5), 10–11.  Aronson, S. M. (2014, May). The origins of the sneeze: Divine gift or mere goldenrod pollen? [Abstract].  Rhode Island Medical Journal ,  97 (5), 10–11.  Autosomal dominant compelling helio ophthalmic outburst syndrome. (2018, April 1).  Georgalas, C., &amp; Jovancevic, L. (2012, February). Gustatory rhinitis [Abstract].  Current Opinions in Otolaryngology &amp; Head and Neck Surgery ,  20 (1), 9–14.  Gore, G., &amp; Verma, A. (2017, September). Sneezing – physiological facts and beliefs.  Journal of the Association of Physicians of India ,  65 , 106.  Jovancevic, L., Georgalas, C., Savovic, S., &amp; Janjevic, D. (2010, March 2). Gustatory rhinitis [Abstract].  Rhinology ,  48 (1), 7–10.  Lieberman, P. (2017, June 9).  Songu, M., &amp; Cingi, C. (2009). Sneeze reflex: Facts and fiction.  Therapeutic Advances in Respiratory Disease ,  3 (3), 131–141.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Why do some people sneeze after eating?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321587.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, April 23). "Why do some people sneeze after eating?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  