 Both polymyalgia and  fibromyalgia  are more common in women than men. Polymyalgia  usually occurs  in people aged over 55, while, fibromyalgia is  common  among young and middle-aged people.  In this article, we look at the similarities and differences between polymyalgia and fibromyalgia, including symptoms, treatments, and medications.  Polymyalgia and fibromyalgia are often confused because they both cause muscle pain throughout the body, and they have similar names.  However, they are different disorders with different causes. In fact, it is possible for a person to have both polymyalgia and fibromyalgia.  Polymyalgia rheumatica is an inflammatory form of  arthritis . Fibromyalgia does not show traditional signs of  inflammation , though some recent research from  2017  suggests it may also involve inflammation.  The causes of the two conditions are different:  This means that fibromyalgia may occur because of the way that the brain and nerves perceive sensation, while polymyalgia develops due to a problem with the immune system.  Polymyalgia and fibromyalgia differ in the following areas:  Both conditions can cause widespread pain throughout the body. Similarities and differences in symptoms of polymyalgia and fibromyalgia include:  Fibromyalgia is a diagnosis of exclusion. This means that when a person has widespread chronic pain throughout the body, and a doctor cannot find any other cause, they might diagnose fibromyalgia.  No single test can determine if a person has fibromyalgia. However, a physical exam that looks for specific tender points may be helpful. A doctor may also take blood samples to rule out inflammatory conditions, such as  rheumatoid arthritis  and polymyalgia.  Blood tests can usually diagnose polymyalgia. Most people with polymyalgia have elevated levels of inflammatory proteins in their blood. Their red blood cells may also show changes that are characteristic of inflammation.  A doctor may also perform other tests to rule out other inflammatory diseases, such as a biopsy or blood test for rheumatoid factor. These tests are standard for people with polymyalgia, but not for people with some other conditions.  Corticosteroids are the treatment of choice for polymyalgia. Corticosteroids are so effective at treating polymyalgia that if symptoms do not get better after using them, then polymyalgia might not be the right diagnosis. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories ( NSAIDs ) cannot treat polymyalgia.  There is a range of medications available that may reduce the symptoms of fibromyalgia, including:  Unlike with polymyalgia, finding the correct drug to treat fibromyalgia is often a process of trial and error. Drug treatment for fibromyalgia tends to work best when it is used in combination with other remedies, especially exercise.  Treatment for polymyalgia focuses on reducing inflammation while treating fibromyalgia emphasizes pain management and reducing central sensitization.  The treatment of choice for polymyalgia is medication, while treatment for fibromyalgia often focuses on lifestyle changes, particularly exercise. People with fibromyalgia  may also find  that therapy, especially  cognitive behavioral therapy  (CBT), can help them to manage symptoms.  Complementary therapies and management techniques that may also help fibromyalgia include:  There is little evidence that these treatments improve symptoms of polymyalgia.  Both fibromyalgia and polymyalgia are chronic disorders. The symptoms may change with time but are unlikely to go away.  Appropriate treatment of polymyalgia with corticosteroids can ease the symptoms, but relapses can occur.  There is no cure for either fibromyalgia or polymyalgia. However, both can be managed with appropriate treatment.  People with fibromyalgia may try several remedies before finding one that is best for them. Those with polymyalgia can often find quick relief using an appropriate medical treatment such as corticosteroids.  Also, a doctor should monitor people with polymyalgia for signs of a blood vessel condition called giant cell  arteritis .  Symptoms of giant cell arteritis include:  It is essential that a person gets professional advice and guidance when dealing with chronic pain. This may mean chasing up doctors or seeking new healthcare providers who will be able to help a person effectively manage their symptoms.   Article last updated by Phil Riches on Tue  5 March 2019.  Visit our  Fibromyalgia  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Fibromyalgia.   
 Bäckryd, E., Tanum, L., Lind, A.-L., Larsson, A., &amp; Gordh, T. (2017, March 3). Evidence of both systemic inflammation and neuroinflammation in fibromyalgia patients, as assessed by a multiplex protein panel applied to the cerebrospinal fluid and to plasma.  Journal of Pain Research ,  10 , 515–525.  Bäckryd, E., Tanum, L., Lind, A.-L., Larsson, A., &amp; Gordh, T. (2017, March 3). Evidence of both systemic inflammation and neuroinflammation in fibromyalgia patients, as assessed by a multiplex protein panel applied to the cerebrospinal fluid and to plasma.  Journal of Pain Research ,  10 , 515–525.  Bhana, S. (2017, March). Fibromyalgia.  Bidonde, J., Busch, A. J., Schachter, C. L., Overend, T. J., Kim, S. Y., Góes, … Foulds, H. J. A. (2017, June 21). Aerobic exercise training for adults with fibromyalgia.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , (6)  Biundo, J. J. (2017, February). Fibromyalgia.  Cagnie, B., Coppieters, I., Denecker, S., Six, J., Danneels, L., &amp; Meeus, M. (2014, August). Central sensitization in fibromyalgia? A systematic review on structural and functional brain MRI [Abstract].  Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism ,  44 (1), 68–75.  Clauw, D. (n.d.). Difference between fibromyalgia and polymyalgia.  Coppens, E., Van Wambeke, P., Morlion, B., Weltens, N., Ly, H. G., Tack, J., &amp; Van Oudenhove, L. (2017, October). Prevalence and impact of childhood adversities and post-traumatic stress disorder in women with fibromyalgia and chronic widespread pain.  European Journal of Pain ,  21 (9), 1582–1590.  Udell, J. (2017, March). Polymyalgia rheumatica.  Villa-Forte, A. (2017, September). Polymyalgia rheumatica.  Yates, M., Graham, K., Watts, R. A., &amp; MacGregor, A, J. (2016). The prevalence of giant cell arteritis and polymyalgia rheumatica in a UK primary care population.  BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders , 17, 285.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  , Zawn Villines. "What is the difference between polymyalgia and fibromyalgia?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Mar. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321532.php&gt;    APA  , Z. (2019, March 5). "What is the difference between polymyalgia and fibromyalgia?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  