 All hair produces some oil to keep it nourished and healthy, as well as to protect the scalp. But too much oil production can lead to seborrheic dermatitis, a condition that causes red, scaly patches to form on the scalp, along with  dandruff  that is difficult to get rid of.  Having very oily hair can also make a person feel self-conscious and lower their self-esteem.  While some people may despair at their oily hair, there are several natural remedies they can try to help get rid of the grease without stripping the hair of its natural oils or irritating the scalp.  Sometimes, oily hair is caused by excess oil that has not been removed properly. Some people with greasy hair may need to  wash it every day .  Shampoo helps to get rid of excess oil. It will also remove excess hair products and any other debris that has built up on the scalp and causes the hair to look and feel greasy.  Flakes may become visible in the hair if a person does not use enough shampoo.  This can cause dandruff  and other scalp diseases.  Some people who do cleanse their hair once a day may be washing it too much. Washing too often can strip the hair of its natural oils, causing the hair to produce even more oil.  People who find their hair becomes greasy very quickly after washing it and have an itchy or irritated scalp might want to experiment with washing their hair less frequently. Doing so could help to balance out oil production and reduce greasiness.  It is easy for people to get into bad hair-washing habits that cause their hair to become oily and damage their scalp.  The correct way to wash the hair is to massage a small amount of shampoo into the roots and scalp.  Do this thoroughly but carefully, taking care not to scratch the scalp or hair. Scrubbing too aggressively could cause irritation and more oil production.  As most people find their hair is oiliest near the hairline, it is best to focus on washing the scalp and hair roots, rather than the ends of the hair. Rinsing the shampoo through the hair will be sufficient to clean the ends.  Rinse hair thoroughly to ensure that debris from the shampoo does not build up and weigh the hair down.  Conditioner can cause oils to build up more quickly, contributing to the greasy look of a person's hair.  Instead of conditioning all over, try just applying to on the ends of the hair to keep them from drying out. Make sure to rinse thoroughly after application.  Certain times of day are better for hair washing than others, such as after a workout or first thing in the morning.  Washing the hair at night might mean that it looks greasy again by morning. Going to the gym or doing exercise creates sweat, which can make a person's hair look oily and unwashed.  Washing the hair after wearing a hat, helmet, or headscarf is also a good idea. Covering the head creates heat, causing the scalp to sweat and trapping oils.  Using hair straighteners and blow drying can help tame unruly hair. However, doing so can also make hair look greasy more quickly than if it was just left to dry naturally.  Avoiding straightening irons and hair dryers will also protect hair from heat damage.  While scraping the hair back may seem like a good idea, this can cause the oils on the scalp to spread faster. People who prefer tying their hair up might think about letting it loose once in a while.  If no remedies are helping to reduce oil, a change of style could make someone feel better about their hair. In fact, oily hair can work well for some hairstyles, such as a slicked-back topknot.  A hairbrush benefits from regular cleaning, as it can pick up products, dead skin, and other debris.  If the brush is not cleaned, dirt and debris will spread through the hair the next time a person uses it. This can make freshly-washed hair immediately look dirty and greasy again.  People who play with their hair may find that it often looks greasier after they have touched it. This happens because they are transferring oil and dirt from their hands onto the hair. Also, when a person scratches, twirls or runs their hands through their hair, they stimulate the oil glands and encourage them to produce more oil.  There are plenty of products available that are specifically designed for oily hair. Many are available to purchase  online . Switching shampoos and using ones with stronger detergents may help get rid of excess oil and leave hair looking clean and healthy.  People who plan to wash their hair daily should note that these stronger shampoos can irritate the scalp. Therefore, people who wash their hair every day might find that mild baby shampoo is a better option.  Silicone is  thought  to make a person's hair smooth and shiny. However, there is a fine line between gloss and grease. If silicone builds up in the hair, it can make it look greasy, oily, and weighed down.  Silicone can also block moisture from penetrating the hair shafts, so it is advisable that people keep it out of their haircare routines when possible.  Some people may not want to wash their hair every day or find that even if they do it is greasy by the afternoon. In these cases, dry shampoo may help, as its effects occur instantly.  Dry shampoo works by soaking up excess oil from the hair. Cornstarch or baby powder can also have a similar effect, for those looking for a homemade alternative.  It is important to note that using too much dry shampoo can leave the hair feeling gritty and dirty. It should not be considered a substitute for using shampoo and water as it does not help with removing dirt and debris from the scalp.  People with oily hair should try to avoid products that could weigh their hair down and contribute to a greasy look. Products that claim to smooth, nourish, and condition the hair are not usually necessary and may make the situation worse.  While adding oil to the hair may not sound like a remedy for oily hair,  coconut oil  could help.  Coconut oil  works by lifting oil from the scalp and nourishes and conditions dry ends at the same time.  One  study  found that using a shampoo containing 5 percent tea tree oil improved dandruff, helped to soothe an itchy scalp, and reduced greasiness compared with a  placebo .  Witch hazel can be extremely useful for people with greasy hair. It helps to  close the pores  that produce oil.  Witch hazel can also relieve itching and  inflammation  and helps to restore a natural pH balance on the scalp. It is a gentle solution for people with sensitive scalps too.   Green tea  could help keep hair looking healthy and grease-free, according to  small-scale studies . It works by reducing oil production and also nourishes skin when applied to it.  Using shampoo containing green tea extract could help people to reduce the oiliness of their hair.  Oily hair can lead to people feeling less good about their appearance. It can also cause the scalp to become itchy and uncomfortable.  Fortunately, there are plenty of simple, natural remedies to help combat oily hair.  People should be aware that the quantity of oil that their hair produces can change over time. Some people may find that their hair becomes naturally less greasy with age.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 American Academy of Dermatology. (2011, February 4). Going to great lengths for beautiful hair: Dermatologist shares hair care tips for healthy and damaged hair [Press release].  American Academy of Dermatology. (2011, February 4). Going to great lengths for beautiful hair: Dermatologist shares hair care tips for healthy and damaged hair [Press release].  Borda, L. J., &amp; Wikramanayake, T. C. (2015, December). Seborrheic dermatitis and dandruff: A comprehensive review.  Journal of Clinical and Investigative Dermatology ,  3 (2).  Clark, G. W., Pope, S. M., &amp; Jaboori, K. A. (2015, February 1). Diagnosis and treatment of seborrheic dermatitis.  American Family Physician ,  91 (3), 185–190.  Dandruff. (2016, August 31).  Gavazzoni Dias, M. F. R. (2015). Hair cosmetics: An overview.  International Journal of Trichology ,  7 (1), 2–15.  Does dry shampoo actually keep your hair clean? (2015, April 8).  Mahmood, T., Akhtar, N., &amp; Moldovan, C. (2013, January–March). A comparison of the effects of topical green tea and lotus on facial sebum control in healthy humans.  Hippokratia ,  17 (1), 64–67.  Monselise, A., Cohen, D. E., Wanser, R., &amp; Shapiro, J. (2017, March). What ages hair?  International Journal of Women's Dermatology ,  3 (1), S52–S57. Satchell, A. C., Saurajen, A., Bell, C., &amp; Barnetson, R. S. (2002, December). Treatment of dandruff with 5% tea tree oil shampoo.  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  47 (6), 852–855.  Seborrheic dermatitis. (n.d.).  Srivastava, A. K., Srivastava, S. C., &amp; Srivastava, N. (2016, July 29). Hair disorders, treatment and care: An overview.  Journal of Recent Advances in Applied Sciences ,  4 (1).  Thring, T. S., Hili, P., &amp; Naughton, D. P. (2011, October 13). Antioxidant and potential anti-inflammatory activity of extracts and formulations of white tea, rose, and witch hazel on primary human dermal fibroblast cells.  Journal of Inflammation ,  8 (1), 27.  Tips for healthy hair. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "How to get rid of oily hair naturally."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321552.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, April 20). "How to get rid of oily hair naturally."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  