 Women are  less likely  to survive their first  heart attack  than men. This may be because the symptoms differ between the sexes. Women are more likely to have a "silent" heart attack or display unusual symptoms.  Also, female biology creates unique risk factors for heart attack, as some diseases that increase risk, such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), are not present in male biology.  Many people expect a heart attack to come on suddenly. But research suggests that women experience symptoms for several weeks before a heart attack.  A  study  published in 2003 of 515 women who had experienced a heart attack, reports 80 percent of women had at least 1 symptom at least 4 weeks before their heart attack.  Symptoms may be constant or come and go, and they may also disrupt sleep.  It is vital for a woman who experiences any of these symptoms to seek help immediately, as heart attacks can be fatal, regardless of whether symptoms are mild or severe.  Eight of the symptoms of a possible heart attack are:  The most common symptom of heart attack in both males and females is chest pain or discomfort.  It may be described as:  However, women can experience a heart attack without having any chest discomfort.  Some 29.7 percent of the women surveyed in the 2003 study experienced chest discomfort in the weeks before the attack. Also, 57 percent had chest pain during the heart attack.  Unusual  fatigue  is often reported in the weeks leading up to a heart attack. Fatigue is also experienced just before the event occurs.  Even simple activities that do not require much exertion can lead to feelings of being exhausted.  Feeling weak or shaky is a common acute symptom of a heart attack in a female.  This weakness or shaking may be accompanied by:  Shortness of breath or heavy breathing without exertion, especially when accompanied by fatigue or chest pain, may suggest heart problems.  Some women may feel short of breath when lying down, with the symptom easing when they are sitting upright.   Excessive sweating  without a normal cause is another common heart attack symptom in women.  Feeling cold and clammy can also be an indicator of heart problems.  This is usually non-specific and cannot be attributed to a particular muscle or joint in the upper body.  Areas that can be affected include:  The pain can start in one area and gradually spread to others, or it may come on suddenly.  Almost half of women in the 2003 study reported issues with sleep in the weeks before they had a heart attack.  These disturbances may involve:  Some women may feel pain or pressure in the stomach before a heart attack.  Other digestive issues associated with a possible heart attack can include:  The risk of heart attack increases due to falling  estrogen  levels after  menopause .  Post-menopause heart attack symptoms include:  Risk factors for a heart attack in women include:  The British Heart Foundation  recommend  all women over 40 years of age have regular checks with their doctor. This helps identify risk factors early so that they can be treated. Early intervention reduces the chances of a cardiac event.  Anyone who notices the warning signs of a heart attack, such as the following, should see a doctor immediately:  A doctor will note symptoms, check  blood pressure  and heart rate, and may order blood tests or use an electrocardiogram (EKG) to see the heart's electrical activity.  Only 65 percent of women would call emergency services if they suspected they were having a heart attack, according to a  2012 survey .  Emergency treatment can save lives. Anyone noticing the following symptoms should call an ambulance immediately, especially if the signs are present for 5 minutes or more:  Tips for better heart health include:  A heart attack is a serious and potentially fatal medical event that requires emergency treatment. Women tend to display different heart attack symptoms than men. They also have additional risk factors.  There are many steps women can take to reduce their risk of a heart attack. An awareness of the symptoms of heart attack, especially in the weeks before the event, can also improve outcomes and prevent complications.    
 Heart attack symptoms in women. (2018, March 30).  Heart attack symptoms in women. (2018, March 30).  Heart disease statistics at a glance. (n.d.).  McSweeney, J. C., Cody, M., O'Sullivan, P., Elberson, K., Moser, D. K., &amp; Garvin, B. J. (2003, November 25). Women's early warning symptoms of acute myocardial infarction [Abstract].  Circulation ,  108 (21), 2619–2623.  Mosca, L., Hammond, G., Mochari-Greenberger, H., Towfighi, A., &amp; Albert, M. A. (2013, March 18). Fifteen-year trends in awareness of heart disease in women: Results of a 2012 American Heart Association national survey.  Circulation ,  127 , 1254–1263.  Women and heart attacks. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What are the signs of heart attack in a woman?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321528.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 17). "What are the signs of heart attack in a woman?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  