 In addition to transporting oxygen, hemoglobin carries carbon dioxide out of the cells and into the lungs. Carbon dioxide is then released as a person exhales. Having low hemoglobin can make it difficult for the body to perform these functions.  In this article, learn how to increase hemoglobin levels naturally. We also look at methods of testing and what the results show.  A person can raise their hemoglobin levels at home by:  A person with reduced levels of hemoglobin may benefit from eating more iron-rich foods. Iron works to boost the production of hemoglobin, which also helps to form more red blood cells.  Iron-rich foods include:   Folate  is a type of  vitamin  B that plays an essential part in hemoglobin production. The body uses folate to produce heme, a component of hemoglobin that helps to carry oxygen.  If a person does not get enough folate their red blood cells will not be able to mature, which could lead to folate-deficiency  anemia  and low hemoglobin levels.  Good sources of folate include:  Folate supplements are available for  purchase online .  Consuming iron in foods or supplements is important, but a person should also help their body to absorb that iron.  Foods rich in vitamin C, such as citrus fruits, strawberries, and leafy green vegetables, can boost the amount of iron absorbed. Taking a vitamin C supplement may also help.  Vitamin A and  beta-carotene  can aid the body in absorbing and using iron.  Foods rich in vitamin A include:  Foods high in beta-carotene include yellow, red, and orange fruits and vegetables, such as:  While vitamin A supplements can help the body to process iron, the vitamin is dangerous if too much is consumed.  Excess vitamin A may lead to a condition known as hypervitaminosis A. This can cause symptoms such as bone and joint pain, severe  headaches , and increased pressure within the brain.  A doctor may advise a person with extremely low levels of hemoglobin to take iron supplements. The dosage will depend on a person's levels.  It is important to note that too much iron can be dangerous. It may cause  hemochromatosis , which can lead to liver disease and side effects such as  constipation , nausea, and vomiting.  Supplements will cause levels of iron to increase gradually over a few weeks. A doctor may recommend taking the supplements for several months, to increase the body's iron stores.  Iron supplements are available for  purchase online .  A doctor will check for low hemoglobin with a blood test.  Low hemoglobin is diagnosed when a man has less than  13.5 grams per deciliter (g/dL)  of hemoglobin in the blood, or when a woman has less than  12 g/dL .  A person may have a low hemoglobin level for a variety of reasons, including:  It is possible to have naturally reduced hemoglobin levels without an underlying cause. Some may even have low hemoglobin and experience no symptoms or indications.  With a doctor's guidance, a person can boost their levels of hemoglobin to fall within a normal range. Normal ranges are:  Appropriate hemoglobin levels for children vary depending on age. Anyone concerned about a child's hemoglobin levels should speak with a doctor.  People with very low hemoglobin levels may need additional treatment if taking supplements and changing the diet do not show sufficient results.  Symptoms of extremely low levels of hemoglobin include:  A person with low hemoglobin may have anemia. Common causes of anemia include:  Low hemoglobin levels can also be caused by:  Many people can boost their hemoglobin levels with dietary changes and supplements. Speak with a doctor to determine the correct supplement dosage.  If hemoglobin levels remain low, a person may need further treatment, such as a blood transfusion.  Depending on the cause of low hemoglobin and the treatments attempted, it may take up to a year for levels to reach a healthy range.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.   Article last updated by Phil Riches on Tue  6 November 2018.  Visit our  Blood / Hematology  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Blood / Hematology.   
 Absorption. (2018, April 17).  Absorption. (2018, April 17).  Abbaspour, N., Hurrell, R., &amp; Kelishadi, R. (2014, February). Review on iron and its importance for human health.  Journal of Research in Medical Sciences ,  19 (2), 164–174.  CBC with differential, blood. (n.d.).  Folate. (2018, March 2).  Hemoglobin. (2018, April 16).  Hemoglobin and the functions of iron. (n.d.).  Hurrell, R., &amp; Egli, I. (2010, March 3). Iron bioavailability and dietary reference values.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,   91 (5), 1461S–1467S.  Iron. (2018, March 2).  Iron deficiency anaemia. (2018, January 12).  Johnson, L. E. (n.d.). Vitamin A.  Lands, R., &amp; Isang, E. (2017, January 4). Secondary hemochromatosis due to chronic oral iron supplementation.  Case Reports in Hematology ,  2017 , 2494167.  Michelazzo, F. B., Oliveira, J. M., Stefanello, J., Luzia, L. A., &amp; Rondó, P. H. C. (2013, November 7). The influence of vitamin A supplementation on iron status.  Nutrients ,  5 (11), 4399–4413.  Red blood cell count. (2015, October 2).  Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism). (2015, May 11).  Understanding your test results. (n.d.).  West, A. R., &amp; Oates, P. S. (2008, July 14). Mechanisms of heme iron absorption: Current questions and controversies.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  14 (26), 4101–4110.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "How to increase hemoglobin: Home remedies."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Nov. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321530.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, November 6). "How to increase hemoglobin: Home remedies."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  