  Fibromyalgia  symptoms vary from person to person. Some describe the pain as sharp and shooting, while others report a dull ache.  The American College of Rheumatology estimates that  2 to 4 percent  of people have fibromyalgia and state that it is more common in women.  Until recently, many doctors dismissed people with fibromyalgia. Because the disease was so poorly understood, these doctors mistakenly believed that symptoms were faked. Some analysts speculate that this may be because doctors historically  tended to disregard  women's pain.  In this article, we explore the different ways that men and women may experience fibromyalgia. We also describe common causes and treatments.  The hallmark of fibromyalgia is chronic, widespread pain that cannot be explained by other issues, such as a muscle injury, a  herniated disc ,  arthritis , or an autoimmune disorder.  Everyone with fibromyalgia may experience one or more of the following symptoms:  Symptoms can vary in intensity, but many find that  stress , exhaustion, and illness can make symptoms worse. The type of pain is less important for diagnosis than the pain's chronic and widespread nature.  Women with fibromyalgia may experience heightened or different symptoms compared with men.  Women are more likely to experience:  Additional symptoms common to women may involve:  Fibromyalgia can affect the menstrual cycle. Periods may be heavier, and women may experience painful menstruation, which is called dysmenorrhea.  Many women with fibromyalgia have no problems during pregnancy, but in some cases,  pregnancy can worsen symptoms  of the condition.  Also, fibromyalgia can lead to heightened fatigue and mood swings, which are common in pregnancy.  Consult a doctor about fibromyalgia and pregnancy, as some medication for fibromyalgia can impact the fetus.  Tender points refer to 18 tender or painful spots in nine locations on the body. These spots are paired and located on either side of the spine, for example. Not everyone with fibromyalgia has tender points, but they can help to distinguish it from other pain conditions.  Women with fibromyalgia are more likely than men to have tender points, which are located:  No test can determine whether someone has fibromyalgia. Instead, diagnosing fibromyalgia is a process of exclusion. Doctors ask about symptoms, then test for other disorders that might cause them. If no other cause can be found, a doctor will diagnose fibromyalgia.  To rule out other conditions, a doctor may perform X-rays and order bloodwork. They may also test for tender spots, ask about past injuries, and take a detailed medical history.  A diagnosis is more likely if patients have the following:  While specialists and researchers still use tender points to characterize fibromyalgia, it is not always a reliable diagnostic tool, because the presence of tender points can change from day to day. Also, some doctors may apply more pressure during examinations than others.  With tender points excluded, doctors usually look for the following symptoms when diagnosing fibromyalgia:  Doctors do not have a good understanding of what causes fibromyalgia, and there may be more than one factor.  Some research indicates that women with a history of trauma are more likely to develop fibromyalgia. A  study from 2017  found that 49 percent of women diagnosed with fibromyalgia had experienced at least one type of adversity, such as emotional or physical abuse, during childhood.  Women with fibromyalgia were also six times more likely to have a history of  post-traumatic stress disorder , commonly known as PTSD, than women with esophageal or gastrointestinal disorders.  However, fibromyalgia is not a psychological condition. It instead shows a link between the mind and the body, indicating that a history of trauma can cause or worsen physical pain.  Other theories include:  An event tends to trigger initial fibromyalgia symptoms. The event can be an injury, a traumatic experience, or the development of another disorder, such as arthritis.  People often experience attacks of fibromyalgia that involve heightened baseline symptoms. Many people find that stress, lifestyle changes, and similar events can trigger a fibromyalgia attack.  A wide  range of treatments  can help people to cope with the pain of fibromyalgia. They include:  Many conditions can cause chronic pain, but treatments are available to help.  See a doctor if unexplained pain does not get better after a few weeks.  Anyone experiencing pain accompanied by other severe symptoms, such as heart palpitations or difficulty breathing, should seek medical attention right away.  Fibromyalgia is a treatable condition, and after working with a doctor who specializes in chronic pain or fibromyalgia, the pain can be reduced.  While the condition is chronic, and there is no definitive cure, most people can develop a treatment and management plan that allows them to live normally. Still, it may take time to receive an accurate diagnosis and find the right combination of therapies.  Fibromyalgia does not lead to other disorders, is not fatal, and it does not damage the muscles. However, some find that the severity of symptoms changes over time.    
 Bäckryd, E., Tanum, L., Lind, A.-L., Larsson, A., &amp; Gordh, T. (2017, March 3). Evidence of both systemic inflammation and neuroinflammation in fibromyalgia patients, as assessed by a multiplex protein panel applied to the cerebrospinal fluid and to plasma.  Journal of Pain Research ,  10 , 515–525.  Bäckryd, E., Tanum, L., Lind, A.-L., Larsson, A., &amp; Gordh, T. (2017, March 3). Evidence of both systemic inflammation and neuroinflammation in fibromyalgia patients, as assessed by a multiplex protein panel applied to the cerebrospinal fluid and to plasma.  Journal of Pain Research ,  10 , 515–525.  Coppens, E., van Wambeke, P., Morlion, B., Weltens, N., Giao Ly, H., Tack, J., … van Oudenhove, L. (2017, May 24). Prevalence and impact of childhood adversities and post-traumatic stress disorder in women with fibromyalgia and chronic widespread pain.  European Journal of Pain ,  21 (9), 1582–1590.  Durif-Bruckert, C., Roux, P., &amp; Rousset, H. (2014, July 3). Medication and the patient-doctor relationship: A qualitative study with patients suffering from fibromyalgia.  Health Expectations ,  18 (6), 2584–2594.  Fibromyalgia. (2017, March).  Fibromyalgia. (2017, September 25).  Hoffmann, D. E., &amp; Tarzian, A. J. (2001, March). The girl who cried pain: A bias against women in the treatment of pain.  The Journal of Law, Medicine &amp; Ethics ,  28 (s4), 13–27.  New clinical fibromyalgia diagnostic criteria: Part 1. (n.d.).  Sinclair, D., Starz, T. W., &amp; Turk, D. C. (2005, October 3). The manual tender point survey.  Yunus, M. B. (2002, March–April). Gender differences in fibromyalgia and other related syndromes [Abstract].  Journal of Gender-Specific Medicine ,  5 (2), 42–47.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Is fibromyalgia worse in women?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321559.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, April 20). "Is fibromyalgia worse in women?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  