 This article looks at the various ways a person can relieve the pain of  fibromyalgia  using medical treatments, medications, home remedies, and natural products.  Some prescription medications can help with the pain of fibromyalgia. These include:  Over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers, including  aspirin  and  non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  (NSAIDs), such as Naproxen, may help a person to manage fibromyalgia pain. Some people find that OTC versions of these drugs work well. When these medications are not effective, a doctor may prescribe stronger pain medication.  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  has approved  three drugs specifically for treating fibromyalgia. Those include:  A  2018  study, for instance, shows that people using pregabalin reported improvements in pain, quality of life, mood, and sleep.  People with fibromyalgia may need to try several drugs or different dosages before they find the right combination for them. Talk to a doctor about any side effects, and ask how long it will take the medication to work. Some drugs require several weeks to become fully effective.   Some research  suggests that low levels of the chemical serotonin make people more vulnerable to fibromyalgia. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which increase serotonin levels, may help with some fibromyalgia symptoms.  Also, living with fibromyalgia can lead to  depression  and  anxiety . Some people find that taking  antidepressants  improves their mood, which helps them better manage pain.  Many people with fibromyalgia struggle to sleep at night.  Sleep deprivation  can make the pain worse. When home treatments, such as going to bed at the same time each night and investing in a comfortable mattress fail, doctors may prescribe sleeping medications.  Narcotic pain relievers called opioids change the way the brain responds to pain. They can relieve many types of pain, although their effectiveness for fibromyalgia pain is unclear.  A  2018  study found that the fibromyalgia drugs containing pregabalin worked better for pain relief than opioids. Because opioids can be addictive, it is essential to talk to a healthcare provider about the benefits and risks of these drugs and to consider other treatments first.  Some doctors prescribe non-narcotic pain relievers, such as Tramadol, to help with the pain of fibromyalgia. These drugs can be effective but can also be addictive. It is essential to monitor the dosage and to consider other strategies for long-term pain management.  The following natural remedies may relieve symptoms on their own or improve the effects of drug treatments:  Some studies suggest that therapy can help people cope with fibromyalgia. This does not mean fibromyalgia is in a person's head. Instead, it shows that pain is both a psychological and physical experience.  A person's perceptions can alter how severely they experience their pain.  Stress  and lack of social support can make a person's pain feel less manageable. Therapy can also help people with fibromyalgia find new ways to cope. It might also offer an outlet for the challenges that some people face in coping with decreased mobility, negotiating the medical system, and dealing with unsympathetic colleagues, employers, or loved ones.  People with limited mobility may also find help from online therapy. A  2015 study  found that both face-to-face and online  cognitive behavioral therapy  (CBT) could help with depression and symptom-related distress. Also, CBT might help some people living with fibromyalgia to use relaxation techniques to cope with pain. However, only face-to-face therapy improved daily functioning.  According to a  2015  review study, there is a strong link between a sedentary lifestyle and chronic pain, even in people without fibromyalgia. Remaining physically active may prevent muscle wasting and stiffness that can make a person's pain worse.  There is no clear evidence to suggest that one specific exercise program is better than another. Instead, most exercise seems to produce at least modest pain relief.  The following exercises are shown to improve the symptoms of fibromyalgia:  Some options that are supported by research include:  A person with fibromyalgia should choose the exercise regimen that works best for their schedule and lifestyle.  People with fibromyalgia may benefit from experimenting with their diets. Anecdotal evidence suggests that a wide range of diets may help with symptoms.  For instance, because fibromyalgia  may be linked  to chronic  inflammation , an  anti-inflammatory diet  may help. This diet encourages eating foods such as raspberries, fish,  onions , and nuts. Processed foods, salt, and heavy alcohol consumption can increase inflammation, so people with fibromyalgia should avoid them.  A study published in  2017  argues that fibromyalgia might be related to a person's metabolism. According to this study, fibromyalgia symptoms may develop when the body cannot create enough serotonin, which is a chemical that transmits impulses to nerves, fibers, and muscles. Serotonin derives from an amino acid called tryptophan, which might be affected by high levels of fructose, a type of sugar.  This study suggests that a person tries:  Always talk to a doctor before making any significant diet changes, and consider seeking support from a nutritionist to plan a diet that is balanced and healthful. Restrictive diets can result in a person not consuming enough protein and  carbohydrates , for example.  A person can find out which foods trigger their symptoms by keeping a food diary and tracking their symptoms. Working with a doctor or nutritionist can help individuals with fibromyalgia find the diet that suits them best.  Certain  vitamins  and supplements  may help  to reverse some of the nutritional deficiencies that make fibromyalgia symptoms worse. People interested in trying supplements should talk to a doctor first. It is usually possible to test whether a person has any deficiencies to determine the most appropriate supplements.  Some healthcare professionals believe that low levels of  vitamin D  or  magnesium , for instance,  might cause  fibromyalgia symptoms, though studies are  inconsistent .  Many people with fibromyalgia find that stress makes their symptoms worse. Stress management techniques may, therefore, make symptoms less severe. The key is to find methods that work for a person's lifestyle. Some people turn to friends or family, while others find that new hobbies or distractions work well.  Meditation, particularly mindfulness meditation, which encourages increased awareness of the present moment, may help with fibromyalgia symptoms.  A  2014 study  found that mindfulness alleviated many fibromyalgia symptoms in women, including stress and sleep problems. People who practiced mindfulness reported less severe symptoms and a lower perceived burden associated with fibromyalgia.  Meditation may also help reduce stress and anxiety, which are among the most common triggers for fibromyalgia.  People with fibromyalgia sometimes turn to complementary therapies to manage symptoms. These strategies include:  These methods may work for some people and not for others. Research on their effectiveness is mixed. For example, a  2013  review found only low to moderate evidence that acupuncture may improve fibromyalgia symptoms.  Complementary medicine may offer the best results when used alongside traditional treatments.  Some lifestyle changes can improve a person's comfort and help them to manage their symptoms. Some examples include:  Finding a sympathetic doctor can be key to getting an accurate diagnosis and having treatment tailored to an individual's specific needs.  Feeling heard and understood is critical to unlocking the best possible combination of treatments. A person with fibromyalgia should work with specialists in chronic pain and may wish to switch providers if they feel dismissed or unheard.  Fibromyalgia is a chronic medical condition with no known cure. This means that people with this condition need to create an environment where they can manage their symptoms.  Many people find that their symptoms get better or worse at certain times, or as a result of specific triggers, such as stress and injuries.  Managing fibromyalgia requires finding the right combination of treatments. What works for one person might not work for another, and effective strategies may change with time.  A willingness to experiment and a supportive doctor can help. Be honest about symptoms, and if medication or home remedies are not working, talk to a supportive provider about trying other options.    
 Anti-inflammatory diet. (n.d.).  Anti-inflammatory diet. (n.d.).  Bäckryd, E., Tanum, L., Lind, A.-L, Larsson, A., &amp; Gordh, T. (2017, March 3). Evidence of both systemic inflammation and neuroinflammation in fibromyalgia patients, as assessed by a multiplex protein panel applied to the cerebrospinal fluid and to plasma.  Journal of Pain Research ,  10 , 515–525.  Bidonde, J., Busch, A. J., Schachter, C. L., Overend, T. J., Kim, S. Y., Góes, S. M., … Foulds, H. J. A. (2017, June 21). Aerobic exercise training for adults with fibromyalgia [Abstract].  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .  Boomershine, C. (2010, June 22). Pregabalin for the management of fibromyalgia syndrome.  Journal of Pain Research ,  3 , 81–88.  Cash, E., Salmon, P., Weissbecker, I., Rebholz, W. N., Bayley-Veloso, R., Zimmaro, L. A., … Sephton, S. E. (2014, November 26). Mindfulness meditation alleviates fibromyalgia symptoms in women: Results of a randomized clinical trial [Abstract].  Annals of Behavioral Medicine ,  49 (3), 319–330.  Davis, F., Gostine, M., Roberts, B. A., Risko, R., Cappelleri, J. C., &amp; Sadosky, A. (2018, February 7). Interpreting the effectiveness of opioids and pregabalin for pain severity, pain interference, and fatigue in fibromyalgia patients.  Pain Practice .  Deare, J. C., Zheng, Z., Xue, C. C., Liu, J. P., Shang, J., Scott, S. W., &amp; Littlejohn, G. (2013, May 31). Acupuncture for treating fibromyalgia [Abstract].  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  31 (5), CD007070.  Fibromyalgia in depth. (2016, May).  Joustra, M. L., Minovic, I., Janssens, K. A. M., Bakker, S. J. L., &amp; Rosmalen, J. G. M. (2017, April 28). Vitamin and mineral status in chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  PLOS ONE ,  12 (4), e0176631.  Kibar, S., Yidiz, H. E., Ay, S., Evcik, D., &amp; Ergin, E. S. (2015, September). New approach in fibromyalgia exercise program: A preliminary study regarding the effectiveness of balance training [Abstract].  Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation ,  96 (9), 1576–1582.  Lattanzio, S. M. (2017, November 13). Fibromyalgia syndrome: A metabolic approach grounded in biochemistry for the remission of symptoms.  Frontiers in Medicine ,  4 ,198.  Living with fibromyalgia, drugs approved to manage pain. (2017, November 6).  https://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm107802.htm   Nalli, C., Andreoli, L., Avanzini, R., Tipa, P., Zanetti, M., Milini, C., … Tincani, A. (2017, June 15). AB1178 A prospective study on the effects of 3-month courses of traditional physiotherapy and yoga in patients with chronic arthritis and primary fibromyalgia [Abstract].  Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases ,  76 (Suppl 2), 1468.  Okifuji, A., &amp; Hare, B. (2015, July 14). The association between chronic pain and obesity.  Journal of Pain Research ,  8 , 399–408.  Treatment. (n.d.).  Vallejo, M. A., Ortega, J., Rivera, J., Comeche, M. I., &amp; Vallejo-Slocker, L. (2015, September). Internet versus face-to-face group cognitive-behavioral therapy for fibromyalgia: A randomized control trial.  Journal of Psychiatric Research ,  68 , 106–113.  Wang, C., Schmid, C. H., Fielding, R. A., Harvey, W. F., Reid, K. F., Price, L. L., … McAlindon, T. (2018, March 21). Effect of tai chi versus aerobic exercise for fibromyalgia: Comparative effectiveness randomized controlled trial. BMJ,360, k851.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "How to relieve fibromyalgia pain."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321534.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, April 18). "How to relieve fibromyalgia pain."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  