 In this article, we look at the evidence behind the many health claims about barley, as well as its nutritional value. We also list steps on how to make barley water at home.  The health benefits of barley water include:  Many of barley's health benefits come from it being an excellent source of dietary fiber. Fiber is essential for keeping the digestive system healthy, contributing to healthy bowel movements, and helping people avoid problems such as  constipation .  Researchers have linked a diet high in dietary fiber to a reduced risk of developing some chronic diseases. For example, people who eat plenty of fiber have a  lower risk  of developing cardiovascular disease.  Barley is a soluble fiber, meaning it can dissolve in water and provides the body with useful energy. Fiber can also be insoluble, meaning it passes through the digestive tract without breaking down and does not provide the body with energy.  The  American Dietetic Association  recommend that adult women eat 25 grams (g) and adult men eat 38 g of dietary fiber every day. Most people in the United States do not meet this target, so barley may be an easy way for people to increase their intake.  In addition to its high fiber content, barley also contains a mix of beneficial  vitamins  and minerals.  A  2010 analysis of clinical trials  found that barley may reduce the level of LDL or "bad"  cholesterol  in the blood.  While the results varied depending on the participant's overall health and the doses and quality of barley used, the author's concluded that eating or drinking barley products can be considered part of a plan to reduce total and LDL cholesterol.  The balance of natural gut bacteria plays an essential role in keeping a person healthy. Studies have shown that consuming barley-based foods leads to a reduction of a gut bacteria called  bacteroides .  While these bacteria are not usually a threat, they are the most common species found in anaerobic infections, which occur after an injury or trauma. These infections can affect the abdomen, genitals, heart, bones, joints, and the  central nervous system .  Barley-based foods have been shown to help boost the number of beneficial bacteria  prevotella  in the gut. These bacteria have been shown to help lower blood sugar levels for up to  11–14  hours.  Keeping blood sugar levels in check can help reduce the risk of  type 2 diabetes . It can also help those who have  diabetes  manage their blood glucose levels.  Barley prompts the body to release hormones that regulate appetite by making the person feel fuller for longer. These hormones may also boost the metabolism, which can contribute to weight loss.  Barley water is easy to make. Many people choose to add natural flavorings, such as lemon, to the water to give it a better taste.  To make 6 cups of lemon barley water, a person will need:  A person can follow the steps below to make barley water:  Note that while the honey will enhance the flavor, it will also add sugar. People looking to reduce sugar in their diet may wish to replace honey with a pinch of  stevia .  Barley contains gluten, so anyone with a  wheat allergy  or intolerance should avoid it. Symptoms of a wheat allergy may include:  Barley is an excellent source of dietary fiber, but also contains other essential minerals, including  magnesium , manganese, and  selenium .  Compared to whole-grain oats, barley has more dietary fiber and is lower in fat and  calories .  Per 100 g , barley contains 354  calories , 2.3 g of fat, and 17.3 g of fiber. The  same quantity  of oats contains 389 calories, 6.9 g of fat, and 1.60 g of fiber.  Barley-based foods have a range of health benefits, many of which come from its fiber content.  However, most studies have not looked at barley water specifically. It is also important to remember that sweetened barley water contains extra sugar and calories.    
 AbuMweis, S. S., Jew, S., &amp; Ames, N. P. (2010, December). β-glucan from barley and its lipid-lowering capacity: A meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials [Abstract].  European Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  64 (12), 1472.  AbuMweis, S. S., Jew, S., &amp; Ames, N. P. (2010, December). β-glucan from barley and its lipid-lowering capacity: A meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials [Abstract].  European Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  64 (12), 1472.  Ames, N. P., &amp; Rhymer, C. R. (2008, June). Issues surrounding health claims for barley [Abstract].  The Journal of Nutrition ,  138 (6), 1237S–1243S.  Barley helps improve blood sugar and reduce appetite. (2017, December 19).  Basic report: 20003, barley, hulled. (n.d.).  Basic report: 20038, oats. (n.d.).  Dietary fiber. (n.d.).  Gut microbiota info. (n.d.).  Idehen, E., Tang, Y., &amp; Sang, S. (2017, January). Bioactive phytochemicals in barley.  Journal of Food and Drug Analysis ,  25 (1), 148–161.  New ‘Buck” naked barley: Food, feed, brew. (2018, January 17).  Slavin, J. L. (2008, October). Position of the American Dietetic Association: Health implications of dietary fiber.  Journal of the American Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,  108 (10), 1716–1731.  Wexler, H. M. (2007, October). Bacteroides: The good, the bad, and the nitty-gritty.  Clinical Microbiology Reviews ,  20 (4), 593–621.  Wheat allergy. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "What are the benefits of barley water?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321577.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, April 23). "What are the benefits of barley water?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  