 Stretch marks are a common complaint, especially among pregnant women and adolescents. These long stripes or lines on the skin may be annoying, but they do not cause any medical problems.  Although most stretch marks will fade significantly with time, many people want to minimize their appearance quickly. Read on to discover the best essential oils to reduce stretch marks.  Stretch marks are known medically as striae or striae gravidarum. They occur when the middle layer or dermis of the skin becomes overstretched to the point of tearing.  These tears cause scars that appear as stretch marks on the skin's surface.  This type of skin tearing often occurs:  High levels of steroid hormones caused by medications or diseases, including Cushing's syndrome and  Marfan syndrome , have also been linked to stretch marks.  Stretch marks appear as red or purple lines that are slightly raised initially. They turn white or silver and become flat and shiny, over time. Women are more prone to stretch marks than men, and they usually develop on the:  Certain essential oils are more effective than others at reducing the visibility of stretch marks.  Essential oils should be diluted in a carrier oil before applying. Essential oils should not be swallowed.  Some of the best choices for stretch marks include:  Argan essential oil is a popular natural product for skin and hair care. Argan tree kernels are used to make it.  Some  research  suggests that argan oil can improve the elasticity of the skin, which may reduce or prevent stretch marks. It can be applied topically or consumed to enhance skin elasticity, according to  one study .  A different type of almond to the one that is eaten is used to make bitter almond essential oil.  A  2012 study  suggests that bitter almond oil may reduce the stretch marks caused by pregnancy. Researchers divided the 141 women into:  The scientists found that stretch marks developed in only 20 percent of women in the massage group, 38.8 percent in the oil-only group, and 41 percent in the control group.  More studies are needed before conclusions on the effectiveness of bitter almond oil can be drawn.  The oil also contains toxic compounds that may not be safe in certain amounts, especially when used during pregnancy.  Bitter orange essential oil is extracted from the peel of the bitter orange fruit.   One study  indicates that the oil may tone and condition the skin, as well as prevent skin fragility. These actions could potentially reduce the appearance of stretch marks.  People with sensitive skin may experience irritation when using bitter orange essential oil. It may also cause photosensitivity in people with light skin.  Lavender essential oil is best known for its calming properties. But the oil has several other benefits, including when it comes to the healing of wounds and marks.   Research published  in 2016 reports that lavender oil increases the production of  collagen  and forms new connective tissue that encourages wound healing.  This suggests lavender oil may help in the healing of stretch marks, but it should be noted that the study was carried out on rats.  More research on humans is needed.  Neroli essential oil is made from the flowers of the  Citrus aurantium  tree, the same tree that is used to make bitter orange oil.  Most of the evidence for neroli oil helping stretch marks is anecdotal, and it has been traditionally used for lightening the skin and reducing imperfections.  Neroli oil has  been found  in studies to exhibit powerful  antioxidant  effects. This antioxidant activity may improve the appearance of skin by helping the cells to regenerate.  People often use patchouli essential oil to boost their mood, but it is also known for healing wounds and fading scars.  Studies on animals  suggest  it has antioxidant properties and can promote the synthesis of collagen, which could reduce stretch marks.  Pomegranate essential oil is believed to have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. It is made from the seeds of the pomegranate fruit  A  2017 study  found that a cream comprising pomegranate oil and dragon's blood extract, which is made from dracaena tree resin, increased the elasticity and thickness of the skin.  These findings led researchers to suggest that a blend of pomegranate oil and dragon's blood extract could prevent or minimize the appearance of marks.  Frankincense oil has been  used for centuries  for its healing properties and treatment of skin conditions.  Frankincense enters into the skin easily, and ferulic acids and  vitamins  in the oil bring antioxidant benefits to the skin, which helps keep it soft and healthy.  Essential oils should be diluted in carrier oils and then applied topically to stretch marks and massaged into the skin.  Essential oils should be mixed with a carrier oil to prevent burning and irritation. This is especially important for people with sensitive skin.  Popular carrier oils include:  Mix 15 to 30 drops of essential oil with 1 ounce of carrier oil. Start with fewer drops and work up, as skin tolerance allows.  A patch test should always be carried out before applying essential oils liberally to the skin. The essential oil should be safe to use if there is no reaction after 24 hours.  Distilled from the seeds of rose flowers, rosehip oil as a carrier oil may be effective by itself for the prevention of stretch marks.  When researchers asked pregnant women to apply a moisturizer, containing rosehip oil and vitamin E or a  placebo , they found that the cream was more effective at preventing stretch marks than the placebo.  They suggest that this can reduce the severity of stretch marks during pregnancy, prevent new marks from forming, and stop the progression of existing marks.  People who try essential oils for stretch marks may experience skin irritation or allergic reactions, as these are the most common side effects. They should stop using the oil if it causes a rash, redness, or itching and see a doctor if symptoms persist.  People should be careful using citrus oils, as they can make the skin more sensitive to sunlight for 24 hours after use, which increases the risk of  sunburn .  A person is advised to discuss the use of essential oils with a doctor before trying them, especially if they are taking other medications or using topical treatments.  Stretch marks are extremely common in pregnancy, and many pregnant women would like to find natural ways to prevent or treat stretch marks.  It is unclear if topically applied essential oils are safe for use during pregnancy. People who are pregnant or breast-feeding should avoid the use of essential oils on the skin unless advised differently by their doctor.  People with severe stretch marks or who are allergic to essential oils may wish to try other treatments, including:  Stretch marks are not a serious medical condition, but some people wish to remove them for cosmetic reasons.  Most stretch marks will not completely go away, but using certain essential oils can help to minimize their appearance. If the oils do not work or cause skin irritation, other treatments are available from a doctor or dermatologist.  In many cases, stretch marks will fade with time even without any specific treatment.    
 Ao, Y., Satoh, K., Shibano, K., Kawahito, Y., &amp; Shioda, S. (2008, July 1). Singlet oxygen scavenging activity and cytotoxicity of essential oils from  Rutaceae .  Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and Nutrition ,  43 (1), 6–12.  Ao, Y., Satoh, K., Shibano, K., Kawahito, Y., &amp; Shioda, S. (2008, July 1). Singlet oxygen scavenging activity and cytotoxicity of essential oils from  Rutaceae .  Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and Nutrition ,  43 (1), 6–12.  Bogdan, C., Iurian, S., Tomuta, I., &amp; Moldovan, M. (2017, February 24). Improvement of skin condition in striae distensae: Development, characterization and clinical efficacy of a cosmetic product containing  Punica granatum  seed oil and  Croton lechleri  resin extract.  Drug Design, Development and Therapy ,  11 , 521–531.  Bogdan, C., Moldovan, M. L., Man, I. M., &amp; Crișan, M. (2016, September 6). Preliminary study on the development of an antistretch marks water-in-oil cream: Ultrasound assessment, texture analysis, and sensory analysis.  Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology ,  9 , 249–255.  Boucetta, K. Q., Charrouf, Z., Aguenaou, H., Derouiche, A., &amp; Bensouda, Y. (2015, January 30). The effect of dietary and/or cosmetic argan oil on postmenopausal skin elasticity.  Clinical Interventions in Aging ,  10 , 339–349.  García Hernández, J. Á., Madera González, D., Padilla Castillo, M., &amp; Figueras Falcón, T. (2013, June). Use of a specific anti-stretch mark cream for preventing or reducing the severity of striae gravidarum. Randomized, double-blind, controlled trial [Abstract].  International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,  35 (3), 233–237.  Guan, Y. M., Tao, L., Zhu, X. F., Zang, Z. Z., Jin, C., &amp; Chen, L. H. (2017, September 1). [Effects of Frankincense and Myrrh essential oil on transdermal absorption of ferulic acid in Chuanxiong] [Abstract].  China Journal of Chinese Materia Medica ,  42 (17), 3350–3355.  Kong, S.-Z., Shi, X.-G., Feng, X.-X., Li, W.-J., Liu, W.-H., Chen, Z.-W., ... Su, Z.-R. (2013, October 18). Inhibitory effect of hydroxysafflor yellow A on mouse skin photoaging induced by ultraviolet irradiation [Abstract].  Rejuvenation Research ,  16 (5), 404–413.  Korgavkar, K., &amp; Wang, F. (2015, March). Stretch marks during pregnancy: A review of topical prevention [Abstract].  British Journal of Dermatology ,  172 (3), 606–615.  Morgenstern, K. (2006, December). Frankincense.  Mori, H.-M., Kawanami, H., Kawahata, H., &amp; Aoki, M. (2016, May 26). Wound healing potential of lavender oil by acceleration of granulation and wound contraction through induction of TGF-β in a rat model.  BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  16 , 144.  Suryawanshi, J. A. S. (2011, July). An overview of  Citrus aurantium  used in treatment of various diseases.  African Journal of Plant Science ,  5 (7), 390–395.  Taşhan, S. T., &amp; Kafkasli, A. (2012, May 17). The effect of bitter almond oil and massaging on striae gravidarum in primiparaous women [Abstract].  Journal of Clinical Nursing ,  21 (11–12), 1570–1576.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What essential oils are good for preventing stretch marks?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321595.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 24). "What essential oils are good for preventing stretch marks?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  