 In this article, we look at how  estrogen  and  menopause  affect the skin, and whether rashes are related to these hormonal changes.  Estrogen plays a vital role in keeping the skin young, elastic, and healthy. Estrogen helps the skin by:  While decreasing estrogen levels do have an impact on a person's skin, there are many other factors involved in skin health. These factors can include:  Skin changes that may occur during menopause include:  There is no evidence to suggest that menopause is linked to a specific type of rash. However, as a woman approaches menopause, the body becomes significantly more sensitive to changes in temperature, particularly heat.  During and before menopause, a woman may suddenly feel hot and sweaty, causing her face to become flushed or red. These are known as hot flashes, and they can be mild or severe enough to interfere with daily life.  Decreased estrogen levels can cause the skin to become itchy, sensitive, or irritated. Women may also notice that they are more sensitive to itchy fabrics, soaps, or beauty products. Scratching at itchy skin can cause  hives  and rashes.  A woman who has a rash should consider switching to natural or fragrance-free products to reduce irritation and  inflammation . If rashes become especially problematic, she should see a dermatologist for further advice.  The decline in estrogen and other hormones can cause changes in a woman's hair, causing it to thin or fall out.  During menopause, women may also notice that hair begins to grow on their face where it had not previously grown. This can include under the chin, along the jawline, or on the upper lip.  Women have many options for dealing with unwanted facial hair. Waxing and shaving are easy at-home options. A dermatologist can provide other options, such as laser treatment or hair removal cream.  As estrogen levels fall, it can cause the skin to get thinner and more delicate, meaning it is more easily damaged. Thinning skin can even lead to more frequent and noticeable bruising.  It is essential to use an SPF 30 sunscreen every day, even when not spending a lot of time in the sun. While sunscreen cannot treat thinning skin, it can prevent it from getting worse.  A woman should see her dermatologist if thin skin presents a serious problem with tearing or injury. The doctor may be able to suggest medical treatments that can help manage the problem.  In addition to thinning skin, women in perimenopause or menopause are more likely to have issues with dry or flaky skin.  This is because estrogen helps the skin to hold on to water, keeping it soft and moist. Without estrogen, the skin is prone to drying out.  To prevent dry skin, people can use a gentler cleanser, as traditional soaps can be particularly drying for older women. Moisturizing right after showering or bathing is best.  People should avoid using exfoliants or other strong products because they can be particularly damaging to delicate or dry skin.  Age spots are a common complaint of menopausal women. This is usually a sign of sun damage that has occurred throughout a woman's lifetime.  Wearing sunscreen consistently and from an early age is the best way to prevent age spots and skin cancer developing later in life.  Some types of skin cancer can look like an age spot, so it is essential to see a dermatologist regularly. The risk of skin cancer increases with age and sun exposure.  Skin changes are a common complaint among women during or approaching menopause.  While these issues are the result of normal hormonal changes, there are a few things that women can do to help prevent them from happening or getting worse. Simple steps include:  While there is no evidence that menopause can cause a rash, it is common for women to experience reddening and irritation of the skin during a hot flash. This is usually short-lived and will resolve once the hot flash goes away.  Avoiding skin irritants, applying sunscreen daily, and seeing a dermatologist can help women manage or prevent some of the other skin conditions associated with menopause.    
 Caring for your skin in menopause. (n.d.).  Caring for your skin in menopause. (n.d.).  Menopause. (n.d.).  Menopause FAQs: Understanding the symptoms. (n.d.).  Stevenson, S. and Thornton, J. (2007, September). Effect of estrogens on skin aging and the potential role of SERMs [Abstract].  Clinical Interventions in Aging ,  2 (3), 283–297.  Utian, W. H. (n.d.). Physical changes related to menopause.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "Does menopause cause rashes?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321526.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, April 17). "Does menopause cause rashes?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  