 An ingrown eyelash can touch the eyeball, irritating the eyeball or surrounding skin. This may lead to pain, redness, watery eyes, and damage to the cornea. Trichiasis can be caused by injury,  inflammation , and some eye conditions.  Like other ingrown hairs, eyelashes can also become trapped under the skin and grow inward. This can cause symptoms similar to those of eye disorders, such as styes, which usually result from bacterial infection. It is important to identify and treat the problem correctly.  In this article, we look at the causes, symptoms, and treatments of an ingrown eyelash.  Most ingrown hairs become trapped under the skin, creating a painful bump. The sheath of cells surrounding the hair, called the hair follicle, may become infected. This can all be especially painful when an eyelash is involved.  Trichiasis is slightly different. The eyelash grows outside the skin, but in the wrong direction. Eyelashes on the upper eyelid usually grow upward toward the forehead, allowing them to catch debris and protect the eye. Trichiasis causes these eyelashes to curl down and inward, toward the eye.  On the lower eyelid, where eyelashes typically grow downward, trichiasis causes them to grow upward toward the eye.  Trichiasis can even cause the lashes to touch the eye, causing irritation. A person may feel like there is something in the eye.  Trichiasis is more common in adults than children, but it can occur in anyone.  An eyelash trapped under the skin can easily be mistaken for an infected gland in the eyelid, called a stye. A stye looks like a  pimple  or red lump. It usually drains on its own after several days. If the pain is intense or the stye does not go away,  antibiotics  can treat the infection.  However, a person can easily distinguish a stye from trichiasis, which is characterized by a reversal of eyelash direction.  Trichiasis can occur in a few eyelashes, but it can gradually affect many or all of the eyelashes.  Most people with trichiasis notice a specific area in which many or all of the lashes are growing in the wrong direction.  Changes in eyelash growth can irritate the eye and lead to other symptoms, such as:  If left untreated, trichiasis can injure the eye, for example by scratching the cornea and exposing the area to infection.  When another eye condition is causing trichiasis, there may be additional symptoms. A condition that often occurs with trichiasis is called  blepharitis . This involves inflammation of the eyelid margin, and a person with blepharitis may notice that the skin on their eyelid peels, turns red, collects mucus or is unusually sensitive.  While trichiasis may have no obvious cause, common causes include:  In  rare cases , chronic illnesses that affect the eyelids or mucous membranes, such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome, cause trichiasis.  When just a few eyelashes are misshapen or ingrown, a doctor will usually remove them. They may regrow in the right direction. It is also important to treat the underlying cause.  When many eyelashes are ingrown, or when eyelashes regrow in the wrong direction, the following treatments can help:   Permanent hair removal   An ingrown eyelash can be removed using electrolysis. A doctor will damage the follicle with an electric current to prevent the hair from re-growing. Several sessions may be necessary.  Laser hair removal is an alternative, and a  2015 study  compared its effectiveness to that of electrolysis. Laser hair removal had a first-time success rate of 81 percent, with just 19 percent of targeted lashes regrowing. The first-time success rate of electrolysis was 49 percent, with 63 percent of the lashes regrowing.   Cryosurgery   This procedure is designed to freeze off the affected lashes and their follicles.   Repositioning surgery   A doctor can surgically reposition an eyelid or eyelashes. A  2015 review  of the various treatment techniques for trichiasis suggested that surgery was most effective for people with trachoma.  Trichiasis can cause:  When the eye infection trachoma causes trichiasis, it can  lead to blindness .  Anyone who suspects that they have an ingrown eyelash should see an eye doctor. If there is an underlying cause, identifying it can prevent further damage.  Trichiasis can be annoying and painful. Though it sometimes clears on its own, many people try several treatments before finding one that works.  A doctor specializing in eye and eyelid conditions can help to diagnose the cause, discuss the most effective treatment options, and suggest prevention strategies. A person who suspects that they have an ingrown eyelash should see an ophthalmologist or optometrist.    
 Balantrapu, T. V., &amp; Hoare, P. J. (2014, August 7). The International Agency for the Prevention of Blindness (IAPB) launches essential equipment list for screening and surgery for trachomatous trichiasis [Abstract].  Ophthalmic Epidemiology ,  22 (3), 151–152.  Balantrapu, T. V., &amp; Hoare, P. J. (2014, August 7). The International Agency for the Prevention of Blindness (IAPB) launches essential equipment list for screening and surgery for trachomatous trichiasis [Abstract].  Ophthalmic Epidemiology ,  22 (3), 151–152.  Boyd, K. (2012, November 8). What is trichiasis?  Burton, M., Habtamu, E., Ho, D., &amp; Gower, E. W. (2015, November 13). Interventions for trachoma trichiasis.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  2015 .  Chen, X., Wen, L.-H., Zhan, L., &amp; Wang, J. (2015, January 1). Contrastive study of laser ablation and electrolysis treatment in trichiasis [Abstract].  Guoji Yanke Zazhi ,  15 (9), 1666–1667.  Coats, D. K. (2013, March 13). Treatment for ingrown eyelash (trichiasis).  Garrity, J. (2018, January). Blepharitis.  Garrity, J. (2018, January). Chalazion and hordeolum (stye).  Garrity, J. W. (2018, January). Entropion and ectropion.  Garrity, J. (2018, January). Trichiasis.  Levinbrook, W. S. (2018, March). Pseudofolliculitis  barbae .  Rajak, S. N., Habtamu, E., Weiss, H. A., Kello, A. B., Abera, B., Zerihun, M., … Burton, M., J. (2013, August 22). The outcome of trachomatous trichiasis surgery in Ethiopia: Risk factors for recurrence.  PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases ,  7 (8), 2392.  Trichiasis. (2016, October).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Why is my eyelash growing in the wrong direction?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321570.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, April 21). "Why is my eyelash growing in the wrong direction?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  