 According to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  in the United States, the number of underweight adults aged 20 to 39 years in the country decreased from 3 percent to 1.9 percent between 1988 and 2008.  A person who is underweight is likely to experience health issues, including:  While gaining weight can be a struggle, the following foods may help. They can also increase muscle and boost overall health.  The following nutrient-rich foods can help a person to gain weight safely and effectively.   1. Milk   Milk offers a mix of fat,  carbohydrates , and proteins.  It is also an excellent source of  vitamins  and minerals, including  calcium .  The protein content of milk makes it a good choice for people trying to build muscle.  One  study  found that after a resistance training workout, drinking skim milk helped to build muscle more effectively than a soy-based product.  A similar  study  involving women in resistance training showed improved results in those who drank milk following a workout.  For anyone looking to gain weight, milk can be added to the diet throughout the day.   2. Protein shakes   Protein shakes can help a person to gain weight easily and efficiently. A shake is most effective at helping to build muscle if drunk shortly after a workout.  However, it is important to note that premade shakes often contain extra sugar and other additives that should be avoided. Check labels carefully.  A range of protein shakes is available for purchase in health food stores and  online .   3. Rice   A cup of rice contains about  200 calories , and it is also a good source of carbohydrates, which contribute to weight gain. Many people find it easy to incorporate rice into meals containing proteins and vegetables.   4. Red meat   Consuming red meat has been shown to help with building muscle and gaining weight.  Steak contains both leucine and creatine, nutrients that play a significant role in boosting muscle mass. Steak and other red meats contain both protein and fat, which promote weight gain.  While a person is advised to limit their intake, leaner cuts of red meat are healthier for the heart than fattier cuts.  One  study  found that adding lean red meat to the diets of 100 women aged 60–90 helped them to gain weight and increase strength by 18 percent while undergoing resistance training.   5. Nuts and nut butter   Consuming nuts regularly can help a person to gain weight safely. Nuts are a great snack and can be added to many meals, including salads. Raw or dry roasted nuts have the most health benefits.  Nut butters made without added sugar or hydrogenated oils can also help. The only ingredient in these butters should be the nuts themselves.  A range of nut butters is available for  purchase online .   6. Whole-grain breads   These breads contain complex carbohydrates, which can promote weight gain. Some also contain seeds, which provide added benefits.   7. Other starches   Starches help some of the foods already listed to boost muscle growth and weight gain. They add bulk to meals and boost the number of  calories  consumed.  Other foods rich in starches include:  Beyond adding calories, starches provide energy in the form of glucose. Glucose is stored in the body as glycogen.  Research  indicates that glycogen can improve performance and energy during exercise.

   8. Protein supplements   Athletes looking to gain weight often use protein supplements to boost muscle mass, in combination with resistance training.  Protein supplements are  available for purchase online . They may be an inexpensive way to consume more calories and gain weight.   9. Salmon   Six ounces of salmon will contain about  240 calories , and salmon is also rich in healthy fats, making it a good choice for those looking to gain weight.  It also contains many nutrients, including  omega-3  and protein.   10. Dried fruits   Dried fruits are rich in nutrients and calories, with one-quarter cup of dried cranberries containing around  130 calories .  Many people prefer dried pineapple, cherries, or apples. Dried fruit is widely available  online , or a person can dry fresh fruit at home.   11. Avocados   Avocados are rich in calories and fat, as well as some vitamins and minerals.   12. Dark chocolate   Dark chocolate is a high fat, high-calorie food. It also contains  antioxidants .  A person looking to gain weight should select chocolate that has a cacao content of at least 70 percent. A range of dark chocolate is available for  purchase online .   13. Cereal bars   Cereal bars can offer the vitamin and mineral content of cereal in a more convenient form.  A person should look for bars that contain whole grains, nuts, and fruits.  Avoid those that contain excessive amounts of sugar. A range of low-sugar cereal bars are available for  purchase online .   14. Whole-grain cereals   Many cereals are fortified with vitamins and minerals.  However, some contain a lot of sugar and few complex carbohydrates. These should be avoided.  Instead, select cereals that contain whole grains and nuts. These contain healthy levels of carbohydrates and calories, as well as nutrients such as fiber and antioxidants.   15. Eggs   Eggs are a good source of protein, healthy fat, and other nutrients. Most nutrients are contained in the yolk.   16. Fats and oils   Oils, such as those derived from olives and avocados, contribute calories and heart-healthy unsaturated fats. A tablespoon of olive oil will contain about  120 calories .   17. Cheese   Cheese is good source of fat, protein, calcium, and calories. A person looking to gain weight should select full-fat cheeses.   18. Yogurt   Full-fat yogurt can also provide protein and nutrients. Avoid flavored yogurts and those with lower fat contents, as they often contain added sugars.  A person may wish to flavor their yogurt with fruit or nuts.   19. Pasta   Pasta can provide a calorically dense and carbohydrate-rich path to healthy weight gain.  Avoid bleached pastas, and opt for those made with whole grains.  The foods above can help a person to increase their calorie intake in a healthy way. This will help a person to gain weight safely and efficiently.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Basic Report:  15076, Fish, salmon, Atlantic, wild, raw. (n.d.).  Basic Report:  15076, Fish, salmon, Atlantic, wild, raw. (n.d.).  Basic Report:  20041, Rice, brown, medium-grain, cooked (Includes foods for USDA's Food Distribution Program). (n.d.).  Buford, T. W., Kreider, R. B., Stout, J. R., Greenwood, M., Campbell, B., Spano, M., ... &amp; Antonio, J. (2007, August 30). International Society of Sports Nutrition position stand: Creatine supplementation and exercise.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  4 (1), 6.  Coyle, E. F. (1991). Timing and method of increased carbohydrate intake to cope with heavy training, competition and recovery [Abstract].  Journal of Sports Sciences ,  9 , 29–52.  Daly, R. M., O’Connell, S. L., Mundell, N. L., Grimes, C. A., Dunstan, D. W., &amp; Nowson, C. A. (2014, April). Protein-enriched diet, with the use of lean red meat, combined with progressive resistance training enhances lean tissue mass and muscle strength and reduces circulating IL-6 concentrations in elderly women: A cluster randomized controlled trial.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  99 (4), 899–910.  Full Report (All Nutrients):  45062021, Dried cranberries, UPC: 031200002938 (2017, March 22)   Full Report (All Nutrients):  45239582, O olive oil, olive oil, UPC: 634039000221. (2018, March 11).  Fryar, C. D., &amp; Ogden, C. L. (2012, September 11). Prevalence of underweight among adults aged 20 years and over: United States, 1960–1962 Through 2007–2010.  How much meat can you eat. (2015, December).  Josse, A. R., Tang, J. E., Tarnopolsky, M. A., &amp; Phillips, S. M. (2010, June). Body composition and strength changes in women with milk and resistance exercise.  Medicine &amp; Science in Sports &amp; Exercise ,  42 (6), 1122–1130.  Norton, L. E., &amp; Layman, D. K. (2006, February 1). Leucine regulates translation initiation of protein synthesis in skeletal muscle after exercise.  The Journal of Nutrition ,  136 (2).  Obesity and overweight. (2017, May 3).  Roy, B. D. (2008, October 2). Milk: the new sports drink? a review.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  5 (1), 15.  Vinson, J. A., Zubik, L., Bose, P., Samman, N., &amp; Proch, J. (2005, February). Dried fruits: Excellent in vitro and in vivo antioxidants [Abstract].  Journal of the American College of Nutrition ,  24 (1), 44–50.  Wilkinson, S. B., Tarnopolsky, M. A., MacDonald, M. J., MacDonald, J. R., Armstrong, D., &amp; Phillips, S. M. (2007, April 1). Consumption of fluid skim milk promotes greater muscle protein accretion after resistance exercise than does consumption of an isonitrogenous and isoenergetic soy-protein beverage.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  85 (4), 1031–1040.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "How do you gain weight quickly and safely?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321518.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, April 17). "How do you gain weight quickly and safely?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  