 Also, while  some women  have  eczema  before getting pregnant, others are newly diagnosed during pregnancy.  Eczema is an umbrella term for several skin conditions that cause redness, itchiness, and  inflammation . People of all ages can get eczema, from infants to older adults.  While the symptoms can be painful and uncomfortable, eczema is not dangerous to the baby, and it is not contagious.  Pregnancy effects eczema differently from person to person. While around  25 percent  of women will see an improvement in their symptoms, more than 50 percent will notice that their symptoms become worse.  Even if eczema improves during pregnancy, some women find that their eczema flares up again after childbirth.  Eczema is very common during pregnancy, but it is still important or a person to mention symptoms to the doctor. Sometimes, the itching and skin discomfort can be similar to other, more serious conditions.  The symptoms of eczema can include:  Some women have all of these symptoms, while others may have only a few. Also, the symptoms can vary in severity.  Some women have severe symptoms that prevent them from doing some everyday activities, while others find that their symptoms are very mild and not bothersome.  Treating eczema during pregnancy can be challenging because many of the medications can harm the developing fetus.  There are several safe options, however, including:  When these treatments are not effective, there are other options, including:  Before starting any of these medications, it is important to have a detailed discussion with a doctor about the risks and benefits of taking them during pregnancy.  Some medicine should be completely avoided by pregnant women, including methotrexate, psoralens plus UVA (PUVA), and Toctino (alitretinoin).  If a woman already has eczema and becomes pregnant, it is important for her to speak with a doctor about the medication she is taking as soon as possible.  Home remedies can be very effective in managing some of the discomforts associated with eczema.  Some home remedies a person can try include:  Some women choose to use natural remedies to control their symptoms, including:  Eczema does not affect fertility, but some of the medications for the condition may be dangerous during pregnancy.  Doctors may even recommend stopping certain eczema medications if a woman is trying to get pregnant.  These drugs include:  For some women, eczema flare-ups continue after childbirth. Other women develop eczema on or around the breast and nipple, particularly if the woman is breast-feeding.  Moisturizers and mild to moderate steroids are usually used to treat the symptoms. It is important to wash off the medicine before the baby has its next feeding.  Though uncomfortable, eczema during pregnancy is not dangerous for either mom or her baby.  There are many treatment options, but it is essential for pregnant women or those trying to conceive to speak to a doctor about which options are safe.    
 Lawton, S. (n.d.). Pregnancy and eczema.  Lawton, S. (n.d.). Pregnancy and eczema.  Natural and alternative treatments for eczema. (n.d.).  Weatherhead, S., Robson, S. C., &amp; Reynolds, N. J. (2007, July 21). Eczema in pregnancy.  British Medical Journal ,  335 (7611), 152–154.  What is eczema? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "Eczema during pregnancy: What to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321580.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, April 23). "Eczema during pregnancy: What to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  