  Carbohydrates  or carbs are one of three main food types that the body needs to work properly. The other two are protein and fat. Carbs give the body energy. The body breaks carbs down to use immediately or later.  If the body does not need to use the carbs for energy as soon as a person eats them, it stores them in the muscles and liver to use later. However, if the body does not use these stored carbs, the body converts them to fat.  Many people follow low-carb diets on the basis that if the body does not receive extra carbohydrates, it will not store excess fat.  The idea, then, is that the body will burn some of the stored fat rather than the carbs, which will promote fat loss.  Research from 2003 in the  New England Journal of Medicine  found that people who followed a low-carb diet lost more weight than those on a low-fat diet after 6 months, but not after 12 months.  The study noted that "longer and larger studies are required to determine the long-term safety and efficacy of low-carbohydrate, high-protein, high-fat diets."  Many people find following a low-carb diet challenging, particularly at the beginning of the diet. The following low-carb diet tips might help people stick to their diet and may help them lose weight successfully.  Low-carb foods include:  Most low carb diets only allow for 20 to 50 grams (g) of carbohydrates per day. Because of this, it is essential that people following low-carb diets choose foods that have a lower carb count but a high nutritional value per serving.  The foods in the quantities listed below all contain approximately  15 g  of carbs:  While the foods listed above all contain roughly equal amounts of carbohydrates, they are not all nutritionally equivalent. The dairy products on the list contain protein and vital nutrients, such as  Vitamin D  and  calcium  in addition to the carbohydrate content.  The fruit and vegetables also contain essential  vitamins  and minerals. Choosing whole-grain varieties of bread and rice will provide more nutrients than white varieties, even though the carb content is similar.  A meal plan can help make things easier.  Anyone trying to follow a low-carb diet could try mapping out their week and plan all meals before heading to the grocery store.  Planning meals in advance can help people stick to the diet.  Knowing what they are going to eat for lunch and dinner can help a person avoid making unhealthful food choices, such as stopping at a fast food restaurant.  Planning is one thing, but preparing meals ahead of time can also help. Meal prep can help a person:  Some people like to prepare a week's worth of breakfasts and lunches ahead of time and store the meals in containers, so they are convenient and ready to go. It is possible to freeze some meals too, meaning people can prepare even more food in advance.  Having lots of pre-prepared meals on hand can help people avoid choosing less healthful options.  Popular low-carb meals to prepare in advance include:  Low-carb snack options for between meals include:  It is essential to regulate portion size of any snacks to avoid overeating.  Carb cycling involves eating very low-carb foods for a set amount of days, followed by one day of eating higher carb meals. This helps the body avoid fat-burning plateaus that can develop after weeks of low-carb dieting.  Carb cycling is not for everyone, and anyone considering it should talk to their doctor or nutritionist first.  Carbs come in different forms.  Simple carbs consist of easy to digest sugars. Refined and processed carbs, such as white sugar and white flour, are simple carbs.  People who are starting on a low-carb diet need to think about reducing their intake of refined and processed carbs. Avoiding these carbs will be beneficial for reaching an  ideal weight  and for health in general.  However, not all simple carbs are created equal. Fruits include fructose, which is a simple carb, but eating fruit is recommended in a low-carb diet, as it is loaded with nutrients and is a whole-food source of carbs.  Complex carbs take longer to digest than simple carbs, as they need to be broken down into a simpler form. Complex carbs are found in more nutrient-rich foods, such as beans, whole-grains, and fiber-rich fruits, such as bananas.  Complex carbs also have the added benefit of making a person feel full faster, which might prevent them from overeating. Complex carbs also make people feel full for longer, which might help them avoid snacking between meals.  Substituting high-carb foods for low-carb or no-carb foods can help reduce carb intake.  Some low-carb substitutions include:  Exercise is an important part of overall health. People should avoid a sedentary lifestyle but refrain from excessive exercising.  The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  recommend that adults do moderate exercise for 150 minutes a week for a minimum 10 minutes at a time for moderate health benefits. For optimal health benefits, the CDC recommend 300 minutes of exercise. The CDC also suggest that people lift weights or do other strength training exercises to improve overall health.  Those on low-carb diets may want to avoid long periods of intense activity such as distance running. This is because people who are doing a form of exercise that requires extra endurance, such as marathon training, will need extra carbohydrates to fuel their bodies.  People should know about potential health risks before starting a low-carb diet.  Short-term health risks caused by a low-carb diet may include:  Long-term health risks caused by a low-carb diet may include:  Some people should not follow a low-carb diet unless instructed to do so by a doctor. These groups of people include those with kidney disease and teenagers.  Not everyone will benefit from, or should even consider, a low-carb diet. Anyone thinking about doing a low-carb diet should speak with a doctor before starting.  A low-carb diet can have some benefits, including weight loss. With some planning and appropriate substitutions, most people can follow a low-carb diet. However, a low-carb diet may not be the best way to achieve long-term or  sustainable health goals .  When following a low-carb diet, it is essential that people eat healthfully and do not overeat certain foods, such as very fatty meats.  People looking to lose weight or considering going on a low-carb diet should speak to their doctor or nutritionist before making any significant changes.    
 Basic carbohydrate counting. (2013, July).  Basic carbohydrate counting. (2013, July).  Campos, M. (2017, July 27).  Carbohydrate counting &amp; diabetes. (2014, June).  Converting carbohydrates to triglycerides. (n.d.).  Current physical activity guidelines. (2016, November 29).  Diabetes: Carbohydrate food list. (2012, April).  Foster, G. D., Wyatt, H. R., Hill, J. O., McGuckin, B. G., Brill, C., Mohammed, B. S., ... Klein, S. (2003, May 22). A randomized trial of a low-carbohydrate diet for obesity.  New England Journal of Medicine ,  348 (21), 2082–2090.  Krebs, N. F., Gao, D., Gralla, J., Collins, J. S., &amp; Johnson, S. L. (2010, August). Efficacy and safety of a high protein, low carbohydrate diet for weight loss in severely obese adolescents.  The Journal of Pediatrics ,  157 (2), 252–258.  McClernon, F. J., Yancy Jr, W. S., Eberstein, J. A., Atkins, R. C., &amp; Westman, E. C. (2012, September 12). The effects of a low-carbohydrate ketogenic diet and a low-fat diet on mood, hunger, and other self-reported symptoms.  Obesity ,  15 (1), 182.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What can you eat on a low-carb diet?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321545.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, April 19). "What can you eat on a low-carb diet?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  