 Lifestyle factors can cause heart palpitations. Less frequently, an underlying medical condition is responsible. Palpitations can result from the following conditions, and they require a doctor's care:  The following methods can help to reduce palpitations.   Stress  can have many ill effects on a person's health. It can induce palpitations or make them worse.  It may help to try the following relaxation techniques:  Symptoms may become noticeable after using a stimulant.  The following contain stimulants:  Not all stimulants will cause palpitations in everyone.  The vagus nerve connects the brain to the heart, and stimulating it can help to calm palpitations. A person can do so by:  Before trying this method consult a doctor, who can advise on the best technique.  Electrolytes are molecules found throughout the body that help to transfer electrical signals. These signals play a significant role in regulating the heart rate.  A person can boost the number of electrolytes in their body by eating foods rich in:  A normal diet usually provides a sufficient source of sodium.  The following foods have high potassium contents:  Dairy products and dark, leafy greens are rich in calcium. Magnesium is also found in these vegetables, as well as in nuts and fish.  It may be tempting to attain these nutrients by taking supplements. A person should consult a doctor before trying any supplements, particularly if they are also taking prescription medication.  When the body is dehydrated, the heart has to work harder to circulate blood, which can cause heart palpitations.  Drink plenty of water throughout the day. The recommended amount will vary, depending on age, sex, and whether a person is pregnant, according to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  (CDC).  A person should drink a full cup or glass of water when:  Alcohol is a depressant and does not typically raise the heartrate.  While drinking in moderation is not necessarily problematic, some  research  indicates that even one drink per day can increase the risk of developing atrial fibrillation. A palpitating heart is just one symptom of this condition.  Exercise can improve overall cardiovascular health and restore the heart's natural rhythm. It can also help to reduce stress and  anxiety .  Cardiovascular exercise helps to strengthen the heart, which can prevent or reduce palpitations.  Beneficial exercises include:  However, exercise may trigger palpitations in some people, and it is important to identify and avoid problematic exercises.  Consult a doctor before starting a new exercise routine.  See a doctor if heart palpitations tend to last longer than a few seconds.  A doctor can determine whether an underlying condition is causing the palpitations.  These conditions commonly include:  Other causes of heart palpitations include:  Some prescription medications can cause heart palpitations. Also, a person who has had a  heart attack  may be more likely to develop palpitations.  Treatment will depend on the cause. A doctor may recommend the following:  Heart palpitations are common, and they often last for a few seconds. The tips listed above can help to stop palpitations and reduce their occurrence.  Speak to a doctor if the sensation lasts for longer than a few seconds. This may indicate an underlying condition that requires treatment.    
 Get the facts: Drinking water and intake. (2017, May 12).  Get the facts: Drinking water and intake. (2017, May 12).  Kienzle, M. G., &amp; Guidici, M. C. (n.d.). Heart palpitations: Frequently asked questions.  Larsson, S. C., Drca, N., &amp; Wolk, A. (2014, July). Alcohol consumption and risk of atrial fibrillation: A prospective study and dose-response meta-analysis.  Journal of the American College of Cardiology ,  64 (3), 281–289.  Staying hydrated – staying healthy. (2015, June 25).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Ways to stop heart palpitations."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321541.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, April 19). "Ways to stop heart palpitations."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  