 It is normal for  blood pressure  to vary slightly throughout the day, but blood pressure that fluctuates from one extreme to the other should be monitored and managed.  Home remedies, lifestyle changes, and some medications can help to regulate blood pressure.  It is important to get it checked regularly because blood pressure can reveal a lot about a person's health.  Below are five factors that can cause dangerous fluctuations in blood pressure.  This term describes blood pressure that is higher at the doctor's office, often because the person is anxious about the appointment.  A  study  published in 2013 concluded that people with white coat  hypertension  should be monitored for  heart disease  risk factors, especially abnormal blood sugar levels.  White coat hypertension is not necessarily as concerning as blood pressure that is consistently high.  A 2016 meta-analysis published in the   Journal of Hypertension   found that people with white coat hypertension had a lower risk of heart disease and a better outlook than people with lasting hypertension.  Certain medications can temporarily reduce blood pressure. They include:  Strong emotions, particularly  stress  and  anxiety , can cause blood pressure to spike. This is the body's natural response to a stressful event, and the pressure will eventually return to normal as the person calms down.  However, long-term stress and untreated anxiety can have lasting, harmful effects on blood pressure and overall health.  Being in a warm room or taking a hot bath can temporarily lower blood pressure. This is usually not a cause for concern, as long as blood pressure does not dip too low.  Symptoms of dangerously low blood pressure include dizziness, nausea, and fainting.  Cocaine and methamphetamine can cause extreme spikes in blood pressure.  The factors below may increase the risk of dangerous swings in blood pressure:  First, a doctor will determine the underlying cause. They will ask about a person's history and discuss their lifestyle and current medications. The doctor may also order or conduct tests.  Medications can lower blood pressure and prevent dangerous fluctuations. A person may also be able to achieve this by making changes to their lifestyle.  By attending follow-up visits, a person can ensure that their blood pressure remains within normal limits and that medications are not causing unpleasant side effects.  The following actions can help to normalize blood pressure:  Consult a doctor for personalized guidance.  Regular fluctuations in blood pressure can increase the risk of:  A  study  from 2015 suggested that people with blood pressure that varied significantly between medical appointments were more likely to have a heart attack, a  stroke , or heart failure.  Research published in   The BMJ   indicated that high variability in blood pressure put a person at the same risk for cardiac problems as high  cholesterol .  A  study  from 2017 concluded that older adults with daily fluctuations in blood pressure were more likely to develop  dementia . This supports the findings of a  study  from 2016, which suggested a link between high variability in blood pressure and declines in cognitive ability and memory.  Healthy lifestyle choices, and in some cases medication, can resolve fluctuations in blood pressure.  Have blood pressure checked regularly, and seek treatment for any conditions that may affect it.  While fluctuations in blood pressure can be dangerous, medications and lifestyle changes can manage the situation.  After a doctor determines the cause of changing blood pressure, they will help to develop a treatment plan. A person should have their blood pressure checked regularly.  Follow the advice of doctors and take medicines as prescribed.    
 Briasoulis, A., Androulakis, E., Palla, M., Papageorgiou, N., &amp; Tousoulis, D. (2016, April). White-coat hypertension and cardiovascular events: A meta-analysis [Abstract].  Journal of Hypertension ,  34 (4), 593–599.  Briasoulis, A., Androulakis, E., Palla, M., Papageorgiou, N., &amp; Tousoulis, D. (2016, April). White-coat hypertension and cardiovascular events: A meta-analysis [Abstract].  Journal of Hypertension ,  34 (4), 593–599.  Getting active to control high blood pressure. (2018, January 10).  Health threats from high blood pressure. (2018, January 11).  Higher fluctuations in blood pressure linked to brain function decline. (2016, May 23).  Huang, Y., Huang, W., Mai, W., Cai, X., An, D., Liu, Z., ... &amp; Xu, D. (2017, April). White-coat hypertension is a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases and total mortality.  Journal of Hypertension ,  35 (4), 677–688.  Managing stress to control high blood pressure. (2018, January 29).  Martin, C. A., &amp; McGrath, B. P. (2013, May 18). White-coat hypertension.  Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology ,  41 (1), 22–29.  Muntner, P., Whittle, J., Lynch, A. I., Colantonio, L. D., Simpson, L. M., Einhorn, P. T., … &amp; Oparil, S. (2015, September 1). Visit-to-visit variability of blood pressure and coronary heart disease, stroke, heart failure and mortality: A cohort study.  Annals of Internal Medicine ,  163 (5), 329–338.  Oishi, E., Ohara, T., Sakata, S., Fukuhara, M., Hata, J., Yoshida, D., ... &amp; Ninomiya, T. (2017, August 7). Day-to-day blood pressure variability and risk of dementia in a general Japanese elderly population: The Hisayama Study.  Circulation ,  136 (6), 516–525.  Pickering, T. G., James, G. D., Boddie, C., Harshfield, G. A., Blank, S., &amp; Laragh, J. H. (1988). How common is white coat hypertension?  Jama ,  259 (2), 225–228.  Stevens, S. L., Wood, S., Koshiaris, C., Law, K., Glasziou, P., Stevens, R. J., &amp; McManus, R. J. (2016, August 9). Blood pressure variability and cardiovascular disease: systematic review and meta-analysis.  The BMJ ,  354 .  Understanding blood pressure readings. (2018, February 19).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "How can I stabilize my blood pressure?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321523.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, April 17). "How can I stabilize my blood pressure?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  