 Following a low-fiber diet (also called a low residue diet) reduces the amount of undigested food moving through the small intestine, which reduces stool size and frequency. This is particularly important for people with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) who are experiencing a flare-up.  People preparing for a colonoscopy may also need to follow a low-fiber diet, depending on their doctor's recommendations.  With careful planning, it is still possible to get all the essential nutrients from a variety of low-fiber foods.  In this article, we look at what foods to include and those to avoid when following a low-fiber diet.  Most adults need fiber-rich foods to keep their digestive system healthy. However, a high-fiber diet is unsuitable for some people who have specific conditions so a low-fiber diet may be a better option.  Conditions that may require a person to eat a low-fiber diet include:  A low-fiber diet can reduce the risk of the bowel becoming obstructed, or if the bowel is obstructed, it can reduce symptoms such as bloating or pain.  Foods to avoid on a low-fiber diet:  Proper  nutrition  is crucial for the best management of IBD and other conditions that affect the bowel.  Some people only follow a low-fiber diet for  short periods , while others may use it as a long-term strategy. Even if just following the diet for a for a short time, it is still important to try and eat a variety of foods.  The following foods may be included as part of a low-fiber diet, depending on individual symptoms and tolerance:  Meal options for someone following the low-fiber diet include:   Breakfast:    Mid-morning snack:    Lunch:    Mid-afternoon snack:    Dinner:   When introducing new foods, add only one at a time. This will help a person identify foods that make their symptoms worse.  Read the labels on pre-prepared or packaged meals, as they may contain ingredients that trigger symptoms.  Avoid anything with bits in it, including yogurts, marmalade, mustard, popcorn, and crunchy peanut butter.  Here are some more useful tips for a low-fiber diet:  If eating or digestion continues to be difficult or painful, it is essential to speak to a doctor. People with IBD may need considerable support from a dietitian to manage the disease during times of relapse and remission.  While much research is conflicting on the best dietary approach to prevent or delay IBD relapse, there is some  evidence  that supports a semi-vegetarian diet and exclusion diets.  It is vital to eat a varied diet that contains all of the essential nutrients and enough  calories  to maintain energy levels.    
 A blocked bowel (bowel obstruction). (2017, June 8).  A blocked bowel (bowel obstruction). (2017, June 8).  Bowel obstruction. (2013). Available from  https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/medicine-and-dentistry/bowel-obstruction   Hou, J. K., Lee, D., &amp; Lewis, J. (2015, October, 1). Diet and inflammatory bowel disease: Review of patient-targeted recommendations.  Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology ,  12 (10), 1592–1600.  Inflammatory bowel disease. (2017, April 25).  Low fiber and low residue diets. (n.d.).  Low fibre diet. (2016)  Paulson, E. K., &amp; Thompson, W. M. (2015, May). Review of small bowel obstruction: The diagnosis and when to worry.  Radiology ,  275 (2), 332–342.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  RNutr, Jo Lewin. "What to eat and avoid on a low-fiber diet."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321548.php&gt;    APA  RNutr, J. (2018, April 20). "What to eat and avoid on a low-fiber diet."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  