 Long-term numbness or a tingling feeling in the legs and feet may be due to conditions such as  multiple sclerosis  (MS),  diabetes ,  peripheral artery disease , or  fibromyalgia . The sensation may be felt in the whole leg, below the knee, or in different areas of the foot.  In this article, we look at some of the reasons why a person might experience numbness in the legs and feet, along with symptoms and treatments.  Often, a person's legs go numb temporarily because of their posture. However, chronic or long-lasting numbness in the feet and legs is almost always a sign of an underlying medical condition.  Conditions associated with feet and leg numbness include:   Posture   Postural habits that put pressure on nerves or reduce blood flow in the lower limbs are the most common cause of temporary numbness in the legs and feet. Many people say their leg has "fallen asleep," and the medical term is transient (temporary) paresthesia.  Habits that can cause the feet and legs to fall asleep include:   Injury    Injuries to the torso, spine, hips, legs, ankles, and feet can put pressure on nerves and cause the feet and legs to go numb.   Diabetes   Some people with diabetes develop a type of nerve damage called  diabetic neuropathy . Diabetic neuropathy can cause numbness, tingling, and pain in the feet, and if severe, the legs as well.   Lower back issues and sciatica   Problems in the lower back, such as a breakdown or herniation of spinal discs, can cause compression of the nerves going to the legs, leading to numbness or sensory disturbances.   Sciatica  is the name for irritation of the sciatic nerve, which runs from the lower back to the legs. If this nerve becomes irritated or compressed, a person may experience numbness or tingling in their legs or feet.   Tarsal tunnel syndrome   Tarsal tunnel syndrome occurs when a nerve that runs down the back of the leg and along the inside of the ankle and into the foot is compressed, squeezed, or damaged.  The tarsal tunnel is a narrow space on the inside of the ankle. People with tarsal tunnel syndrome tend to feel numbness, burning, tingling, and shooting pain in their ankles, heels, and feet.   Peripheral artery disease   Peripheral artery disease (PAD) causes the peripheral blood arteries in the legs, arms, and stomach to narrow, reducing the amount of blood they can pump and reducing blood flow. The legs are one of the most common parts of the body impacted by PAD.  Most people with PAD experience pain and cramping in their legs and hips when they are walking or going upstairs. Some people with PAD also experience leg numbness and weakness.  Symptoms of PAD typically go away after a few minutes of rest.   Tumors or other abnormal growths   Tumors,  cysts , abscesses, and benign (non-cancerous) growths can put pressure on the brain, spinal cord, or any part of the legs and feet. This pressure can restrict blood flow to the legs and feet, causing numbness.    Alcohol use   The toxins in alcohol can cause nerve damage that is associated with numbness, especially in the feet.  Chronic or excessive alcohol consumption can also lead to nerve damage that causes numbness. This type of nerve damage is linked to reduced levels of B  vitamins , such as B-1 (thiamine), B-9 ( folate ), and B-12, which is caused by excessive alcohol intake.   Fibromyalgia   Fibromyalgia is a chronic or long-lasting condition that causes widespread body pain, aching, and tenderness. Some people with fibromyalgia also experience numbness and tingling in the hands and feet.  Most people with fibromyalgia experience a variety of symptoms including:  Almost everyone with fibromyalgia experiences symptoms in more than one part of their body for at least 3 months at a time. If numbness in the legs and feet is not accompanied by any other symptoms or is not long-term, it is unlikely to be caused by fibromyalgia.   Multiple sclerosis    People with multiple sclerosis (MS) experience sensory nerve damage that can cause numbness in a small region of their body or whole limbs. Although numbness associated with MS often only lasts for a short period, it can last long enough to become disabling.   Stokes and mini-strokes    Strokes  or mini-strokes can cause brain damage that may affect how the mind interprets and processes nerve signals. A stroke or  mini-stroke  can sometimes cause temporary or long-term numbness in parts of the body.  Numbness is just one of the many symptoms associated with temporary and chronic numbness.  Many people with numbness in their legs and feet experience additional symptoms at the same time or intermittingly, such as:  The proper treatment for numb legs and feet depends entirely on the cause.  Medical options for long-term numbness in the legs and feet include:  Home remedies that may help to relieve uncomfortable numbness in the legs and feet include:  Some alternative therapies have been shown to help reduce the symptoms of conditions known to cause numbness in the legs and feet. Therapies include:  Talk with a doctor about numbness in the legs and feet that:  Numbness in the legs and feet is a common disorder, though when it becomes chronic, it may be a sign of an underlying medical condition.  Anyone who experiences numbness that is unexplained, persistent, frequent, painful, disabling, or accompanied by other chronic symptoms should see a doctor for a diagnosis and to discuss treatment options.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 About peripheral artery disease. (2016, October).  About peripheral artery disease. (2016, October).  Alcohol and peripheral neuropathy. (n.d.).  Falkowski, G. (2016, November). 13 points about the pesky skin condition paresthesia.  Fibromyalgia: Symptoms. (2014, July 30).  Paresthesia information page. (2017, May 24).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Why are my legs and feet numb?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321560.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, April 21). "Why are my legs and feet numb?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  