 Each type of pink eye takes a different length of time to clear up.  Pink eye caused by bacteria will take about 24–48 hours before symptoms improve once a person is on  antibiotics .  Pink eye caused by a virus takes anywhere from a few days to more than a week to resolve.  Pink eye that results from an allergy will normally clear as the other allergy symptoms lessen.  Allergic, viral, and bacterial are the three main types of pink eye:  Common allergens that can cause pink eye include:  Pink eye is not contagious when it is caused by allergies.  Viruses responsible for pink eye include:  People can get viral pink eye from an infection that spreads from the nose to the eyes. It can also be transmitted via droplets from a cough or sneeze that land directly on the eye.  Viral pink eye can stem from an upper respiratory infection or cold.  Viral pink eye can last a few days to about 2 weeks, depending on the severity of the infection.  Common causes of bacterial pink eye spreading from one person to another include:  A bacterial pink eye infection can last about 10 days without treatment. However, bacterial pink eye should resolve in a few days with treatment.  If pink eye does not improve quickly with antibiotic drops, it is likely to be viral rather than bacterial pink eye.  When pink eye symptoms are still present, a person is considered to be contagious.  This is true in all cases except when pink eye is caused by allergies, which is very common.  Seven signs someone is still contagious are:  A daycare, school, or workplace will often request or require a person not to return until their symptoms have cleared.  Treatment for pink eye depends on the type and severity of the infection.  Mild cases can clear on their own with no medical intervention within a few days for both viral and bacterial pink eye. Allergic pink eye often clears as allergic reactions are controlled.  While pink eye heals, people may want to use the following:  People should also:  People should see a doctor in more severe cases. Medication may include:  A doctor may recommend some additional treatments to reduce the allergic reactions in cases of allergic pink eye.  The following are some of the more frequently asked questions about pink eye:  Yes, it may do.  It will often take a few days to about 2 weeks for mild infections. People who get pink eye frequently may want to discuss the issue with their doctor to see if there is an underlying reason.  People should not return to work or school until their symptoms clear completely. A person should talk to their doctor about when it is safe for them to return to normal activities.  A rough guide to when it is safe to return to work or school is:  Makeup and any products used on or near the eyes should be thrown away if:  It is better to buy new makeup than risk using tainted makeup that could spread an infection.  People are unlikely to want to wear their contact lenses when they have pink eye.  Disposable lenses worn either right before or during an infection should be thrown out. Hard lenses should be cleaned thoroughly before being used again.  People can also help prevent infections by using only sterile contact solution to store their contacts and cleaning their hands before inserting or removing them.  Parents should take a newborn baby to be seen by a doctor if the infant develops pink eye. Persistent, watery discharge may be due to a blocked tear duct, but the eye will not usually be red. A blocked tear duct will often clear up on its own.  In other cases in newborns, there may be a more serious infection that requires medical attention.  Avoiding pink eye can be tricky, as it is highly contagious. People should try to avoid close contact with anyone who has pink eye until their symptoms have cleared.  Everyone can take precautions, such as:  Though common and sometimes painful, pink eye is not often a major concern. People should avoid others until their symptoms clear, as it is very contagious when caused by an infection.  Most people are safe to go back to work, school, or daycare once symptoms have cleared. Treatment is often only required in severe cases, or when the infection does not clear on its own.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Antibiotics for pink eye. When you need them and when you don't. (2013, October).  Antibiotics for pink eye. When you need them and when you don't. (2013, October).  Conjunctivitis. (n.d.).  Conjunctivitis (pink eye): Prevention. (2017, October 2).  Conjunctivitis (pink eye): Symptoms. (2017, October 2).  Facts about pink eye. (2015, November).  Pink eye: Usually mild and easy to treat. (2018, March 19).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "How long are you contagious with pink eye?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321551.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, April 20). "How long are you contagious with pink eye?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  