 Treatments for a nervous stomach often include techniques to reduce  anxiety ,  stress , and tension.  In this article, learn about the causes, symptoms, and treatments of a nervous stomach, as well as how to prevent it happening again.  A nervous stomach can mirror the symptoms of some gastrointestinal (GI) disorders. These include conditions such as  irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS),  Crohn's disease , ulcerative colitis, or  gastroenteritis , which is a bacterial or viral-related stomach infection.  Symptoms associated with nervous stomach include:  Children also commonly experience symptoms of a nervous stomach. They may describe their symptoms differently than adults. They may refuse to go to school or frequently report stomach pain without presenting any other signs of an infection.  The GI system has its own nervous system called the enteric nervous system. Nerve endings in the stomach are designed to respond to stress hormones transmitted from the brain. This is part of the "fight-or-flight" response, which causes stress hormones to signal the stomach to slow down so that more blood can pump to the heart, lungs, and muscles.  People can experience high levels of stress on a regular basis, which can mimic those of a "fight-or-flight" response. Some stress-related triggers of a nervous stomach include:  A nervous stomach can give someone "butterflies" in their stomach, or even make a person feel as if they need to vomit.  Sometimes, people call irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) a nervous stomach. Other names for IBS include spastic colon or irritable colon.  However, a person can have a nervous stomach without having IBS. This is because IBS symptoms occur consistently for at least 3 months and often improve with dietary and lifestyle changes.  A doctor can begin to treat a nervous stomach by identifying the stress triggers in a person's life. Some of the potential triggers that a person might need to address to reduce their symptoms include school, job, work, family, or relationships.  Examples of treatments for nervous stomach include:  A doctor can also recommend specific treatments according to a person's individual health history.  A nervous stomach can cause symptoms that are similar to chronic GI disorders. If a person experiences these symptoms on a regular basis, a doctor may diagnose the person with IBS.  Treating any underlying stressors may help reduce the incidence of nervous stomach, alleviate symptoms, and improve a person's quality of life.    
 Cherry, R. (n.d.). Understanding the link between stress and stomach aches in children.  Cherry, R. (n.d.). Understanding the link between stress and stomach aches in children.  Ginger. (2016, November 30).  Holtmann, G., &amp; Talley, N. (2014, December). The stomach-brain axis.  Best Practice &amp; Research Clinical Gastroenterology ,  28 (6), 967–979.  Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). (n.d.).  Ly, H. G., Weltens, N., Tack, J., &amp; van Oudenhove, L. (2015, September). Acute anxiety and anxiety disorders are associated with impaired gastric accommodation in patients with functional dyspepsia.  Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology , 13 (9), 1584–1591.  Monje, M. (2017, January 9). Settling a nervous stomach: the neural regulation of enteric cancer [Abstract].  Cancer Cell ,  31 (1), 1–2.  Peppermint oil. (2016, December 1).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Causes and treatments for a nervous stomach."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321611.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, April 25). "Causes and treatments for a nervous stomach."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  