 The esophagus is the tube that connects the mouth and stomach. Normally, it uses a series of controlled, coordinated contractions to transport food from the mouth to the stomach.  Certain foods or underlying conditions can sometimes trigger abnormal esophageal spasms. These contractions may last only a few minutes or up to several hours.  In this article, we look at the causes of esophageal spasms and how to relieve symptoms using medication, natural remedies, and dietary changes.  Esophageal spasms are a fairly rare condition. They occur mainly in adults over age 60.  There are two main types of esophageal spasms:  A person with an esophageal spasm may experience the following signs and symptoms:  Esophageal spasms can be diagnosed using a special test where a person swallows barium to make the esophagus visible in an X-ray. Doctors may also use manometry, which uses a thin, specialized tube to measure contractions in the esophagus.  Treatment options vary depending on how frequently a person has esophageal spasms and how severe their symptoms are.  A doctor may recommend several different approaches for treating esophageal spasms, including:  We discuss these treatment options below.  Some people with esophageal spasms can identify the foods and drinks that trigger their symptoms. Once they know which foods cause spasms, they can avoid them in the future.  Keeping a food diary can be helpful to learn which foods trigger esophageal spasms. People should record the following information in their food diary:  Common food and drink that triggers esophageal spasms include:  A doctor may recommend certain lifestyle changes for people with esophageal spasms, including:  Some research suggests that using peppermint products may help reduce esophageal spasms.  A review from  2018  suggests that peppermint oil may be effective for treating distal esophageal spasm in some people. Peppermint oil can help relax the muscles, including those in the esophagus.  Mixing a few drops of food-grade peppermint extract into a glass of water and drinking it before a meal may help prevent spasms. It is important to use peppermint extract rather than peppermint essential oil, as the latter can be toxic.  Licorice and menthol products  may also  have a relaxing effect on the muscles in the esophagus.  In some cases, underlying conditions such as  depression ,  anxiety , or gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ) can cause esophageal spasms.  A combination of medications, therapy, and stress-management techniques can help a person manage underlying depression or anxiety. A doctor may also prescribe  antidepressants  for pain caused by esophageal spasms.  Doctors can prescribe proton pump inhibitors or H2 blockers for people with GERD, which may also help reduce esophageal spasms.  If traditional treatments do not work, a person may be able to try other therapies that help relax the esophageal muscles. These include Botox injections and  calcium  channel blockers.  Surgery for esophageal spasms may be used a last resort if other remedies have not worked. There are two procedures available:  Any time someone experiences intense pain or a squeezing sensation in the chest, they should seek immediate medical care. While these symptoms can indicate an esophageal spasm, it is crucial rule out other serious medical issues, including  heart attacks .  To diagnose esophageal spasms, a doctor will ask a person about their symptoms and do a series of tests, including:  While it is not always clear what causes esophageal spasms, some factors may put the nerves in the esophagus at risk of malfunctioning.  These factors include:  Risk factors that may increase the likelihood of an esophageal spasm include:  Esophageal spasms are painful but otherwise not harmful. Treatments are available to help a person with esophageal spasms manage and prevent their symptoms.  Avoiding triggers and making lifestyle changes are often the recommended way to treat and prevent esophageal spasms.  It is also essential for someone with this condition to treat any underlying conditions, such as depression, anxiety, or GERD.    
 Achalasia. (2017, November 20).  Achalasia. (2017, November 20).  Acker, B. W., &amp; Cash, B. D. (2017, December). Medicinal foods for functional GI disorders.  Current Gastroenterology Reports ,  19 (12), 62.  Castell, D. O. (2017, April 2). Esophageal motility disorders: Clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and management.  Coss–Adame, E., Erdogan, A., &amp; Rao, S. S. C. (2014, August). Treatment of esophageal (noncardiac) chest pain: An expert review.  Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology ,  12 (8), 1224–1245.  Diffuse esophageal spasm. (n.d.).  Lynch, K. L. (n.d.). Esophageal spasm.  Heller myotomy for achalasia. (n.d.).  Khalaf, M., Chowdhary, S., Elias, P. S., &amp; Castell, D. (2018, March 29). Distal esophageal spasm: A review.  The American Journal of Medicine .  Khashab, M. A., Messallam, A. A., Onimaru, M., Teitelbaum, E. N., Ujiki, M. B., Gitelis, M. E., ... Inoue, H. (2015, May). International multicenter experience with peroral endoscopic myotomy for the treatment of spastic esophageal disorders refractory to medical therapy (with video) [Abstract].  Gastrointestinal Endoscopy ,  81 (5), 1170–1177.  Klatte, D. C. F., Gasparini, A., Xu, H., de Deco, P., Trevisan, M., Johansson, A. L., ... Carrero, J. J. (2017, September). Association between proton pump inhibitor use and risk of progression of chronic kidney disease [Abstract].  Gastroenterology ,  153 (3), 702–710.  Ravi, K., &amp; Katzka, D. A. (2015, April). Diagnosis and medical management of esophageal dysmotility [Abstract].  Techniques in Gastrointestinal Endoscopy ,  17 (2), 62–69.  Shams, R., Oldfield, E. C., Copare, J., &amp; Johnson, D. A. (2015, January 19). Peppermint oil: Clinical uses in the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases.  JSM Gastroenterology Hepatology ,  3 (1), 1035–1046.  Weijenborg, P. W., de Schepper, H. S., Smout, A. J. P. M., &amp; Bredenoord, A. J. (2015, February). Effects of antidepressants in patients with functional esophageal disorders or gastroesophageal reflux disease: A systematic review [Abstract].  Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology ,  13 (2), 251–259.  Yarnell, E., &amp; Abascal, K. (2011, June 30). Spasmolytic botanicals.  Alternative and Complementary Therapies ,  17 (3),169–174.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  , Jenna Fletcher. "How to treat esophageal spasms."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321656.php&gt;    APA  , J. (2018, April 28). "How to treat esophageal spasms."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  