 Pain in the latissimus dorsi is often caused by overuse, or it may be a result of poor technique in sports or similar activities.  Fortunately, several exercises can help to prevent or relieve this pain.  It may be difficult to tell whether the pain is located in the latissimus dorsi or other muscles in the shoulders or back.  When the latissimus dorsi is injured, a person may feel pain in several places, including:  In some cases, the pain will occur without warning, and it can be felt in surrounding muscles. This pain often worsens when the person extends their hands to the front, raises their hands above their head, or throws an object.  Damage to the latissimus dorsi can cause other symptoms. They may include:  Consult a doctor when the source of  back pain  cannot be identified, or if it is accompanied by:  These could be symptoms of a more severe condition.  The latissimus dorsi is used in everyday activities, including:  It is also used during sports or workouts that feature:  Below are the most common causes of pain:  A person may be at greater risk of injury if they:  It is possible to tear the latissimus dorsi, and athletes are at particular risk. Some athletes most likely to injure this muscle include:  Certain exercises can alleviate pain associated with the latissimus dorsi and strengthen the muscle to prevent further injury.  It is essential that a person consult an expert, such as a doctor or personal trainer, to ensure that the exercises are right for them and that they are using correct form.  The following two exercises can reduce latissimus dorsi pain. A doctor can recommend how often a person should perform these exercises. Never continue an exercise that is painful or too uncomfortable:  This pose is often referred to as "the Superman," because it resembles how he flies.  To perform back bow:  A person can make certain lifestyle changes to prevent latissimus dorsi pain. These include:  The latissimus dorsi is one of the largest muscles in the back. It can be injured with overuse, or when a person does not use correct form while exercising. In most cases, latissimus dorsi pain will go away with rest, stretching, and the exercises described above.  Consult a doctor before trying a new exercise, to ensure that it is the right choice and to learn correct form.    
 Anderson, S. E., Hertel, R., Johnston, J. O., Stauffer, E., Leinweber, E., &amp; Steinbach, L. S. (2005, November). Latissimus dorsi tendinosis and tear: imaging features of a pseudotumor of the upper limb in five patients.  American Journal of Roentgenology ,  185 (5), 1145–1151.  Anderson, S. E., Hertel, R., Johnston, J. O., Stauffer, E., Leinweber, E., &amp; Steinbach, L. S. (2005, November). Latissimus dorsi tendinosis and tear: imaging features of a pseudotumor of the upper limb in five patients.  American Journal of Roentgenology ,  185 (5), 1145–1151.  Donohue, B. F., Lubitz, M. G., &amp; Kremchek, T. E. (2016, December 20). Sports injuries to the latissimus dorsi and teres major [Abstract].  The American Journal of Sports Medicine ,  45 (10), 2428–2435.  Henseler, J. F., Nagels, J., Nelissen, R. G. H. H., &amp; de Groot, J. H. (2014, April). Does the latissimus dorsi tendon transfer for massive rotator cuff tears remain active postoperatively and restore active external rotation?  Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery ,  23 (4), 553–560.  Mehdi, S. K., Frangiamore, S. J., &amp; Schickendantz, M. S. (2016, March–April). Latissimus dorsi and teres major injuries in major league baseball pitchers: A systematic review.  American Journal of Orthopedics ,  45 (3), 163–167.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "How do you stretch the latissimus dorsi?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321623.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, April 26). "How do you stretch the latissimus dorsi?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  