 As people age, the skin begins to break down and lose elasticity. This natural process causes wrinkles and fine lines to appear on the face around the forehead, mouth, and eyes.  Although essential oils will not eliminate wrinkles completely, they may be able to reduce their appearance. They are also a natural alternative to chemical creams and lotions.  In this article, discover some of the best essential oils for preventing and reducing the appearance of wrinkles.  Here are 10 essential oils that could help people reduce the appearance of wrinkles:  Lemon is well-known for its  vitamin  C content and potential health benefits for the immune system. However, lemon oils are also used in a variety of commercial skin care products to help reduce the signs of aging, such as wrinkles.   Studies  have found that lemon oil could help reduce the damage caused by oxidation. Lemon oil may also help prevent sun damage, which can lead to wrinkles.  All citrus essential oils, including lemon and grapefruit, make the skin more sensitive to sunlight. It is essential to avoid sun exposure for several hours after using citrus essential oils, so it is wise to apply them before bed.   Early studies  indicate that sandalwood may have anti-inflammatory properties. In addition to these properties, sandalwood may help restore moisture to the skin.  When the skin is adequately hydrated, it may appear plumper and lessen the appearance of fine lines and wrinkles.  Clary sage is a sweet-smelling herb related to the type of sage many people keep in their spice rack.  Clary sage has been shown to have  antioxidant  effects. One  study  concluded that clary sage might help prevent DNA and proteins from being damaged by free radicals. Free radicals are chemicals  believed  to damage the skin.  Pomegranate is a complex fruit offering a variety of health benefits. People often use them in healthful foods and drinks as a nutrient-rich and tasty additive.  A  2014 study  concluded that pomegranate oil could reduce oxidative  stress , which may help prevent the formation of new wrinkles.  When applied to the skin, pomegranate may also:  Lavender has a distinct, relaxing aroma. It is often used in aromatherapy and commercial bath products. There is a growing body of research looking at the potential health benefits of this popular plant.  In a  2013 study , a research team studied the antioxidant effects of lavender. Their findings suggested that lavender oil helps protect against oxidative stress in the brain.  These same effects may help reduce the appearance of wrinkles and fine lines when applied to the skin. However, more studies need to be conducted with humans to prove lavender oil's effectiveness.  Some people are allergic to lavender. It is advised to do a patch test before applying any new substance to the skin.  In a  2012 study , researchers noted that carrot seeds have some antioxidant effects. The antioxidants could help prevent aging by stopping the breakdown of healthy cells in the skin.  Ylang-ylang is an essential oil often used in perfumes. However, according to a  2015 study , ylang-ylang has shown some antioxidant effects that could help aid skin renewal.  Specifically, ylang-ylang was shown to help rebuild the skin's proteins and fats while reducing the number of free radicals. Many skin care companies add ylang-ylang to their products to take advantage of its potential healing properties.  Rosemary is a herb known for its distinct flavor, as well as for its antioxidant and antimicrobial properties.  Rosemary's antioxidants may help prevent wrinkles by stopping free radicals from breaking down the skin's elasticity.  One  2014 study  found that as little as 10 milligrams per kilogram of  body weight  per day showed significant results in reducing free radicals.  One  study  found that frankincense was effective in reducing the appearance of scarring and stretch marks on a person's skin. It may have the same effect on wrinkles and fine lines.  In addition, frankincense may help:   Studies  suggest that rose oil may have antioxidant, antibacterial, and anti-inflammatory properties. Reducing inflammation can help reduce puffiness and redness in the skin.  Rose oil could be particularly helpful for skin cell renewal, which can keep the skin looking youthful for longer.  People should not apply essential oils to the skin without diluting them in a carrier oil first. Common carrier oils include:  People should mix the oils well in a bottle or bowl. For use on the face, the National Association for Holistic Aromatherapy  recommend  the following:  A person should test a small amount on a patch of skin 24 hours before using the oil on larger areas. If any irritation occurs after 24 hours, they may be allergic to the oil and should not use it.  If no irritation occurs, a person can apply the essential oil mixture directly to affected areas of the skin once or twice daily.  Risks associated with essential oils are often related to allergic reactions resulting in a rash or itchiness.  Other signs of an allergic reaction include:  In some cases, an allergic reaction can be severe and cause  anaphylaxis . If a person experiences severe symptoms or is having trouble breathing, they should seek immediate medical attention.  A person should never swallow essential oils, as they are toxic.  It is important to note that the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not regulate essential oils, so it is crucial to buy them from a reputable source.  Though essential oils may help, there is no guarantee that they will fully reduce the appearance of wrinkles or other signs of aging.  There are many commercial products available to help reduce the appearance of wrinkles. These products include:  A person can also take steps to slow down the development of wrinkles. These steps include:  Essential oils may help a person reduce the appearance of wrinkles and other signs of skin aging. In addition to these benefits, essential oils may also:  However, essential oils are not guaranteed to work, nor will they completely remove wrinkles that already exist.  While usually safe, essential oils should always be mixed with a carrier oil and tested on a small patch of skin before a person applies them to larger areas of the body.    
 Ayaz, M., Sadiq, A., Junaid, M., Ullah, F., Subhan, F., &amp; Ahmed, J. (2017, May 30). Neuroprotective and anti-aging potentials of essential oils from aromatic and medicinal plants.  Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience ,  9 , 168.  Ayaz, M., Sadiq, A., Junaid, M., Ullah, F., Subhan, F., &amp; Ahmed, J. (2017, May 30). Neuroprotective and anti-aging potentials of essential oils from aromatic and medicinal plants.  Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience ,  9 , 168.  Boskabady, M. H., Shafei, M. N., Saberi, Z., &amp; Amini, S. (2011, July-August). Pharmacological effects of  Rosa damascene .  Iranian Journal of Basic Medical Sciences ,  14 (4), 295–307.  Calabrese, V., Scapagnini, G., Randazzo, S. D., Randazzo, G., Catalano, C., Geraci, G., &amp; Morganti, P. (1999). Oxidative stress and antioxidants at skin biosurface: a novel antioxidant from lemon oil capable of inhibiting oxidative damage to the skin [Abstract].  Drugs Under Experimental and Clinical Research ,  25 (6), 281–287.  Dwivedi, C., &amp; Abu-Ghazaleh, A. (1997, August). Chemopreventive effects of sandalwood oil on skin papillomas in mice [Abstract].  European Journal of Cancer Prevention ,  6 (4), 399–401.  Gülçin, I., Uguz, M. T., Oktay, M., Beydemir, Ş., &amp; Küfrevioglu, Ö. İ. (2004, January 9). Evaluation of the antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of clary sage ( Salvia sclarea  L.).  Turkish Journal of Agriculture and Forestry ,  28 (1), 25–33.  Hancianu, M., Cioanca, O., Mihasan, M., &amp; Hritcu, L. (2013, March 15). Neuroprotective effects of inhaled lavender oil on scopolamine-induced dementia via anti-oxidative activities in rats [Abstract].  Phytomedicine ,  20 (5), 446–452.  Mikhaeil, B. R., Maatooq, G. T., Badria, F. A., &amp; Amer, M. M. A. (2003). Chemistry and immunomodulatory activity of frankincense oil.  Zeitschrift für Naturforschung ,  58 , 230–238.  Poljšak, B., &amp; Dahmane, R. (2012, February 29). Free radicals and extrinsic skin aging.  Dermatology Research and Practice ,  2012 .  Rašković, A., Milanović, I., Pavlović, N., Ćebović, T., Vukmirović, S., &amp; Mikov, M. (2014, July 7). Antioxidant activity of rosemary ( Rosmarinus officinalis  L.) essential oil and its hepatoprotective potential.  BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  14 , 225.  Sinha, P., Srivastava, S., Mishra, N., &amp; Yadav, N. P. (2014, July 24). New perspectives on antiacne plant drugs: Contribution to modern therapeutics.  BioMed Research International .  Singh, K., Singh, N., Chandy, A., &amp; Manigauha, A. (2012, May).  In vivo  antioxidant and hepatoprotective activity of methanolic extracts of  Daucus carota  seeds in experimental animals.  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  2 (5), 385–388.  Shutes, J. (n.d.). Methods of application.  Zarfeshany, A., Asgary, S., &amp; Javanmard, S. H. (2014, March 25). Potent health effects of pomegranate.  Advanced Biomedical Research ,  3 .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Which essential oils help get rid of wrinkles?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321645.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, April 27). "Which essential oils help get rid of wrinkles?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  