 In this article, we look at the possible benefits of Epsom salt baths, how to use a detox bath, and whether there are any risks involved.  The two main ingredients of Epsom salt are  magnesium  and sulfate. It is believed the combination of both ingredients stimulates detoxification pathways.  Magnesium is a natural substance that aids a variety of bodily functions, including the removal of toxins. Sulfate can strengthen the walls of the digestive tract and make releasing toxins easier.  There is little scientific research documenting the detoxifying effects of Epsom salt. However, advocates of it argue that an Epsom salt detox bath may have the following benefits:  Epsom salt bathwater can soften rough, dry skin, and exfoliate dead skin cells. It may also soothe skin affected by skin conditions, including  eczema  and  psoriasis .  It is a good idea to check with a doctor before soaking in Epsom salt if a person has a skin condition, as it may make the symptoms worse.  An Epsom salt bath may provide pain relief and reduce swelling in people living with certain types of inflammatory conditions, such as  rheumatoid arthritis ,  lupus ,  gout , and psoriatic  arthritis .  Low levels of magnesium can  ease the pain in people with arthritis . Epsom salt contains magnesium and may help the body get rid of toxins responsible for exacerbating  inflammation  while also reducing swelling, stiffness, and pain.  Healthy magnesium levels can boost brain neurotransmitters that are responsible for inducing sleep and reducing  stress . Magnesium may also promote melatonin, a sleep-inducing hormone.  People feeling stressed and overwhelmed may benefit from taking an Epsom salt bath. Some research  has found  that people who are suffering from mental and physical stress benefit when their magnesium levels are managed. While the study looked at oral supplements, Epsom salt could have a similar effect.  Taking a warm bath can also help a person relax by allowing them to release muscle tension and recuperate after a long day.  Epsom salt may help treat athlete's foot and  ingrown toenail  infections. A person can bathe in a tub with Epsom salt water or soak feet in warm water and Epsom salt to help feet heal faster and relieve itching.  Soaking the feet in Epsom salts may also help reduce foot odor.  Splinters can be difficult to remove without pushing them further into the skin. Soaking in an Epsom salt bath for a few minutes can reduce inflammation in the affected area, soften the splinter, and make it easier to remove.  Epsom salt should be dissolved with plenty of water if it is going to be consumed orally. Adding lemon can improve the taste.  However, the only benefit of drinking Epsom salt is as a laxative when someone is constipated.  While oral consumption of Epsom salt is safe in very small doses, there is no credible evidence that consuming it has any detoxifying effects.  Anyone considering drinking or eating Epsom salt should consult a doctor first. Many medications, including acetaminophen, can interact with Epsom salt.  It is recommended to only purchase Epsom salt that has USP on the label, which means it has been tested for human use, according to standards set by the United States Food and Drug Association (FDA).  The packaging should have ingredient and drug fact information printed on it. Epsom salt can be purchased at a health food store, some pharmacies, or  online .  To take an Epsom salt bath, add 2 cups of Epsom salt when running a bath in a standard size bathtub. The salt will quickly dissolve if put under running water.  The water should be warm but not too hot. Temperatures between  92°F and 100°F  (33°C and 37°C) are ideal.  A person can then soak in the bath for 12 to 20 minutes, or longer if desired, and they should avoid using soap.  People should rest for at least 1 hour after a detox bath or take a bath at bedtime so that they can go to sleep afterward.  Other things that can be added to an Epsom salt bath to enhance its effects include:   Olive oil   Olive oil contains  antioxidants  and can also help soften the skin when added to a bath. A person can use olive oil by adding ½ a cup of the oil as the bath is filling with water.  It is essential to be cautious when getting in and out of the bathtub to avoid slipping, as the oil can make the bath's surface slippery.  Using olive oil in a bath is not recommended for children or older adults who are prone to falling.   Essential oils   Adding therapeutic oils can make a detox bath more relaxing. Some oils people can try include:  Essential oil needs to be diluted before being applied to skin, and so it is best to dilute it with a carrier oil before bathing.  A mixture of 3 to 5 drops of essential oil per ½ to 1 ounce of carrier oil is usual. Carrier oils can be sweet almond oil,  coconut oil , or even olive oil. A little essential oil goes a long way, so it is important to add only a few drops of the diluted oil into a full bath.   Baking Soda   Baking soda has been shown to have  antifungal properties  and may help reduce irritating germs. It may also soften the skin and reduce itchiness.  Epsom salt baths are normally safe, even for children. However, oral consumption of Epsom salt may be dangerous for pregnant women, children, and people with kidney conditions.  Epsom salt overdoses are rare but can cause serious side effects, including:  More research is needed to prove the benefits and detoxifying effects of Epsom salt baths. However, people who use Epsom salt baths for detoxification believe in their benefits, such as relaxation, pain relief, and softening the skin.  Warm baths can help to reduce stress and promote better sleep. Adding Epsom salt can be a part of a healthy relaxation routine.    
 Letscher-Bru, V., Obszynski, C. M., Samsoen, M., Sabou, M., Waller, J., &amp; Candolfi, E. (2013, February). Antifungal activity of sodium bicarbonate against fungal agents causing superficial infections.  Mycopathologia ,  175 (1–2), 153–158.  Letscher-Bru, V., Obszynski, C. M., Samsoen, M., Sabou, M., Waller, J., &amp; Candolfi, E. (2013, February). Antifungal activity of sodium bicarbonate against fungal agents causing superficial infections.  Mycopathologia ,  175 (1–2), 153–158.  Milne, H., Dean, P., &amp; Hughes, M. (2009, April 20). Deliberate overdose with Epsom salts.  BMJ Case Reports ,  2009 .  Waring, R. H. (n.d.). Report on absorption of magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts) across the skin.  Warm water works wonders on pain. (n.d).  Wienecke, E., &amp; Nolden, C. (2016, December 8). [Long-term HRV analysis shows stress reduction by magnesium intake] [Abstract].  MMW Fortschritte der Medizin ,  158 (Suppl 6), 12–16.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "What are the benefits of an Epsom salt detox?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321627.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, April 26). "What are the benefits of an Epsom salt detox?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  