 Doctors recommend hysterectomies for women who would benefit from the surgical removal of the uterus. The cervix is the lowest part of the uterus where it meets the vagina.  During a total or radical hysterectomy, a surgeon removes the woman's whole uterus, including her cervix. The surgeon will then create a vaginal cuff in the place of the cervix.  Sometimes, a vaginal cuff procedure will be done separately from a hysterectomy if this area needs to be repaired due to tearing or improper healing.  It is essential to speak to a doctor about the recovery process, as every woman is different and may benefit from an individualized recovery plan.  Usually, a doctor will give the following instructions to a woman who has just undergone a total hysterectomy:  A doctor will also prescribe medications to prevent infections and reduce pain. A doctor may also recommend an  estrogen  cream that can be applied to the vaginal cuff to help it heal.  Recovering from a hysterectomy with a vaginal cuff takes a minimum of  6–8 weeks , but may take longer depending on a person's overall health.  While recovering from a hysterectomy with a vaginal cuff, a woman may be asked to see a doctor for a checkup.The doctor will make sure the vaginal cuff is healing properly and that there are no signs of infection.  If scar tissue is forming on the vaginal cuff site, the doctor may apply a small amount of silver nitrate to burn off the scar tissue and aid healing.  Removing the scar tissue may be uncomfortable but should not be painful. It can usually be done in the doctor's office without any need for a separate appointment.  While vaginal cuffs are generally safe, there is a small risk of the cuff tearing. A vaginal cuff tear occurs when the edges of the wound split or rip.  A vaginal cuff tear, also known as vaginal cuff dehiscence, is rare. Due to the suturing or cutting technique, women are  more at risk  for this complication if they have undergone a laparoscopic or robotic hysterectomy instead of an abdominal or vaginal hysterectomy.  If the vaginal cuff tear is very large, additional complications may occur, including a bowel evisceration. This happens when the bowels push through the torn vaginal cuff.  Factors that  increase  the risk of a vaginal tear after a hysterectomy include:  While vaginal cuff tears are rare, they can be a life-threatening medical emergency.  Women who are having a vaginal cuff as part of a hysterectomy should seek immediate medical attention if they develop any of the following symptoms:  While vaginal cuff tears are most likely to occur within a few days of the hysterectomy, they can occur at any time following the procedure.  Most of the time, tears occur spontaneously, but they can also be  triggered  by sexual activity or a bowel movement.  A person will need surgery to repair the vaginal cuff if they experience a vaginal cuff tear. Other complications that require vaginal cuff repair include:  In some cases of a partial vaginal cuff tear, a surgeon can repair the cuff through the vagina instead of making an external incision.  A person will be given intravenous fluids and  antibiotics  before and after surgery. The length of the surgical procedure may vary based what caused the tear or other complication.  After surgery, the person will be taken to a recovery room and monitored while the anesthesia wears off. They may have to stay overnight in the hospital, particularly if bowel function was affected.  After a vaginal cuff repair, people need to allow  8 to 12 weeks  of recovery time. During this time, a doctor will recommend avoiding any activity that strains the new incision, including heavy lifting and sex. Many doctors will also suggest getting lots of rest and limiting strenuous exercise.  The best way for a woman to manage a vaginal cuff is to follow all of her doctor's instructions following a hysterectomy.  Some women may feel better in just a few weeks after surgery. They may push themselves too hard physically or have sex before the vaginal cuff has healed, accidentally causing an injury or tear.  A woman healing from a hysterectomy and a vaginal cuff procedure should be gentle on their body and avoid physical and sexual activity until the cuff has fully healed.  Vaginal cuff tears and complications are rare, but it is important to take precautions. Women can reduce their risk of experiencing these complications by following an individualized recovery plan after surgery and giving their body plenty of time to heal.  If a woman needs a vaginal cuff repair, she will likely need to spend up to  12 weeks  recovering before a doctor clears her to resume normal activities, including exercise and sexual activity.    
 Escobar, P. A., Gressel, G. M., Goldberg, G. L., &amp; Kuo, D. Y.-S. (2016, March 10). Delayed presentation of vaginal cuff dehiscence after robotic hysterectomy for gynecologic cancer: A case series and review of the literature.  Case Reports in Obstetrics and Gynecology .  Escobar, P. A., Gressel, G. M., Goldberg, G. L., &amp; Kuo, D. Y.-S. (2016, March 10). Delayed presentation of vaginal cuff dehiscence after robotic hysterectomy for gynecologic cancer: A case series and review of the literature.  Case Reports in Obstetrics and Gynecology .  Goldberg, A. (2014, May 1). Management of evisceration of the vaginal cuff.  Hur, H.-C. (2018, March 13). Vaginal cuff dehiscence after hysterectomy.  Hysterectomy. (2016, March 22).  Lethaby, A., Mukhopadhyay, A., &amp; Naik, R. (2012, April 18). Total versus subtotal hysterectomy for benign gynaecological conditions.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , 4.  Nguyen, M.-L. T., Kapoor, M., Pradhan, T. S., Pua, T. L., &amp; Tedjarati, S. S. (2013). Two cases of post-coital vaginal cuff dehiscence with small bowel evisceration after robotic-assisted laparoscopic hysterectomy.  International Journal of Surgery Case Reports ,  4 (7), 603–605.  Robinson, B. L., Liao, J. B., Adams, S. F., &amp; Randall, T. C. (2010, July 2). Vaginal cuff dehiscence after robotic total laparoscopic hysterectomy.  Obstetrics and Gynecology ,  114 (2 Pt 1), 369–371.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is a vaginal cuff and what are the risks?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321679.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, April 30). "What is a vaginal cuff and what are the risks?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  