 Some supporters claim that  coconut oil  is a cure for  constipation . So, what are these claims, and does evidence back them up?  Some people speculate that coconut is successful in easing constipation because it contains an abundance of medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs).  It is thought that MCFAs stimulate bowel movements and help to soften the stool.  MCFAs are found in medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs), which are also a form of fatty acids that have a range of health benefits.  A  2003 study  on how the MCTs in coconut oil impacted on  obesity  forms the basis for most current claims about the benefits of coconut oil.  The study suggested that MCTs may be beneficial for preventing obesity or stimulating weight loss. However, the study reached no conclusions about how MCTs might affect constipation.  The use of the study's data in current claims for coconut oil is controversial. One reason for this is that the study used oil that contained 100-percent MCTs, rather than coconut oil, which reportedly contains just 13- to 15-percent MCTs.  Even the doctor who led the study expressed concern that the data is being misused by coconut oil marketers, according to an article in   The Guardian   newspaper in the United Kingdom.  A study released by the  American Society for Microbiology  seems to support the view that coconut oil is effective against the colonization of the bacteria  Candida albicans  ( C. albicans ) in the gut.  This is the bacteria that causes  oral thrush  and vaginal yeast infections. It is a natural component of the gut's microflora.  The authors of the study propose that coconut oil either kills off the bacteria in the gut or prevents its growth. They also conclude that coconut oil could become the first dietary intervention to reduce colonization of the gut by  C. albicans .  However, other people have suggested that the presence of  C. albicans  in the gut and the process of killing off the bacteria can cause constipation. There is little scientific evidence to support this.  It is also important to bear in mind that, like most scientific studies of coconut oil so far, this study investigating the impact of coconut oil on  C. albicans  was conducted only in rodents. It is difficult to know whether these effects will be the same in humans.  Constipation is often a result of diet or lifestyle choices.   Dehydration  is a significant cause of constipation. So, even simple steps such as drinking more water can help.  Scientists have known for a long time that  coffee  can stimulate the gut. Coffee has a laxative effect that is  60 percent  stronger than water.  Adding more fiber to the diet can also increase the bulk and consistency of stools, which could make them easier to pass. Evidence also suggests that eating probiotic foods is effective against constipation.  Coconut oil and MCT oil are both mild enough to try in moderation.  A range of over-the-counter (OTC) laxatives is available if coconut oil or other lifestyle remedies do not work.  Anyone wanting to try coconut or MCT oil should speak to a doctor first, especially if they are pregnant, breast-feeding, or have other health conditions, such as inflammatory bowel disease.    
 Derbyshire, D. (2017, July 9). Coconut oil: Are the health benefits a big fat lie?  The Guardian .  Derbyshire, D. (2017, July 9). Coconut oil: Are the health benefits a big fat lie?  The Guardian .  Gunsalus, K. T. W., Tornberg-Belanger, S. N., Matthan, N. R., Lichtenstein, A. H., &amp; Kumamoto, C. A. (2015, October 17).  Manipulation of host diet to reduce gastrointestinal colonization by the opportunistic pathogen Candida albicans.  mSphere ,  1 (1), e00020–15.  Rao, S. S., Welcher, K., Zimmerman, B., &amp; Stumbo, P. (1998, February). Is coffee a colonic stimulant?  European Journal of Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  10 (2), 113–118.  St-Onge, M.-P., Ross, P., Parsons, W. D., Jones, P. J. H. (2002, September 6). Medium-chain triglycerides increase energy expenditure and decrease adiposity in overweight men.  Obesity A Research Journal ,  11 (3), 395–402.     Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Railton, David. "Is coconut oil a laxative?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321658.php&gt;    APA  Railton, D. (2018, April 28). "Is coconut oil a laxative?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  