 Chest pain is the second biggest cause of emergency room (ER) visits in the United States, leading to  more than 8 million  ER visits every year. Worldwide, chest pain affects 20 to 40 percent of the general population.  In this article, learn about many potential causes of chest pain and the other symptoms they cause.   1. Muscle strain    Inflammation  of the muscles and tendons around the ribs can result in persistent chest pain. If the pain becomes worse with activity, then it may be a symptom of a  muscle strain .   2. Injured ribs   Injuries to the  ribs , such as bruises, breaks, and  fractures , can cause chest pain. A person may have heard a crack or felt extreme pain at the time of injury if they have a broken rib.   3. Peptic ulcers    Peptic ulcers , which are sores in the stomach lining, do not usually cause intense pain. However, they can result in a recurring discomfort in the chest.  Taking antacids, which are available to  purchase online  and in pharmacies, can usually relieve pain caused by  peptic ulcers .   4. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)    GERD  refers to when the contents of the stomach move back up into the throat. It can cause a burning feeling in the chest and a sour taste in the mouth.   5. Asthma    Asthma  is a common breathing disorder characterized by inflammation in the airways, which  can cause  chest pain. Other symptoms include shortness of breath, coughing, and wheezing.   6. Collapsed lung   When air builds up in the space between the lungs and ribs, a lung can collapse, causing sudden chest pain when breathing. If someone has a  collapsed lung,  they will also experience shortness of breath,  tiredness , and a rapid heart rate.   7. Costochondritis    Costochondritis  is inflammation of the cartilage of the rib cage. This condition can cause chest pain. Costochondritis pain may get worse when sitting or lying in certain positions, as well as when a person does any physical activity.   8. Esophageal contraction disorders   Esophageal contraction disorders are spasms or contractions in the food pipe. These disorders can also cause chest pain.   9. Esophageal hypersensitivity   Changes in pressure in the food pipe or the presence of acid can sometimes cause severe pain. At present, experts are  not sure  what causes this sensitivity.   10. Esophageal rupture   If the food pipe bursts, this can result in sudden, intense chest pain. An esophageal rupture may occur after intense vomiting or an operation involving the esophagus.   11. Hiatal hernia   A  hiatal hernia  is when part of the stomach pushes up into the chest. This type of  hernia  is very common and may not cause any symptoms. However, if the top of the stomach pushes into the lower part of the chest after eating, it can cause symptoms of  GERD , such as  heartburn  and chest pain.   12. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy    Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  is when the heart grows too thick due to  genetic factors . The thickening of the heart prevents blood from flowing from the heart properly, causing the muscle to work very hard to pump blood.  Symptoms of  hypertrophic cardiomyopathy  include chest pain, shortness of breath, dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting.   13. Tuberculosis    Tuberculosis  bacteria growing in the lungs can cause symptoms such as a bad cough, coughing up blood or sputum, or pain in the chest.   14. Mitral valve prolapse   Chest pain, palpitations, and dizziness are all symptoms of  mitral valve prolapse , which is when a valve in the heart is unable to close fully. In mild cases, this condition may have no obvious symptoms.   15. Panic attack   A  panic attack  may cause chest pain in addition to nausea, dizziness, sweating, rapid heartbeat, and fear.   16. Pericarditis    Pericarditis  is inflammation of the sac around the heart. It can result in sharp chest pain that is made worse by intakes of breath or lying down.   17. Pleurisy    Pleurisy  is inflammation of the membrane that covers the lungs. It can result in sharp chest pain when breathing deeply.   18. Pneumonia   Lung infections such as  pneumonia  can cause sharp or stabbing chest pain. Other symptoms of pneumonia include  fever , chills, and coughing up phlegm.   19. Pulmonary embolism   A  pulmonary embolism  is when a blood clot gets trapped in an artery feeding blood to the lungs. It can cause chest pain, difficulty breathing, and coughing up blood.  Pulmonary embolisms  can be life-threatening if not treated immediately.   20. Heart attack   Chest pain is one of the  five main symptoms  of a  heart attack . The others are:  Women experiencing a heart attack may also experience sudden tiredness, nausea, or vomiting.  If someone thinks that they are having a heart attack, they should seek emergency medical help. The quicker a person can get to ER, the quicker treatment can begin.  Getting prompt treatment increases a person's chances of survival and potentially reduces the severity of the damage to the heart.   21. Myocarditis   Myocarditis is when the heart becomes inflamed, resulting in symptoms that are similar to a heart attack, such as:   22. Angina    Angina  feels like a squeezing pain or pressure on the chest. It occurs when not enough blood is getting to the heart. A person may also feel pain in the shoulders, back, neck, arms, or jaw.  Angina is a symptom of  coronary artery disease .   23. Aortic dissection   Aortic dissection is a separation of the inner layers of the aorta, the main artery that leads from the heart. When this happens, a buildup of blood can cause the artery to burst. Aortic dissection is life-threatening, so requires immediate medical help.   24. Coronary artery dissection   Sudden intense pain that appears to "tear" across the chest, neck, back, or abdomen can be a symptom of coronary artery dissection. This  rare but serious  condition occurs when the coronary artery tears.   25. Pancreatitis   One rare symptom of  pancreatitis  is pain in the lower chest that is  made worse  by lying down flat.   26. Pulmonary hypertension   Pulmonary  hypertension  is  high blood pressure  in the arteries that carry blood to the lungs. In  some cases , this may result in chest pain.  It is always best to contact a doctor if chest pain comes on suddenly, especially if taking anti-inflammatory medications does not ease symptoms. Anyone experience chest pain and difficulty breathing should go to the hospital or call for emergency medical help.  Symptoms that may require emergency help include:  Even when chest pain feels severe, a heart attack is not the most likely cause. However,  more than 1 million  people have heart attacks every year in the U.S., so it is essential to seek medical attention if a person is unsure.    
 Coronary artery dissection: Not just a heart attack. (2018, March 15).  Coronary artery dissection: Not just a heart attack. (2018, March 15).  De Lorenzo, A., Lessa, C., Camargo, G., Gottlieb, I., Lima, R. S. L. (2014, July). A not so obvious cause of chest pain: Pulmonary hypertension [Abstract].  The American Journal of Medicine ,  127 (7), 605–607.  Dromey, M. Nwaneri, C., &amp; Wilson, D. (2017, July 13). Severe chest pain in an asthmatic patient.  BMJ ,  358 .  Gyawali, C. P. (2010, August). Esophageal hypersensitivity.  Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  6 (8), 497–500.  Heart attack: Know the symptoms. Take action. (2011, December).  Heart attack signs and symptoms. (2015, August 5).  Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (2018, March 15).  Mathur, A. K., Whitaker, A., Kolli, H., &amp; Nguyen, T. (2015, September 30). Acute pancreatitis with normal serum lipase and amylase: A rare presentation.  Journal of the Pancreas .  Paichdaze, N., Afzal, B., Zia, N., Mujeeb, R., Khan, M. M., &amp; Razzak, J. A. (2015, December 11). Characteristics of chest pain and its acute management in a low-middle income country: Analysis of emergency department surveillance data from Pakistan.  BMC Emergency Medicine ,  15 (Suppl 2), S13.  Pleurisy and other pleural disorders. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Railton, David. "What could cause chest pain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321650.php&gt;    APA  Railton, D. (2018, April 27). "What could cause chest pain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  