  Varicose veins  occur when blood collects behind the small valves in a person's veins instead of flowing smoothly back to the heart. They are more common in the legs and feet, because blood returning to the heart has farther to travel.  Doctors often recommend compression stockings to improve circulation, stop varicose veins from getting worse, and reduce pain or discomfort.  Here, we look at evidence that supports the use of these stockings, as well as associated risks. We also discuss how to choose the right size and shape.  Compression stockings are traditionally used to improve circulation. According to the authors of  Sclerotherapy: Treatment of Varicose and Telangiectatic Leg Veins , Roman soldiers often wrapped their legs in leather straps to improve circulation during long marches.  Modern compression stockings are more sophisticated and designed to provide consistent pressure in the legs, helping blood to flow back toward the heart. Stockings usually exert more pressure near the ankles and feet, providing an extra squeeze that promotes blood flow.  Studies suggest that compression stockings can improve some symptoms of varicose veins, but little evidence supports the idea that stockings alone will eliminate them. Different types of stockings exert different amounts of pressure.  Some recent research into varicose veins includes:  Overall, results are mixed. A review from  2015  found that little reliable evidence supports compression stockings as a treatment for varicose veins.  The right amount of pressure and the right kind of stocking depends on the number, type, and underlying cause of a person's varicose veins.  The three main kinds are:  Stockings are typically knee- or thigh-high. Knee-high stockings promote circulation in the lower leg and when exercising.  A doctor may recommend thigh-high compression stockings for varicose veins, though these are more often used to prevent blood clots after surgery, particularly after  knee replacement surgery .  People tend to wear compression stockings during the day, because sitting upright and standing are more likely to cause circulation problems.  A person with varicose veins might try putting their feet up at night, to improve circulation. However, a doctor may recommend wearing stockings at night as well.  Because compression stockings are intentionally tight, they can be difficult to put on. The legs should be clean and dry. Wait for any lotion to be absorbed before putting on stockings.  Using compression stockings can have side effects, including:  Stockings that are wrinkled, worn incorrectly, or the wrong size are more likely to cause problems.  When circulation is inhibited by a condition such as peripheral  neuropathy , which can damage the nerves in the legs, a person may not be able to tell whether stockings are too tight or falling down.  A person is more likely to experience negative effects if they wear stockings for too long. Remove stockings every day and check the legs and feet for signs of damage or irritation, using a mirror if necessary. It may help to use a long-handled mirror or a mirror placed on the ground.  If new areas of irritation occur, contact a doctor.  Compression stockings may not eliminate varicose veins, but they may reduce associated pain and swelling.  Examine their legs daily for signs of irritation and damage, and replace compression stockings every  3 to 6 months . Keep the legs and stockings clean and dry to achieve the best results.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Belcaro, G., Dugall, M., Luzzi, R., Ippolito, E., &amp; Cesarone, M. R. (2017, March). Postpartum varicose veins: Supplementation with pycnogenol or elastic compression – a 12-month follow-up.  International Journal of Angiology ,  26 (1), 12–19.  Belcaro, G., Dugall, M., Luzzi, R., Ippolito, E., &amp; Cesarone, M. R. (2017, March). Postpartum varicose veins: Supplementation with pycnogenol or elastic compression – a 12-month follow-up.  International Journal of Angiology ,  26 (1), 12–19.  El-Sheikha, J., Carradice, D., Nandhra, S., Leung, C., Smith, G. E., Campbell, B., &amp; Chetter, I. C. (2015, June). Systematic review of compression following treatment for varicose veins [Abstract].  British Journal of Surgery ,  102 (7), 719–725.  Goldman, M., &amp; Weiss, R. (2016, November 24).   Sclerotherapy: Treatment of varicose and telangiectatic leg veins (6th ed.) . New York, NY: Elsevier.  How long should I wear compression stockings to improve my circulation? (2016, February 1).  Kakkos, S. K., Timpilis, M., Patrinos, P., Nikolakopoulos, K. M., Papageorgopoulou, C. P., Kouri, A. K., … Tsolakis, I. A. (2018, January). Acute effects of graduated elastic compression stockings in patients with symptomatic varicose veins: A randomized  double blind  placebo controlled trial.  European Journal of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery ,  55 (1), 118–125.  Robertson, B. F., Thomson, C. H., &amp; Siddiqui, H. (2014, June). Side effects of compression stockings: A case report.  British Journal of General Practice ,  64 (623), 316–317.  Sell, H., Vikatmaa, P., Albäck, A., Lepäntalo, M., Malmivaara, A., Mahmoud, O., &amp; Venermo, M. (2014, June). Compression therapy versus surgery in the treatment of patients with varicose veins: A RCT. European Journal of Vascular &amp; Endovascular Surgery ,  47 (6), 670–677.  Varicose veins. (n.d.).  Varicose veins and spider veins. (2018, March 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Do compression stockings help to treat varicose veins?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321662.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, April 28). "Do compression stockings help to treat varicose veins?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  