 Hemoglobin is an iron-containing protein that transports oxygen around the body. Deficiencies in  vitamin  B-12 or  folate  often cause macrocytic  anemia , so it is sometimes called  vitamin deficiency anemia .  In this article, we look at the causes and symptoms of macrocytic anemia, the treatment options, and how to prevent complications.  Macrocytic anemia occurs if the red blood cells are unusually large. A unit called femtoliters (fL) is used to measure the size of blood cells. Usually, red blood cells are between  80–100 fL .  Red blood cells larger than 100 fL are considered macrocytic. When the cells grow too large, there are fewer of them than there needs to be and they carry less hemoglobin. This means the blood is not as oxygen-rich as it should be. Low blood oxygen can cause a range of symptoms and health problems.  Macrocytic anemia is not a single disease, but a symptom of several medical conditions and nutritional problems.  One of the most common types of macrocytic anemia is megaloblastic macrocytic anemia. This happens when red blood cells produce DNA too slowly to divide.  Anemia develops gradually, so a person may not notice any symptoms until it is severe. When symptoms appear, they may include:  Macrocytic anemia is just one type of anemia. The symptoms of anemia are similar across all types, so it is important to use blood tests to diagnose the specific anemia a person has.  When people develop macrocytic anemia due to B-12 deficiency, they may have other symptoms. These include:  These symptoms may resolve after treatment, but they can become permanent if left untreated.  Macrocytic anemia is almost always due to a deficiency of folate or vitamin B-12. A person may have a deficiency of one of these if their body cannot absorb vitamins due to an underlying disease, or because they do not eat enough foods with these vitamins.  B-12 is abundant in animal products, so vegans and vegetarians are more at risk of a B-12 deficiency. In some cases, people may eat enough foods with B-12 but are unable to absorb the vitamin due to autoimmune disorders,  cancer , alcohol  addiction , or inflammatory bowel disease.  A folate deficiency, sometimes known as vitamin B-9 deficiency, can also cause macrocytic anemia. Pregnant and breast-feeding women use more folate and have a higher risk of becoming deficient.  People who do not eat enough folate-rich foods can also become deficient. Diseases that interfere with the body's ability to absorb  nutrition , such as  celiac disease , can lead to a folate deficiency.  Other causes of macrocytic anemia may include:  Each of these factors can make it more difficult for the body to absorb and metabolize essential nutrients.  In very rare cases, macrocytic anemia can be caused by a  bone marrow  disorder that prevents the body from producing enough healthy blood cells.  Doctors classify macrocytosis into two broad categories:  When a person shows signs of macrocytic anemia, a doctor will take several blood tests to find the underlying cause. They may also ask questions about a person's diet, lifestyle, and other symptoms.  In most cases, vitamin injections are the first line of treatment. Injecting vitamins ensures the body can absorb these even if an underlying condition, such as celiac disease, prevents vitamin absorption.  Eating more foods containing vitamin B-12 may improve symptoms if a person is deficient in this vitamin because of their diet.  Other treatment options include:  When the blood does not have enough hemoglobin, it will not have enough oxygen. The body may try to fix this by increasing the heart rate or  blood pressure . Left untreated, anemia can cause  heart failure , an enlarged heart, and circulatory problems.  When macrocytic anemia is due to a problem with the bone marrow or an organ, this underlying cause can trigger further complications. For example, people with untreated bone marrow disorders may develop  leukemia .  Most cases of macrocytic anemia are due to vitamin deficiencies, which can cause different complications depending on the vitamin:   Vitamin B-12 deficiencies   A vitamin B-12 deficiency can cause:   Folate deficiencies   A folate deficiency can cause:  Most cases of macrocytic anemia can be managed with vitamin injections. A doctor will continue to monitor a person's B-12 or folate levels and use blood tests to determine whether red blood cells have returned to their normal size.  While most people recover with prompt treatment, they may need periodic checks for anemia.  When macrocytic anemia is due to an underlying disease, the outlook depends on what disease is causing the deficiency, and how it is treated.  Macrocytic anemia often goes undiagnosed until it becomes severe. People who have symptoms of anemia, a family history of anemia, or who have or are at risk of a condition linked to macrocytic anemia should see a doctor for a blood test.  Regular blood tests can help detect all forms of anemia before they undermine a person's health. Most cases of anemia can be easily diagnosed and treated.    
 Braunstein, E. M. (n.d.). Vitamin deficiency anemia.  Braunstein, E. M. (n.d.). Vitamin deficiency anemia.  Braunstein, E. M. (2016, November). Megaloblastic macrocytic anemias.  Johnson, L. E. (2018, March). Folate (folic acid).  Johnson, L. E. (2018, March). Vitamin B12 (cobalamins).  Kaferyle, J., &amp; Strzoda, C. E. (2009, February 1). Evaluation of macrocytosis.  American Family Physician ,  79 (3), 203–208.  Nagao, T., &amp; Hirokawa, M. (2017, April 13). Diagnosis and treatment of macrocytic anemias in adults.  Journal of General and Family Medicine ,  18 (5), 200–204.  Understanding myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). (n.d.).  Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia. (2016, May 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Macrocytic anemia: Symptoms and treatment."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321620.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, April 25). "Macrocytic anemia: Symptoms and treatment."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  