 Vaginal discharge can be a variety of colors. The color and consistency of discharge can be affected by many factors, including diet,  stress , medication, and sexual activity.  Yellow is a relatively common color and not usually cause for alarm. It can indicate different things. Causes of yellow discharge vary from normal bodily functions to infections to pregnancy.  It is essential to note that anyone who is concerned about any vaginal discharge, especially if it is accompanied by other symptoms, should contact a doctor.  Three common causes of yellow discharge are listed below.  Thin, watery, yellow discharge is typically nothing to worry about. It usually indicates that someone is nearing menstruation and is about to start their period.  In most cases, the yellow tint is simply some early menstrual blood mixing with the mucus.  Other signs that a period is due could include premenstrual syndrome (PMS) symptoms such as:  People who do not experience any of the symptoms indicating that their period is due, or who are confident they are not due for their period, should be aware that watery yellow discharge can also be a sign of infection.  A thick, yellow discharge without a smell can also be a sign that a period is coming or be an early sign of pregnancy. This is because the tint of yellow signals that there is some new or old blood in the mucus.  The yellow tint can also come from implantation bleeding in early pregnancy, which can also cause similar symptoms. As such, it is always worth taking a pregnancy test — especially after missing a period.  Many women are not aware that bleeding can also occur during implantation, but it is usually lighter or presents as spotting rather than the usual flow.  Other signs of early pregnancy to watch out for could be:  These symptoms are very similar to those of menstruation, so it is important that a person takes a pregnancy test if they think they might be pregnant.  However, even if someone is pregnant when their period is due, a positive result may not show up immediately. People are more likely to get more definite result a few days after a missed period. Also, those who have experienced some bleeding might get a clearer result once the bleeding subsides a few days later.  If someones does discover they are pregnant, they can expect an increase in discharge throughout their pregnancy. This discharge should be odorless or mild-smelling, and milky white. This discharge known as leukorrhea is perfectly normal according to the  American Pregnancy Association .  A yellow discharge with a strong smell suggests an infection. The infection could be anything from  bacterial vaginosis  to a  sexually transmitted infection  (STI). An example of an STI is trichomoniasis, or "trich."  An  estimated 3.7 million  people in the United States have trich, yet only 30 percent develop any symptoms. Symptoms that people can look out for include:  If someone suspects that they might have trich, they should visit the doctor. The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  say that a trich infection can last for months or even years without treatment.  If the infection is caused by bacterial vaginosis, the discharge is likely to be a little more green or gray than yellow.  Even if the discharge is yellow or white, a person could still have bacterial vaginosis if they have the following symptoms:  Anyone who experiences a new, strong-smelling discharge should visit the doctor regardless of the color and consistency of the vaginal discharge.  Some people may find it difficult to talk about changes in vaginal discharge, but it is important to remember that vaginal discharge is a normal and healthy part of the reproductive system.  A typical color range is usually clear or milky white depending on the stage of the menstrual cycle. The smell should also be mild, not strong.  If someone experiences the following symptoms, they should see a doctor as soon as possible:  The earlier someone gets a diagnosis and treatment, the sooner they can resolve any potential issues.    
 Khan, Z., Bhargava, A., Mittal, P., Bharti, R., Puri, P., Khunger, N., &amp; Bala, M. (2017, July 8). Vaginal discharge: Exploring demographic profile, risk factors and alternative method of reliable diagnosis through self-collection of vaginal swabs [Abstract].  Sexually Transmitted Infections ,  93 (2).  Khan, Z., Bhargava, A., Mittal, P., Bharti, R., Puri, P., Khunger, N., &amp; Bala, M. (2017, July 8). Vaginal discharge: Exploring demographic profile, risk factors and alternative method of reliable diagnosis through self-collection of vaginal swabs [Abstract].  Sexually Transmitted Infections ,  93 (2).  Trichomoniasis [Fact sheet]. (2017, July 14).  Vaginal  dischage  during pregnancy. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Roux, Jennifer Le. "What causes a yellow vaginal discharge?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321647.php&gt;    APA  Roux, J. (2018, April 27). "What causes a yellow vaginal discharge?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  