 Doctors are not sure why some people who experience  hair loss  have low iron stores. They do know, however, that iron is an essential component in an enzyme called ribonucleotide reductase that helps cell growth.  According to  some research , hair follicle cells can be particularly sensitive to decreasing levels of iron and may not be able to grow new cells as effectively when iron stores are low.  In this article, learn about the link between iron deficiency  anemia  and hair loss, as well as the treatment options for each.  Iron plays a crucial role in making hemoglobin, a compound that carries oxygen to cells, which is essential for the body to function.  Symptoms of iron deficiency anemia include:  While hair loss is not a typical symptom of iron deficiency anemia, some people might experience it.  If a person suspects their iron levels may be low, they should visit a doctor who can perform blood tests to determine if they are anemic.  Most of the studies related to iron deficiency anemia and hair loss look at hair loss in women. Female pattern hair loss, also known as androgenetic alopecia, is the  most common  hair loss type in women.  Female pattern hair loss usually refers to thinning hair in the middle portion of the scalp. People with this hair loss pattern may also have thinning or receding hair on the hairline along their forehead.   Research  has determined that there is not enough evidence to say for sure that iron deficiency anemia can cause hair loss in men or women. While some studies have found that people experiencing hair loss were deficient in iron, there is little evidence to suggest that an iron deficiency is the cause.  However, the research does suggest that iron deficiency hair loss  seems to be related  to hair loss that does not scar the hair follicles. This is promising for regrowth because it means that the follicles are not severely damaged and may be able to grow hair again.  People experiencing both hair loss and an iron deficiency might need to treat both separately.  Doctors can recommend many treatments to people experiencing hair loss, including:  Doctors are continually researching new techniques to restore hair growth. One example is platelet-rich plasma (PRP) treatment. This involves separating the platelets from a sample of a person's blood using a specialized machine, then injecting these platelets into areas of the scalp affected by hair loss.  Doctors believe the platelets contain a significant amount of growth factors, which can help stimulate hair growth.  Research  in one study found that women who received PRP injections saw increases in the density and thickness of their hair after 6 months. However, more studies need be done to prove PRP's effectiveness.  Treatments for iron deficiency anemia include:   Research  states that there is not enough evidence available to suggest that taking iron supplements will help a person with hair loss grow new hair if they have iron-deficiency anemia.  However, there are many other hair regrowth treatments available. People with hair loss should talk to their doctor about treatment options.  If a person has low iron stores, increasing their iron intake will likely help them to feel better overall.  Doctors are still defining the relationship between iron deficiency anemia and hair loss. This is because hair loss can have multiple contributing factors, including genetics.  However, doctors do know that iron deficiency can play a role because many people experiencing hair loss have lower iron stores than those who are not losing their hair.  Ideally, by increasing their iron stores, a person may see an improvement in hair growth as well as any symptoms of iron deficiency anemia.    
 Iron-deficiency anemia. (n.d.).  Iron-deficiency anemia. (n.d.).  Iron-deficiency anemia. (n.d.).  Killip, S., Bennett, J. M., &amp; Chambers, M. D. (2007, March 1). Iron deficiency anemia.  American Family Physician ,  75   (5), 671–678.  Le Floc'h, C., Cheniti, A., Connétable, S., Piccardi, N., Vincenzi, C., &amp; Tosti, A. (2015, January 8). Effect of a nutritional supplement on hair loss in women [Abstract].  Journal of Cosmetic Dermatology ,  14 (1), 76–82.  Park, S. Y., Na, S. Y., Kim, J. H., Cho, S., &amp; Lee, J. H. (2013, June 3). Iron plays a certain role in patterned hair loss.  Journal of Korean Medical Science ,  28 (6), 934–938.  Tawfik, A. A., &amp; Osman, M. A. R. (2017, May 14). The effect of autologous activated platelet-rich plasma injection on female pattern hair loss: A randomized placebo-controlled study.  Journal of Cosmetic Dermatology ,  17 (1).  Trost, L. B., Bergfield, W. F., &amp; Calogeras, E. (2006, May). The diagnosis and treatment of iron deficiency and its potential relationship to hair loss.  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  54 (5), 824 – 844.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Can an iron deficiency cause hair loss?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321668.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, April 30). "Can an iron deficiency cause hair loss?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  