 There are also a few other factors that people may wish to take into account when considering sex during menstruation in order to make the experience as comfortable as possible.  In this article, we address some common questions related to having sex during menstruation, including the benefits and risks.  There is a risk of infection when having oral, anal, or vaginal sex, or any form of skin-to-skin genital contact — even during menstruation.  Unless a person uses  birth control  or has a same-sex partner, there is also a risk of pregnancy when having sex during menstruation.  We look at the possible risks of sex during menstruation below, including  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs) and pregnancy:  There are two types of infection that may occur due to sexual activity: STIs and problems caused by changes in normal vaginal flora, such as yeast infections and  bacterial vaginosis .  While yeast infections can also occur without engaging in sexual activity, people may have  a higher risk  of getting a yeast infection due to the hormonal changes during a period.  Vaginal-penile sex can also spread yeast infections, causing the head of the penis to become inflamed. This condition is called  balanitis .  The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  estimate there are 20 million new sexually transmitted infections annually in the United States alone.  Sexually transmitted infections include:  The only way to protect against STIs is to use barrier methods such as condoms or dental dams. These protective measures do not guarantee that a person will not contract an infection, but they can significantly reduce the risk when used correctly.  According to  The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists , most women experience a 28-day menstrual cycle.  This cycle lasts from the first day of menstrual bleeding to the day before bleeding begins the following month. The length of the cycle varies between individuals, but is usually between 26–32 days long, with 28 days being the average.  The most fertile time of the menstrual cycle is between days 8 and 19.  This is the time when the egg is released from the ovary during  ovulation  and travels down the fallopian tube where fertilization occurs. If fertilized by a sperm, the egg makes its way to the uterus for implantation.  Although timing is everything, some important  facts  to consider include:  Following ovulation, an egg can stay alive and viable in a woman's fallopian tube for 24 hours.  Sperm can live for 3 to 5 days after being ejaculated into the body.  Changes in menstrual regularity can make it more challenging to accurately determine which days a woman is most fertile. Menstrual regularity may be influenced by:  Because of these fluctuations, a woman can theoretically get pregnant at any time. Unless people are in a same-sex partnership or are trying to conceive, birth control should be used even if a woman is menstruating.  Sex can have a positive impact on overall health, though not all the benefits have been scientifically proven.  In general, the possible benefits of having sex during menstruation include:  Having sex during menstruation can sometimes be messy. However, there are some steps people can take if they are worried about this, including:  Disposable menstrual cups are available to  purchase online . Reusable cups are thicker than disposable ones and should not be worn during penetrative sexual activity.  Having a period does not mean sex is not an option. It is important to remember, however, that people can still become pregnant or get an STI while on their period.  As such, people should continue to use barrier methods of contraception during sexual activity, such as condoms or dental dams, to prevent unintended pregnancy and infections.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 CDC fact sheet: Reported STDs in the United States, 2016 high burden of STDs threaten millions of Americans [Fact Sheet]. (2017, September).  CDC fact sheet: Reported STDs in the United States, 2016 high burden of STDs threaten millions of Americans [Fact Sheet]. (2017, September).  Fertility awareness-based methods of family planning. (2015, April).  Hambach, A., Evers, S., Summ, O., Husstedt, I. W., &amp; Frese, A. (2013, February 19). The impact of sexual activity on idiopathic headaches: An observational study [Abstract].  Cephalgia ,  33 (6), 384–389.  Male yeast infection: How can I tell if I have one? (2015, August 22).  STDs. (n.d.).  Yeast infections during your period. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. "Is it safe to have sex during menstruation?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321667.php&gt;    APA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. (2018, April 30). "Is it safe to have sex during menstruation?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  