 Although anyone can experience a hyperextended elbow, it tends to occur among those who play contact sports or engage in other strenuous physical activities. People who trip and fall may also hyperextend their elbow when they reach out to cushion their fall.  A popping sound and immediate pain are two of the main symptoms of a hyperextended elbow.  The popping sound can help people distinguish the injury from other elbow conditions, such as  tennis elbow .  Other signs include:  Severe injuries can lead to a deformity in the elbow or reduced circulation in the affected arm and hand.  A hyperextended elbow occurs when one of the joints in the elbow (known medically as the humeroulnar joint) bends backward. This is a movement that is outside the normal range of motion.  It is most likely to happen when a person is:  Factors that increase the risk of elbow hyperextension include:  A doctor will usually take a medical history and carry out a physical examination of the arm to diagnose a hyperextended elbow.  During the physical exam, the doctor may check for pain or discomfort. They will do this by asking the person to hold their arm in different positions, with the elbow bent at different angles.  The doctor will also look for signs of bruising or swelling.  Doctors may order imaging scans, such as magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) or X-rays, to check for any damage to the soft tissues or bones.  Treatment for a hyperextended elbow involves managing the symptoms and allowing the joint time to heal.  Treatments include RICE:  Rest allows the elbow joint time to heal. Avoid flexing and extending the elbow in the days after the injury, where possible. Take time off from sports or other activities that involve the use of the elbow.  A doctor or physical therapist can suggest the best time to return to these activities.  Applying an ice pack to the joint immediately after injuring the elbow alleviates pain and swelling.  To make an ice pack, wrap ice in a thin cloth. Apply it to the elbow for up to 20 minutes at a time. Repeat several times daily for the first few days.  Never apply ice directly to bare skin.  Applying compression to the elbow joint can restrict its movement and reduce  inflammation . Elastic compression bandages specially designed for the elbow are available in pharmacies and drugstores. There are also many  available online .  Alternatively, wrap a regular elastic bandage firmly around the joint to provide compression. It should never be so tight that it causes pain or numbness in the arm or hand.  Raising the elbow above heart level is another way to reduce swelling. Hold the arm as high as possible in the first few days after hyperextending the elbow.  The simplest way to do this is to prop the elbow up on some cushions while sitting or lying down. Consider using a sling when moving around.  Other forms of treatment include:  Several over-the-counter (OTC) anti-inflammatory medications will reduce swelling and pain including:  A person might choose to wear an elbow brace to immobilize their arm and elbow joint, which encourages healing.  People can wear a brace for the first few days following injury. However, they should check with their doctor after that, as doctors do not usually recommend the long-term use of a brace.  However, some doctors may suggest using the brace during certain sporting activities to prevent re-injury.  Severe cases of a hyperextended elbow may require surgery. This is especially true if there is damage to the surrounding bones or ligaments.  People who undergo surgery may need to wear a brace and see a physical therapist.  The following stretches alleviate pain and increase the range of motion and flexibility:  Not all cases of elbow hyperextension can be prevented, such as those caused by an awkward fall.  Using proper form and technique when engaging in activities can reduce the risk of injury. Some people may benefit from wearing a brace or supportive sleeve while working out.  It is important to avoid repetitive hyperextension injuries as some  research  suggests these can cause pathological changes in the bones and joint.  Recovery times can range from several days to several weeks. The time it takes depends on the treatments used and how severe the injury is. Most people recover within 3 to 4 weeks.  Those who suspect they have a hyperextended elbow should see their doctor for a diagnosis. Apply ice immediately after the injury to alleviate pain and swelling. Keep the joint immobilized for several days.  If surgery is required, the injury will take longer to heal, and  physical therapy  may be necessary.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 De Almeida, T. B. C., Dobashi, E. T., Nishimi, A. Y., De Almeida Jr., E. B., Pascarelli, L., &amp; Rodrigues, L. M. R. (2017, September–October). Analysis of the pattern and mechanism of elbow injuries related to armbar-type armlocks in jiu-jitsu fighters.  Acta Ortopedica Brasileira ,  25 (5), 209–211.  De Almeida, T. B. C., Dobashi, E. T., Nishimi, A. Y., De Almeida Jr., E. B., Pascarelli, L., &amp; Rodrigues, L. M. R. (2017, September–October). Analysis of the pattern and mechanism of elbow injuries related to armbar-type armlocks in jiu-jitsu fighters.  Acta Ortopedica Brasileira ,  25 (5), 209–211.  Felton, P. J., &amp; King, M. A. (2016, January 20). The effect of elbow hyperextension on ball speed in cricket fast bowling [Abstract].  Journal of Sports Sciences ,  34 (18), 1752–1758.  Popovic, N., &amp; Lemaire, R. (2002, December 1). Hyperextension trauma to the elbow: Radiological and ultrasonographic evaluation in handball goalkeepers.  Journal of Sports Medicine ,  36 (6), 452–456.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to do about a hyperextended elbow."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321614.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 25). "What to do about a hyperextended elbow."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  