 Ureaplasma bacteria are part of the body's bacterial population, and they live in balance, without causing a problem, in most cases. Sometimes, however, they can  increase in population , causing infection and health problems.  Ureaplasma belongs to a class of bacteria known as  Mycoplasma . The  Mycoplasma  species are the smallest known organisms of their type that can make a copy of themselves to reproduce.  Ureaplasma does not have a cell wall, which makes it unique among bacteria. The lack of a cell wall makes it resistant to some common  antibiotics , including  penicillin . However, it can be treated with others.  Most people have Ureaplasma in their bodies and never know it. But, Ureaplasma has been linked to diseases and conditions that affect the male and female reproductive systems. It can also infect newborns if the mother passes the bacteria to the infant during pregnancy.  In this article, we examine how Ureaplasma is spread, the symptoms it can cause, and what treatment options are available.  Ureaplasma can be passed during sexual contact. One  study  found that vaginal infections with Ureaplasma were higher among women who had multiple sexual partners.  These bacteria may also be passed to a fetus or newborn if the mother has Ureaplasma infection during pregnancy.  Ureaplasma may also be found in women who have never been sexually active, according to another  study .  As such, the cause of Ureaplasma presence may not be known in some cases.  Ureaplasma does not cause symptoms if it is living in balance with other bacteria. A healthy immune system can usually keep the bacteria in check, preventing them from causing infection.  If the Ureaplasma population increases, certain health problems may develop and cause symptoms.  The following symptoms are possible signs of Ureaplasma infection and should be checked by a doctor.  People should note that Ureaplasma may not be the only cause of these issues.   Trouble getting pregnant   Ureaplasma bacteria have been found in both men and women with  infertility  problems. Infertility is defined as trying to conceive for  12 months  without success.  The bacteria may affect the number of sperm and their ability to move in men. In women, it may cause an infection that makes pregnancy more difficult to achieve.  A  study  found that a particular Ureaplasma known as  Ureaplasma urealyticum  is seen more often in women with unexplained infertility. As a result, the authors suggest that women with unexplained infertility should be tested for the bacteria.  A genital tract infection may cause up to  15 percent  of all cases of male infertility, but not all of these are due to Ureaplasma. Many of them are a result of  sexually transmitted infections , such as  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea .  A  review  of research found that  U. urealyticum  was associated with a higher risk of infertility in men. Another type,  Ureaplasma parvum , was not linked to male infertility.   Pain, discharge, and itching of the genital area   Ureaplasma infection may cause some conditions that lead to pain and discomfort in the genital area. They include:   Pelvic or abdominal pain   Ureaplasma has been linked to several different health problems that can cause pain in the pelvic, abdominal, or groin area. These include:  Premature babies, especially those that weigh 1,000 grams (about 2.2 pounds) or less, may be  more prone  to Ureaplasma infection.  Newborns may develop:  Also, a fetus can become infected with Ureaplasma before birth, which can lead to:  Pregnant women can be treated for Ureaplasma infections, which greatly reduces the chance of these complications.  A biopsy or swab, which is tested in a lab, is used to diagnose Ureaplasma. The biopsy or swab may be taken from the vagina, uterine lining, urethra, or urine sample.  Due to its small size, Ureaplasma is nearly impossible to see under a microscope. Identifying Ureaplasma requires specialized lab tests and equipment.  Antibiotic treatment is needed for infections of Ureaplasma. Only certain antibiotics are effective against these bacteria, however.  The antibiotic chosen depends upon the health problem being addressed, and who is being treated. Certain antibiotics are not safe for pregnant women or newborns.  Urinary tract or genital infections caused by Ureaplasma  may be treated  with azithromycin or doxycycline.  If the bacteria do not respond to these drugs, erythromycin or fluoroquinolones may be used.  Newborns with lung problems caused by Ureaplasma may be treated with erythromycin.  Pregnant women who have premature rupture of membranes may be treated with macrolide antibiotics. These include clarithromycin, azithromycin, and erythromycin.  Treatment with an antibiotic may reduce the risk of Ureaplasma infection in the newborn.  Only abstaining from sexual contact can prevent Ureaplasma transmission. But, some people may have Ureaplasma colonization without having sex.  Ureaplasma is considered an opportunistic bacteria, which means it is found in both healthy people and those with certain diseases.  Opportunistic bacteria may be able to make someone sick when an illness,  stress , or other opportunity weakens the immune system and allows it to multiply and further invade the body.  Getting treatment for medical conditions and having regular checkups with a doctor may help prevent these opportunities from occurring.  The outlook for Ureaplasma infection depends upon what health problems it is causing, and the severity of the condition. Fortunately, certain antibiotics are effective against the bacteria and often clear up infections when taken as directed.  Pregnant women should see their obstetrician regularly for prenatal checkups and should discuss any unusual symptoms. This can help avoid any complications for the mother or baby.    
 Chaim, W., Horowitz, S., David, J. B., Ingel, F., Evinson, B., &amp; Mazor, M. (2003, August 15).  Ureaplasma urealyticum  in the development of postpartum endometritis [Abstract].  European Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Biology ,  109 (2), 145–148.  Chaim, W., Horowitz, S., David, J. B., Ingel, F., Evinson, B., &amp; Mazor, M. (2003, August 15).  Ureaplasma urealyticum  in the development of postpartum endometritis [Abstract].  European Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Biology ,  109 (2), 145–148.  Diseases characterized by vaginal discharge. (2011, January 28).  Gupta, A., Gupta, A., Gupta, S., Mittal, A., Chandra, P., &amp; Gill, A. K. (2009, December). Correlation of mycoplasma with unexplained infertility [Abstract].  Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics ,  280 (6), 981–985.  Huang, C., Zhu, H. L., Xu, K. R., Wang, S. Y., Fan, L. Q., &amp; Zhu, W. B. (2015, August 20). Mycoplasma and ureaplasma infection and male infertility: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  Andrology ,  3 (5), 809–816.  Kokkayil, P., &amp; Dhawan, B. (2015, April 10). Ureaplasma: Current perspectives.  Indian Journal of Medical Microbiology ,  33 (2), 205–214.  Larsen, B., &amp; Hwang, J. (2010).  Mycoplasma ,  ureaplasma , and adverse pregnancy outcomes: A fresh look.  Infectious Diseases in Obstetrics and Gynecology ,  2010 , 521921.  Martin, D. H. (2008, July 9). Nongonococcal urethritis: New views through the prism of modern molecular microbiology [Abstract].  Current Infectious Disease Reports ,  10 (2), 128–132.  Moi, H., Blee, K., &amp; Horner, P. J. (2015, July 29). Management of non-gonococcal urethritis.  BMC Infectious Diseases ,  15 (1), 294.  Pellati, D., Mylonakis, I., Bertoloni, G., Fiore, C., Andrisani, A., Ambrosini, G., &amp; Armanini, D. (2008, September). Genital tract infections and infertility [Abstract].  European Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Reproductive Biology ,  140 (1), 3–11.  Rittenschober-Böhm, J., Waldhoer, T., Schulz, S. M., Stihsen, B., Pimpel, B., Goeral, K., ... &amp; Berger, A. (2018). First trimester vaginal  Ureaplasma  biovar colonization and preterm birth: Results of a prospective multicenter study [Abstract].  Neonatology ,  113 (1), 1–6.  Sung, T.-J. (2010, December 31).  Ureaplasma  infections in pre-term infants: Recent information regarding the role of  Ureaplasma  species as neonatal pathogens.  Korean Journal of Pediatrics ,  53 (12), 989–993.  Waites, K. B., Katz, B., &amp; Schelonka, R. L. (2005, October). Mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas as neonatal pathogens.  Clinical Microbiology Reviews ,  18 (4), 757–789.  What is infertility? (2017, July 27).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "What is Ureaplasma?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321636.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, April 26). "What is Ureaplasma?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  