 According to  recent findings , consuming saturated fat may not be bad for health as researchers once thought.  Fat is an essential nutrient that the body needs to function properly. Fats provide energy, absorb certain  vitamins  and minerals, help maintain body temperature, and insulate the body's vital organs.  The most recent Dietary Guidelines for Americans (2015–2020) recommend that adults get between  20 to 35 percent  of their daily  calories  from fat.  In this article, we look at the differences between saturated and unsaturated fat, what they do in the body, and the types of foods that contain them.  Fats are classified into three main groups, which are:   Saturated fat   These are fats that have single bonds between their molecules and are "saturated" with hydrogen molecules. They tend to be solids at room temperature, such as butter.  Food sources rich in saturated fat include meat and dairy products, such as:   Research  has found that medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs) are the most healthful type of saturated fat. Coconut, for example, is rich in MCTs.   Unsaturated fat   Unsaturated fats contain one or more double or triple bonds between the molecules. As oils, these fats are liquids at room temperature. They are also found in solid foods.  This group is further classified into two categories called monounsaturated fats and polyunsaturated fats.  Dietary sources of unsaturated fats include:   Trans fat   These fats are liquid fats that are converted to solid fats during food processing techniques.  Some meats and dairy products contain small amounts of trans fats, but they are usually found in processed foods.  Examples of food products that may contain trans fats include cookies, crackers, doughnuts, and fried foods.  Researchers have studied the effects of saturated and unsaturated fat on the human body for decades.   Observational studies  showed that people with  heart disease  or those at risk of heart problems had higher amounts of saturated fats in their diet.  This association fueled further research showing that saturated fats may increase levels of "bad"  cholesterol  (low-density lipoprotein or LDL). Consuming too much LDL cholesterol may increase a person's risk of heart disease.  Recent  research  has challenged the link between saturated fats and heart disease. Some studies do not record any significant effects of reducing saturated fat on people's risk of heart disease and  strokes .  In contrast, the health benefits of unsaturated fats are well-established. The first evidence of their "heart-healthful" properties dates back to the  1960s , when people from Greece and other Mediterranean regions were found to have a low rate of heart disease despite consuming a high-fat diet.  Unsaturated fats help lower a person's levels of LDL cholesterol, reduce  inflammation , and build stronger cell membranes in the body.  All foods that are rich in fat contain a combination of fatty acids. As such, no food contains entirely saturated or unsaturated fats, making it very difficult eliminate just one type.  Most health organizations and dietary experts  recommend  eating saturated fats in moderation, and replacing them with unsaturated fats when possible.  The American Heart Association strongly recommend a saturated fat intake of no more than  5 to 6 percent  of total daily calories. This means that for an average 2000-calorie daily diet, no more than 120 calories or 13 grams should come from saturated fats.  However, research from  2008 ,  2014 , and  2018  supports a higher intake of MCT saturated fats, such as from coconut oil, for weight loss and other health benefits. People with existing heart problems should speak to a doctor before adding new saturated fats to their diet.  Some easy ways for people to lower saturated fat intake and include more healthful fats in their diet include:  Despite the abundance of research on dietary fats, there is still no evidence that conclusively links saturated fats with negative health outcomes such as heart disease.  However, experts agree that limiting intake of most saturated fats and consuming enough unsaturated fats, such as plant oils, avocado, and fish, is the ideal approach to a healthful diet in the long-term.  Written by Gillian D'Souza    
 De Souza, R. J., Mente, A., Maroleanu, A., Cozma, A. I., Ha, V., Kishibe, T., … Anand, S. S. (2015, August 12). Intake of saturated and trans unsaturated fatty acids and risk of all cause mortality, cardiovascular disease, and type 2 diabetes: Systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies.  BMJ ,  351 .  De Souza, R. J., Mente, A., Maroleanu, A., Cozma, A. I., Ha, V., Kishibe, T., … Anand, S. S. (2015, August 12). Intake of saturated and trans unsaturated fatty acids and risk of all cause mortality, cardiovascular disease, and type 2 diabetes: Systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies.  BMJ ,  351 .  Dietary Guidelines for Americans (2015–2020). (2015, December).  Fat: The facts. (2017, May 1).  Hooper, L., Martin, N., Abdelhamid, A., &amp; Davey Smith, G. (2015, June 10). Reduction in saturated fat intake for cardiovascular disease.  The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , 6.  Li, Y., Hruby, A., Bernstein, A. M., Ley, S. H., Wang, D. D., Chiuve, S. E., … Hu, F. B. (2016, October 6). Saturated fat as compared with unsaturated fats and sources of carbohydrates in relation to risk of coronary heart disease: A prospective cohort study.  Journal of the American College of Cardiology ,  66 (14), 1538–1548.  Lifestyle coach facilitation guide: Post-core. (n.d.).  Mumme, K., &amp; Stonehouse, W. (2015, February). Effects of medium-chain triglycerides on weight loss and body composition: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials [Abstract].  Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,  115 (2), 249–263.  St-Onge, M.-P., Bosarge, A., Goree, L. L. T., &amp; Darnell, B. (2010, May 21). Medium chain triglyceride oil consumption as part of a weight loss diet does not lead to an adverse metabolic profile when compared to olive oil.  Journal of the American College of Nutrition ,  27 (5), 547–552.  St-Onge, M.-P., Mayrsohn, B., O'Keeffe, M., Kissileff, H. R., Choudhury, A. R., &amp; Laferrère, B. (2015, April 1). Impact of medium and long chain triglycerides consumption on appetite and food intake in overweight men.  European Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  68 (10), 1134–1140.  The skinny on fats. (2017, September 19).  The truth about fats: The good, the bad, and the in-between. (2017, August 22).  Wang, Y., Liu, Z., Han, Y., Xu, J., Huang, W., &amp; Li, Z. (2018). Medium chain triglycerides enhances exercise endurance through the increased mitochondrial biogenesis and metabolism.  PLoS ONE ,  13 (2), e0191182.  Willett, W. C., Sacks, F., Trichopoulou, A., Drescher, G., Ferro-Luzzi, A., Helsing, E., &amp; Trichopoulos, D. (1995, June). Mediterranean diet pyramid: A cultural model for healthy eating [Abstract].  American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  61 (6 Suppl), 1402S–1406S.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  D’Souza, Gillian. "Is saturated or unsaturated fat better for you?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321655.php&gt;    APA  D’Souza, G. (2018, April 27). "Is saturated or unsaturated fat better for you?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  