 An anteverted uterus is a natural variation, much like having a certain eye color. A person's uterus can also be tilted backward. This is less common and is called a retroverted uterus.  In this article, learn more about an anteverted uterus, how uterine tilt is tested, and what it means for fertility.  The uterus is the pear-shaped organ in a woman's lower abdomen in which fetuses grow.  It is also called the womb.  The uterus is connected to the ovaries, which produce eggs.  When a woman ovulates, an egg travels down toward the uterus via the fallopian tubes.  The uterus is attached to the walls of the pelvis by flexible ligaments that allow it to tilt forward and backward.  An anteverted uterus is common, occurring in  around 75 percent  of women. It means that the uterus is tipped forward toward the bladder. How far forward the uterus tips varies between individuals.  It does not affect the structure of the uterus and is not an abnormality or health condition. Having an anteverted uterus does not interfere with reproduction or have an impact on a woman's health.  The uterus is tipped backward the remaining 25 percent of the time. This is called a tipped, tilted, or retroverted uterus and can sometimes cause problems during pregnancy.  An anteverted uterus is a natural genetic variation, much like eye or hair color.   Infertility  affects about 1 in every 6 couples in the United States. The cause of infertility can be a problem with the male or female reproductive system, or both.  Problems with the female reproductive system account for only approximately  50 percent  of infertility cases.  An anteverted uterus is normal and not usually the cause of fertility issues. Problems with  ovulation , the cervix, or the fallopian tubes are the most common causes of female infertility.  Other things that can affect a woman's fertility include:  A retroverted womb can, however, sometimes cause issues during pregnancy. Symptoms may include:  Pregnancy starts with a retroverted uterus around  15 percent of the time . The uterus tends to move into an upward position on its own by the 14th week of pregnancy, but sometimes it stays in the same place and can get "wedged" in the pelvic cavity as it grows.  Having an anteverted uterus is the most common variation in uterine position. It does not affect sex life or sexual health.  Unless a doctor suspects it is causing a problem, it is common for most women not to know if their uterus is anteverted or retroverted.  A pelvic exam or  ultrasound  can be carried out to determine the tilt of the uterus. An initial pelvic exam may include all or some of the following:  An anteverted uterus is perfectly normal and is not considered a health condition. It requires no treatment.  If a woman is concerned about her fertility or has a family history of a retroverted uterus causing problems during pregnancy, she can speak to her doctor about fertility tests and checking the tilt of the uterus.  An anteverted uterus simply means the uterus is tilted forward. It is normal and is not considered to be a health condition.  The majority of women have an anteverted uterus. It does not have any impact on a person's sex life, menstrual cycle, or fertility.    
 Ball, J. W., Dains, J. E., Flynn, J. A., Solomon, B. S., &amp; Stewart, R. W. (2017, December 21).  Seidel's Guide to Physical Examination – E-Book: An Interprofessional Approach . Elsevier Health Sciences.  Ball, J. W., Dains, J. E., Flynn, J. A., Solomon, B. S., &amp; Stewart, R. W. (2017, December 21).  Seidel's Guide to Physical Examination – E-Book: An Interprofessional Approach . Elsevier Health Sciences.  Female infertility. (2017, May 16).  Heavy periods. (2016, September 30).  Jacobsson, B., &amp; Wide-Swensson, D. (2009, August 7). Incarceration of the retroverted gravid uterus – A review. [ABSTRACT]  Acta obstetricia et gynecologica Scandinavica ,  78 (8), 665–668.  Moore, M., &amp; De Costa, C. (2004).  Do You Really Need Surgery? A Sensible Guide to Hysterectomy and Other Procedures for Women . Rutgers University Press.  Sakhel, K., Sinkovskaya, E., Horton, S., Beydoun, H., Chauhan, S. P., &amp; Abuhamad, A. Z. (2014, February 1). Orientation of the uterine fundus in reference to the longitudinal axis of the body.  Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine ,  33 (2), 323–328.  Sanders, R. C., &amp; Parsons, A. K. (2014, July). Anteverted retroflexed uterus: A common consequence of cesarean delivery.  American Journal of Roentgenology ,  203 (1), W117–W124.  Tipped uterus: Tilted uterus. (2017, March 8).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "Can you get pregnant with an anteverted uterus?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321675.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, April 30). "Can you get pregnant with an anteverted uterus?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  