 In rare cases, white gums can indicate  oral cancer , so it is essential to see a doctor for a proper diagnosis.  Read on to learn more about white gums and discover how to get rid of them with home remedies and medical treatments.  The following conditions and situations can lead to white gums:  Leukoplakia is an oral condition that can turn parts of the gums white.  It causes white patches to appear in the mouth that cannot be removed with a toothbrush.  Most cases of leukoplakia are harmless, but some are precancerous.  The  American Cancer Society  advises that patches occurring alongside red lesions are more likely to be cancerous or precancerous.  Doctors do not know exactly what causes leukoplakia, but tobacco use is thought to play a role.   Anemia  occurs when the body lacks healthy red blood cells. These cells are needed to carry oxygen around the body.  Anemia comes in different forms, depending on its underlying cause. Common causes include iron or  vitamin B12  deficiencies,  Crohn's disease , and  celiac disease .  Symptoms of anemia include:  People with anemia may also have pale skin, including the skin on the gums. This can cause them to look white.  Canker sores, or mouth ulcers, are lesions that develop in the mouth and on the gums. They can be very painful, especially when speaking, eating, or drinking.  The ulcers are typically round or oval and have a pale center with a red border.  Canker sores that appear on the gums can make certain areas of the gumline look white. However, they do not change the color of the gums in the entire mouth.   Gingivitis  is a mild form of gum (periodontal) disease. This common condition affects  approximately half  of all American adults. Poor dental hygiene is the most common cause of gingivitis.  People with gingivitis may experience irritated, red, and swollen gums around the base of their teeth. They may also notice loose teeth or bleeding when brushing and flossing. Over time, the condition can cause the gums to turn white and recede.  Oral  lichen planus  causes lacy white patches to appear on the gums, tongue, and other tissue inside the mouth. It is a chronic autoimmune condition that causes a range of other symptoms, including pain, bleeding, and gum  inflammation .  People with oral lichen planus should go for regular dental check-ups, as they have an increased risk of nutritional deficiencies, mouth infections, and oral cancer.  Also known as  candidiasis ,  oral thrush  is a yeast infection that causes raised, creamy-white sores in the mouth.  The sores appear on the inside of the cheeks, the tongue, or the gums. Babies, older adults, and people with  diabetes  are at greater risk of oral thrush.  The trauma of a tooth extraction may cause the gums surrounding the extraction site to turn white. Gums will usually return to their normal color within a few days.  Getting teeth professionally whitened can cause the gums to look brighter or whiter than normal. They should return to their usual color within a few hours.  According to the American Cancer Society, around  51,000 people  in the United States will get oral cavity or oropharyngeal  cancer  in 2018.  White gums are a symptom of oral cancer. This condition can spread quickly, so it is vital to be aware of other signs and symptoms, including:  Symptoms that may occur alongside white gums vary depending on the underlying cause of the color change.  Sometimes, a person may have no other symptoms. In other cases, white gums can be accompanied by:  Keeping track of any additional symptoms can help a doctor or dentist diagnose the underlying cause of white gums.  White gums are treated according to their underlying cause.  Dietary changes,  vitamin  supplements, and managing any chronic health conditions can help treat anemia.  Minor canker sores typically heal within 2 weeks, usually without any treatment. Major sores can take up to 6 weeks to heal and should be evaluated by a doctor or dentist.  Treatments for canker sores that persist include:  Gingivitis is easy to treat with improved dental hygiene habits. Preventing and treating gingivitis involves brushing and flossing twice a day and going for regular dental check-ups.  Severe cases may require scaling or laser cleaning.  Patches of leukoplakia can be frozen off or removed with a scalpel or laser. People with the condition should avoid smoking or chewing tobacco.  A doctor may prescribe antiviral drugs if a person also has a weakened immune system.  There is no cure for oral lichen planus, but a person can manage the symptoms with:  Oral thrush is typically treated with antifungal medications. A doctor may prescribe medication in the form of a tablet, lozenge, or mouth rinse.  Over  50 percent  of oral cancer cases go undetected until the cancer has spread to other areas, such as the lymph nodes, so it is essential to see a doctor as soon as possible.  Treatment options include  chemotherapy  and surgically removing the affected areas.  Several home remedies can alleviate the symptoms associated with white gums, although they may not necessarily treat the underlying cause.  To manage white gum conditions at home, a person can:  The outlook for white gums varies depending on the underlying cause, the health of the individual, and the treatments used.  Canker sores, for example, often clear up within a few days. They may not require any treatment. Other conditions, such as oral lichen planus, require lifelong management.  White gums can be a sign of serious conditions, such as oral cancer, so it is essential to see a doctor for a diagnosis. Early treatment can reduce the risk of complications and improve the long-term outlook.  Some of the home remedies listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 CDC: Half of American adults have periodontal disease. (n.d.).  CDC: Half of American adults have periodontal disease. (n.d.).  Key statistics for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers. (2018, March 9).  Oral cavity, pharyngeal, and laryngeal cancer screening (PDQ®)–patient version. (2018, April 12).  What are oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers? (2018, March 9).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What does it mean when you have white gums?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321640.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, April 27). "What does it mean when you have white gums?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  