 When  fibromyalgia  causes  inflammation  of the cartilage that joins the upper ribs to the breastbone, it results in a condition called costochondritis.  The resulting pain may be confused with heart-related pain. As always, a correct diagnosis is essential.  In this article, we look at what kinds of chest pain are normally associated with fibromyalgia. We also describe treatment options.  People with fibromyalgia tend to have chronic pain, stiffness, and tenderness that radiates throughout the body. Although it was once considered a noninflammatory illness, research from  2017  suggests that fibromyalgia causes widespread inflammation that is not detected by routine blood tests.  If fibromyalgia-related inflammation affects the cartilage that connects the upper ribs to the breastbone, this can result in costochondritis.  Fibromyalgia can also cause inflammation, pain, stiffness, and muscle spasms anywhere in the chest.  When first experiencing costochondritis or painful or restrictive chest symptoms associated with fibromyalgia, many worry that something is wrong with their lungs or that they are having a  heart attack .  People tend to describe the pain as:  The severity of symptoms will generally depend on the extent of inflammation. This is true for symptoms of costochondritis and chest-related fibromyalgia symptoms.  The pain described above may:  Pain caused by costochondritis may be felt either in the center of the chest or anywhere along the cartilage that runs between the sternum, or breastbone, and the ribs.  Fibromyalgia can cause chest pain when it affects the muscles, tendons, or ligaments in the area.  When fibromyalgia impacts the cartilage that connects the ribs to the sternum, it can cause costochondritis.  Cartilage is a flexible connective tissue found in joints. The cartilage that joins the ribs to the sternum allows the ribcage to expand during inhalation. Because of this, people with severe costochondritis may have difficulty or experience pain while taking deep breaths.  Researchers are not sure why fibromyalgia occurs. Physical or emotional  stress  may prompt an abnormal response of the  central nervous system , causing extensive pain.  Triggering events may include:  Symptoms of fibromyalgia may be provoked by changing levels of some neurotransmitters, which are chemicals that help the nerves to communicate.  People with fibromyalgia tend to have  increased levels  of neurotransmitters that communicate pain, such as glutamate and substance P. Alterations in levels of this substance seem to change how the brain understands pain.  Also, individuals with fibromyalgia often have lower levels of neurotransmitters that inhibit the communication of pain, such as gamma-aminobutyric acid.  These differences in neurotransmitter levels may indicate that people with fibromyalgia have exaggerated responses to pain. Or, it may mean that the brain mistakenly perceives normal sensations as pain.  Doctors and researchers are still working to determine the best treatments for fibromyalgia. Each person responds to treatment differently.  When chest pain is severe, long-lasting, disabling, or frequent, comprehensive treatment may be necessary.  The American Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have yet to specify any treatment for fibromyalgia, though the organization has approved certain medications for use in managing symptoms.  Medications approved for the management of fibromyalgia include:  Some lifestyle adjustments and natural remedies have been shown to reduce symptoms of costochondritis and others associated with fibromyalgia.  Options for immediate relief include:  Lifestyle adjustments that may help to reduce long-term symptoms include:  Some traditional and alternative medical therapies are often recommended to treat long-term symptoms, though limited scientific evidence may support their use.  Popular therapies with preliminarily evidence include:  Fibromyalgia tends to cause pain throughout the body, and chest pain will often occur with other symptoms.  A person should seek immediate medical attention when chest pain occurs in isolation, or when it is accompanied by:  Many people with fibromyalgia experience chest pain, usually where the ribs and the sternum connect, in the middle of the chest.  This pain tends to be harmless and often resolves with basic home care. However, people who experience severe, disabling, or frequent chest pain associated with fibromyalgia may require additional treatment and should speak with a doctor.  Seek emergency medical care if chest pains are not accompanied by other fibromyalgia symptoms, such as exhaustion and pain mirrored on both sides of the body.  Also, seek immediate care when chest pain occurs in areas that are not tender, or when the pain is accompanied by symptoms not related to fibromyalgia, such as coughing, fever, and heart palpitations.    
 Becker, S., &amp; Schweinhardt, P. (2012, July 11). Dysfunctional neurotransmitter systems in fibromyalgia, their role in central stress circuitry and pharmacological actions on these systems.  Pain Research and Treatment ,  2012 , 1–10.  Becker, S., &amp; Schweinhardt, P. (2012, July 11). Dysfunctional neurotransmitter systems in fibromyalgia, their role in central stress circuitry and pharmacological actions on these systems.  Pain Research and Treatment ,  2012 , 1–10.  Bäckryd, E., Tanum, L., Lind, A.-L., Larsson, A., &amp; Gordh, T. (2017, March 3). Evidence of both systemic inflammation and neuroinflammation in fibromyalgia patients, as assessed by a multiplex protein panel applied to the cerebrospinal fluid and to plasma.  Journal of Pain Research ,  10 , 515–525.  Fibromyalgia. (2016, March 1).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Fibromyalgia and chest pain: What is normal, symptoms, and treatment."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321635.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, April 26). "Fibromyalgia and chest pain: What is normal, symptoms, and treatment."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  