 Aromatherapy is used to help with a wide range of health issues, from  acne  to  asthma ,  depression  to  insomnia , and  migraine  to worms.  In this article, we examine what carrier oils are, and how people can use them alongside essential oils.  Essential oils are distilled from the aromatic leaves, bark, and roots of plants. If applied to the skin directly, they can cause reactions, such as severe irritation, redness or burning.  Carrier oils are used to dilute the essential oils and help "carry" them into the skin. Aloe vera gels and unscented body lotion are also sometimes used as carriers.  Carrier oils are vegetable oils, such as  coconut oil  or avocado oil, that have been derived from the seeds, kernels, or nuts of a plant.  To be used in aromatherapy, it is recommended that the oil is obtained through cold pressing. In this process, the oil is extracted by crushing the plants. Users claim that the fragile nutrients in the oil can be damaged if they are extracted with heat.  While some are odorless, most carrier oils have a faint smell that is sweet and nutty. Unlike essential oils, they do not evaporate.  Different carrier oils have different properties and use. The carrier oil chosen for aromatherapy treatment will depend on the desired outcome.   Coconut oil ( Cocus nucifera )   People in the tropics have been using coconut oil as a  moisturizer  for centuries. Recently, the oil has also  been shown  to have antimicrobial properties. This is largely due to its high lauric acid content, which is the main fatty acid in coconut oil.  The oil smells of coconut and can be used either as a carrier oil or on its own. It can be applied to the skin, hair, and lips, and helps to protect the skin by leaving a thin layer behind.  Coconut oil is solid and creamy at room temperature.   Black cumin seed oil ( Nigella sativa )   Black cumin seed oil is anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, and antifungal, and is  thought  to be helpful in promoting the healing of wounds and burns.  This oil is golden brown and has a mild, earthy, woody smell that can be slightly spicy or peppery. Black cumin seed oil also absorbs into the skin quickly.   Jojoba oil ( Simmondsia chinensis )   Jojoba oil, which is really a wax, is commonly used in massage. Due to its natural anti-inflammatory properties, it might help in the  treatment of mild acne .  In aromatherapy, it absorbs well and could be a good choice for those with oily or acne-prone skin.  Jojoba oil is yellow and has a distinct but pleasant smell.   Evening primrose oil ( Oenothera biennis )   The light and sweet-smelling evening primrose oil has been used in aromatherapy and skin care for many years. It is  thought  to be useful in many skin conditions, including  eczema .  It is usually expensive, and aromatherapists tend to blend it with other carrier oils. It has a high essential fatty acid content, meaning that it deteriorates and goes rancid quite quickly.   Rose hip oil ( Rosa mosqueta )   Rose hip oil is rich in essential fatty acids, including alpha-linolenic acid. It has  been shown  to have antioxidative and anti-inflammatory effects and is used to treat various skin conditions.  Rose hip oil is a natural source of  vitamin  C and vitamin E.   Grapeseed oil ( Vitus vinifera )   Grapeseed oil is considered to be an all-purpose oil that is  commonly used  in aromatherapy, from massage to skin care. It has a light aroma that is slightly sweet and nutty, and it is virtually clear in color. It leaves a glossy film on the skin.  This oil is made from the pressings of the seeds from particular grape varieties.  Massage and body oils are made by combing essential oils with one or more carrier oils.  When making up massage oil, the National Association for Holistic Aromatherapy recommends the following  dilution ratios :  For infants and young children  For adults  This dilution is recommended for most healthy adults during aromatherapy.  This dilution is usually used to treat temporary health concerns, such as muscle pain or injury.  These dilutions are less common. Anyone who notices any irritation or sensitivity when using these dilutions is advised to stop applying the mixture.  Aromatherapy involves using concentrated essential oils that have been extracted from herbs, flowers, and other plants to treat various health issues.  The term dates back to 1937 when the French perfumer and chemist Rene-Maurice Gattefosse first coined it.  In 1928, Gattefosse had badly burned his hand while working in his laboratory. In desperation, he plunged the injury into the nearest vat of lavender oil and was surprised to discover how quickly the pain eased. The skin healed quickly and left no scarring.  The incident sparked his interest in the area, and he went on to study the therapeutic benefits of essential oils.  Today, the term aromatherapy is widely accepted to refer to using essential oils to bring about holistic therapeutic or medicinal benefits. Aromatherapy is often used alongside medical treatments to help relieve symptoms of various conditions.  Aromatherapy oils are used to ease many different ailments, including:  Carrier oils make it possible for people to enjoy the benefits of applying essential oils to their skin without suffering irritation.  Many carrier oils have their own therapeutic properties, meaning that there are countless combinations of health benefits when they are used.    
 Agero, A. L., &amp; Verallo-Rowell, V. M. (2004, September). A randomized double-blind controlled trial comparing extra virgin coconut oil with mineral oil as a moisturizer for mild to moderate xerosis [Abstract].  Dermatitis ,  15 (3), 109–116.  Agero, A. L., &amp; Verallo-Rowell, V. M. (2004, September). A randomized double-blind controlled trial comparing extra virgin coconut oil with mineral oil as a moisturizer for mild to moderate xerosis [Abstract].  Dermatitis ,  15 (3), 109–116.  Agnew, T., Leach, M., &amp; Segal, L. (2014, May 7). The clinical impact and cost-effectiveness of essential oils and aromatherapy for the treatment of acne vulgaris: A protocol for a randomized controlled trial.  The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine ,  20 (5).  Chrubasik, C., Roufogalis, B. D., Müller‐Ladner, U., &amp; Chrubasik, S. (2008, April 29). A systematic review on the  Rosa canina  effect and efficacy profiles.  Phytotherapy Research ,  22 (6), 725–733.  Cooke, B., &amp; Ernst, E. (2000). Aromatherapy: A systematic review.  British Journal of General Practice ,  50 (455), 493–496.  Dayrit, F. M. (2014, November 15). The properties of lauric acid and their significance in coconut oil [Abstract].  Journal of the American Oil Chemists' Society ,  92 (1), 1–15.  Garg, S. C. (2005). Essential oils as therapeutics.  Mahmoudvand, H., Dezaki, E. S., Kheirandish, F., Ezatpour, B., Jahanbakhsh, S., &amp; Harandi, M. F. (2014, December 23). Scolicidal effects of black cumin seed ( Nigella sativa ) essential oil on hydatid cysts.  Korean Journal of Parasitology ,  52 (6), 653–659.  Meier, L., Stange, R., Michalsen, A., &amp; Uehleke, B. (2012, April). Clay jojoba oil facial mask for lesioned skin and mild acne — results of a prospective, observational pilot study [Abstract].  Complementary Medicine Research ,  19 (2), 75–79.  Methods of application. (n.d).  Shutes, J. (n.d.). Methods of application.  Simon, D., Eng, P. A., Borelli, S., Kägi, R., Zimmermann, C., Zahner, C., … Schmid-Grendelmeier, P. (2014, February). Gamma-linolenic acid levels correlate with clinical efficacy of evening primrose oil in patients with atopic dermatitis [Abstract].  Advances in Therapy ,  31 (2), 180–188.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "The best carrier oils for essential oils."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321639.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, April 26). "The best carrier oils for essential oils."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  