  Pimples , however, can sometimes resemble the symptoms of other conditions, such as a  sexually transmitted disease  or STD, and so it is important to know if a growth on or around the penis needs medical attention.  This article will discuss other signs to look out for that could indicate an STD, methods for treating a pimple on the penis, and when to see a doctor.  Pimples develop when the oil glands on the surface of the skin are blocked by oil, dead skin cells, or other debris.  This blockage can trigger an immune response, causing the area to become inflamed and swollen.  The resulting small lump is known as a pimple, and pimples can occur anywhere on the body.  Pimples appear as small, round bumps on the skin's surface. The base is usually red or flesh colored.  The tip of a pimple can either be white (whiteheads), black ( blackheads ) or the same color as the base, depending on the type of debris that has caused the build up. Some pimples also contain  pus .  Factors that increase the likelihood of a pimple include:  Being aware of these factors can help to determine the likelihood of it being a straightforward pimple that has developed or something else.  Pimples can occur regardless of sexual activity, which also helps to narrow down the cause of a bump.  It is possible that an STD is causing them if someone is sexually active and other symptoms also occur.  There are three STDs, which we give details of here, with symptoms that could be mistaken for pimples.  A primary symptom of  genital warts  is the growth of small, flesh-white colored bumps on the shaft, or head of the penis.  The tips of  warts  can be shaped like cauliflowers and can vary greatly in size. It is also possible for genital warts to appear on areas surrounding the penis, such as the scrotum or inner thigh.  Genital warts often disappear on their own, but can be easily treated with creams or freeze and heat therapy.  Genital  herpes  causes gray-white blisters with a red base to develop on the penis or surrounding areas. They are often uncomfortable, itchy, and can spread to the anus.  The blisters can become open sores and ooze fluids and will crust over. Blisters can also appear around the mouth or lips.  Genital herpes is usually treated using antiviral drugs.  White or red painless ulcers on or around the penis can develop as a symptom of  syphilis .  A bacterial infection causes the condition and can pose a serious health risk if left untreated.  Syphilis is typically treated using  antibiotics .  Medical treatment is rarely required for pimples. Pimples will disappear on their own after a few days, in most cases.  It is important to avoid itching or popping the pimples. This can worsen the condition and may cause permanent scarring and superimposed infection.  Addressing the likely causes of pimples is the best method of preventing them from developing again.  Methods to reduce the risk of pimples include:  Medications available to purchase over the counter or online, such as  benzoyl peroxide ,  salicylic acid , or exfoliants, can be helpful for reducing the appearance of pimples.  The region around the penis is highly sensitive, so these medications must be used cautiously.  A doctor should be seen if pimples occur with other symptoms that may include:  If action has been taken to reduce the risk of a pimple developing, or they do not disappear after one week, it may be worth consulting a doctor.  If there is any uncertainty over whether a growth is a pimple or not, it is important to seek medical advice, to ensure they are not a symptom of a more serious condition.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Genital herpes. (2017, September 6).  Genital herpes. (2017, September 6).  Genital warts. (2017, August 21).  Syphilis [Fact sheet]. (2017, February 13).  Treating pimples. (n.d.).  What is this lump on my penis? (2015, March 28).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What should you do about a pimple on the penis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321630.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, April 26). "What should you do about a pimple on the penis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  