 Dirt, grit, dust, and other stray particles should all be flushed from the eyes, as should chemicals and bodily fluids, such as blood.  While flushing the eye, a person should have someone call emergency services or prepare to take them to receive immediate medical attention.  In this article, learn how to flush the eyes without causing further damage and what symptoms may indicate a medical emergency.  The following are step-by-step instructions on how to flush the eye:  A person will likely get wet while flushing their eye. If someone else is present, it may be helpful to hand the person flushing a towel or garbage bag to keep the wetness away.  After a person has flushed their eye, they should seek immediate medical attention. If chemicals were the cause, they should bring a sample to the doctor for identification.  A person may need to  flush their eye  for longer, depending on the type of chemical involved. Flushing times for specific chemicals include:  Oven and drain cleaners are also highly alkaline, and a person may need to flush their eye for hours to prevent the surface of the eye from becoming burned.  If any material has penetrated the eyeball, flushing the eye can cause further damage.  In this case, seek emergency medical attention and protect the eye by covering it with a gauze pad or Styrofoam cup.  Refrain from rubbing the eyes, even if they are itchy or painful, as this can push the object deeper into the eye.  Anyone who has sustained an eye injury should seek emergency medical attention, even if the area no longer hurts after flushing.  The following symptoms also require emergency medical attention when they follow an eye injury:  Contact emergency services if metal, glass, or another object is protruding from the eye.  Anyone who works with tools, chemicals, or around bodily fluids should always wear eye protection. If an injury occurs, a person should flush their eye as soon as possible for at least 15 minutes.  After flushing the eye, contact emergency services or find a ride to a hospital. This is especially important when the eye has been exposed to chemicals.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 First aid for chemical exposures. (2018, April 12).  First aid for chemical exposures. (2018, April 12).  Palmer, J. (2010, April 16). Ask the expert: Flush time for exposure to eyes.  Shetler, J,. &amp; Lighthizer, N. (2015, January 15). Foreign body removal in 12 steps.  Review of Optometry .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Griff, Ann Marie. "How to safely flush your eye."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321637.php&gt;    APA  Griff, A. (2018, April 26). "How to safely flush your eye."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  