 These characteristics can change, according to the phases of the menstrual cycle. However, if discharge suddenly takes on an unusual smell, color, or texture, this may signal an infection. This is especially true if vaginal or vulvar irritation, pain, or itching accompanies the discharge.  Potential infections include:  If a person suspects that they have any of the conditions listed above, they should seek prompt medical treatment.  It is possible to have vaginal discharge at any age. The amount of discharge depends on certain factors, including the phase of the menstrual cycle.  A person is likely to have more discharge if they are:  It is especially important to be on the lookout for unusual discharge during pregnancy. Be aware of any changes, including:  These could signal a medical condition. Consult a doctor.  Normal discharge tends to be mucus-like and will not soak a pad or panty liner. See a doctor if an increased amount of wet discharge requires a pad or liner, as this can indicate ruptured membranes, commonly known as the water breaking.  Vaginal discharge changes during the menstrual cycle.  In preparation for  ovulation  and during it, discharge tends to be stretchy and wet. The body produces more mucus at this stage than after it. Ovulation occurs  between days 11 and 21 of the menstrual cycle .  Just before a period, discharge is often white or cloudy, because of raised levels of the hormone  progesterone .  Immediately after a period, vaginal discharge may be brownish, due to remnants of blood in the vagina.  Once this is flushed away, a person may spend 3–4 days without discharge.  The term spotting refers to vaginal discharge that contains small amounts of blood. If this occurs at an odd time of the cycle, it can indicate:  Anyone who experiences spotting unrelated to their period should see a doctor.  People who have gone through  menopause , defined as 12 months without a period, typically should not find blood in their discharge. Even a small amount should be brought up with a doctor.  During pregnancy, it can be normal to lose a little blood, especially following sex or a pelvic exam. The blood is usually light pink or brown, and the flow stops quickly.  If the blood is bright red, or if there is a lot of blood in the discharge, consult a doctor. This can indicate a miscarriage or a problem with the placenta.  Abnormal discharge can signal a vaginal infection, usually bacterial vaginosis, trichomoniasis, or  candidiasis .  These can be treated in the following ways:  Each of these infections requires medical treatment, but practicing good hygiene can help to prevent a recurrence. Wash the genitals frequently, either without soap or with a nonallergenic soap, such as one that includes glycerin. Dry the area by patting gently.  Other tips include:  Although these measures may help, they cannot eliminate an infection.  Consult a doctor if:  Vaginal discharge changes naturally, to coincide with the menstrual cycle or pregnancy. Be aware of unusual smells, colors, or textures, as these can signal a medical condition.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 French, L., Horton, J., &amp; Matousek, M. (2004, November). Abnormal vaginal discharge: What does and does not work in treating underlying causes [Abstract].  The Journal of Family Practice ,  53 (11), 890–894.  French, L., Horton, J., &amp; Matousek, M. (2004, November). Abnormal vaginal discharge: What does and does not work in treating underlying causes [Abstract].  The Journal of Family Practice ,  53 (11), 890–894.  Ilankoon, I. M. P. S., Goonewardena, C. S. E., Fernandopulle, R. C., &amp; Perera, P. P. R. (2017, February). An insight to how estate women in Sri Lanka manage abnormal vaginal discharge.  Iranian Journal of Public Health ,  46 (2), 268–269.  Mitchell, H. (2004, May 29). Vaginal discharge: Causes, diagnosis, and treatment.  The BMJ ,  328 (7451), 1306–1308.  Munro, M. G. (2014). Investigation of women with postmenopausal uterine bleeding: Clinical practice recommendations.  The Permanente Journal ,  18 (1), 55–70.  Mylonas, I., &amp; Bergauer, F. (2011, June). Diagnosis of vaginal discharge by wet mount microscopy: A simple and underrated method [Abstract].  Obstetrical &amp; Gynecological Survey ,  66 (6), 359–368.  Spence, D., &amp; Melville, C. (2007, December 1). Vaginal discharge.  The BMJ ,  335 (7630), 1147–1151.  Understanding ovuation. (2016, October 10).  Venugopal, S., Gopalan, K., Devi, A., &amp; Kavitha, A. (2017, January–June). Epidemiology and  clinico -investigative study of organisms causing vaginal discharge.  Indian Journal of Sexually Transmitted Diseases ,  38 (1), 69–75.  Zemouri, C., Wi, T. E., Kiarie, J., Seuc, A., Mogasale, V., Latif, A., &amp; Broutet, N. (2016, October 5). The performance of the vaginal discharge syndromic management in treating vaginal and cervical infection: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  PLOS One ,  11 (10).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "What does it mean when you have a lot of clear watery discharge?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321625.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, April 26). "What does it mean when you have a lot of clear watery discharge?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  