 Lumps on or near the collarbone in this area have many causes, with some requiring medical attention.  In this article, we look at what causes a lump on the collarbone, as well as treatment options and when to see a doctor.  In this article, we look at the various reasons why a person might have a lump on their collarbone, and the other symptoms that might arise from each cause.  A collarbone injury, such as a  fracture  or break, can sometimes cause a lump to form. The injury can range in severity from a simple fracture to a complex break that separates the bone into several pieces.  Other symptoms of a collarbone injury include:  Injuries that lead to a collarbone injury or break include falls, car accidents, or an injury during childbirth.  Doctors can diagnose these types of injuries using imaging tests, such as X-rays and computerized tomography (CT) scans.  An infection of the bone, also called  osteomyelitis , may occur following an injury, surgical procedure, or placement of an intravenous (IV) line near the collarbone.  Although it is  rare , osteomyelitis of the collarbone can become a long-term or chronic problem for some people if left untreated.  Symptoms can range from mild to severe and may include:  Young children with osteomyelitis may also seem irritable or chronically tired.  The body has hundreds of lymph nodes that produce lymph fluid. This fluid contains infection-fighting white blood cells.  Most people have experienced swollen lymph nodes on the sides of their neck during a bout with the cold or  flu , but swollen lymph nodes may also occur near the collarbone.  In  most situations , the underlying cause of swollen lymph nodes is a virus or bacteria. However, a doctor may wish to take a sample of the lymph fluid if they suspect a more serious condition to be the cause, such as  cancer .  Symptoms that may occur alongside enlarged lymph nodes include:  In some cases, a collarbone lump may be caused by a  cyst  or  tumor .  Cysts are filled with fluid and are not usually cancerous. A type of cyst called a  ganglion cyst  is  common  on the hand and wrist, but can also develop along the collarbone.  In rare cases, cancerous and non-cancerous tumors can form on or near the collarbone. These lumps need to be seen by a doctor.  An aneurysmal bone cyst of the clavicle is one rare type of tumor that can form, usually in people under the  age of 20 .  Some people may develop a non-cancerous, soft tumor called a lipoma near the collarbone. These lumps generally do not cause any problems, but may need to be removed if they are affecting a person's everyday life.  The treatment of a collarbone lump will depend on what is causing the lump. Treatments for common causes include:  Nonsurgical treatment of a collarbone injury may include:  If a person has a severe break or fracture, surgery may be necessary. A surgeon can use metal pins, screws, and plates to realign the bone and help it heal in the right place.  Treatment of osteomyelitis will vary depending on the severity of the infection and symptoms. In addition to prescribing strong  antibiotics , a doctor may recommend surgery to remove a portion of the bone.  A doctor will try to diagnose the cause of enlarged lymph nodes and treat any underlying infection. In many cases, enlarged lymph nodes will go away on their own with rest and fluids. If the infection is caused by bacteria, a doctor may prescribe antibiotics.  People can often manage cysts with observation, fluid drainage, or surgical removal. Tumors may need to be surgically removed, depending on whether they are cancerous or not.  The overall outlook of a lump on the collarbone will depend on the underlying cause.  Lumps found on the collarbone can be caused by a variety of things, including injury, infection, and cysts.  Symptoms, treatment, and outlook vary based on the cause and severity of the lump. Anyone with a lump on their collarbone without a clear cause should speak with a doctor to get a proper diagnosis and treatment.    
 Balakrishnan, C., Vashi, C., Jackson, O., &amp; Hess, J. (2008, Summer). Post-traumatic osteomyelitis of the clavicle: A case report and review of literature.  The Canadian Journal of Plastic Surgery, 16 (2), 89–91.  Balakrishnan, C., Vashi, C., Jackson, O., &amp; Hess, J. (2008, Summer). Post-traumatic osteomyelitis of the clavicle: A case report and review of literature.  The Canadian Journal of Plastic Surgery, 16 (2), 89–91.  Bone infection. (n.d.).  Chadha, M., &amp; Singh, A. P. (2008, April). Aneurysmal bone cyst of the clavicle.  The Canadian Journal of Surgery ,  51 (2), E32–E33.  Ganglion cyst. (2015, August 13).  Kim, N. G., Lim, Y. S., Choi, J. H., Kim, J. S., &amp; Lee, K. S. (2014, April 10). Ganglion cyst of the sternoclavicular joint in an adult.  Archives of Craniofacial Surgery, 15 (1), 40–42.  Lowe, J. A. (2016, December). Clavicle fracture (broken collarbone).  Lymph nodes and cancer. (2015, April 14).  Osteomyelitis. (2016, October 21).  Swollen glands. (2017, September 8).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. "What causes a lump on the collarbone?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321694.php&gt;    APA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. (2018, April 30). "What causes a lump on the collarbone?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  