 Sweat is the body's natural way to control its temperature. A person usually sweats due to physical exertion, raised body temperature, or exposure to heat. The sweat acts as a coolant, reducing the temperature inside the body.  In other cases, a person may sweat in their armpits or on the palms of their hands because of emotional or mental  stress .  Diaphoresis usually resolves once the underlying cause is known. In this article, we look at the possible causes and treatment option.  When a person experiences  excessive sweating , it is called diaphoresis. In diaphoresis, the sweating cannot be explained by external heat or exercise. Instead, it is often the result of an underlying medical condition or someone's medication.  It is essential for someone to see a doctor if they experience frequent diaphoresis. Often, the underlying condition can be treated and future diaphoresis prevented.  In some cases, the excessive sweating is caused by a condition that may have serious complications.  A range of conditions can cause diaphoresis, including the following:   Menopause  is a common cause of excessive sweating in women. This type of sweating often occurs at night.   Estrogen  and other hormones are in a state of flux during and just before menopause. The hormones can send messages to the brain that the body is overheating even when it is not, which triggers a sweat response.  When a person has  hyperthyroidism , their thyroid gland produces too much thyroxine. Thyroxine helps regulate the body's metabolism. Too much thyroxine can increase the speed of someone's metabolism, causing excessive sweating.  A person may also experience:  A person should seek medical attention if they suspect they have hyperthyroidism, as there are treatments available.  For someone who has  diabetes , profuse sweating can signal  hypoglycemia  or low blood sugar. In these situations, a person needs to bring their blood sugar levels back up. Hypoglycemia can cause severe complications and be life-threatening if not treated urgently.  Some additional signs of hypoglycemia include:  Many women sweat more during pregnancy than at other times in their lives. Sweating during pregnancy can occur because of:  Most pregnancy-related sweating is normal, but a woman should see a doctor if she experiences excess sweating combined with  fever , chills, or vomiting. These symptoms could be signs of other conditions or an infection.  Carrying extra weight can make a person more prone to sweating. This can be due to increased exertion from carrying more weight or holding on to heat.  When a person stops using alcohol or drugs for recreational purposes, they may go through withdrawal. Profuse sweating is a common symptom of withdrawal, but there are many others, some of which may be life-threatening.  It is often a good idea for a person quitting drugs or alcohol to seek medical attention, as a doctor can help monitor withdrawal symptoms.  Symptoms of withdrawal can include:  Diaphoresis is a potential side effect of many medications. Some over-the-counter and prescription drugs that may cause excessive sweating include:  If a person suspects they are sweating due to a medication they are taking, they should speak to their doctor. It is possible they may recommend a change in medication.  A  heart attack  is a medical emergency. In addition to severe sweating, a person may experience:   Anaphylaxis  is an extreme allergic reaction that can be life-threatening. In addition to sweating, a person may experience:  A person should seek immediate medical help if experiencing anaphylaxis. Anyone who witnesses someone experiencing the symptoms of anaphylaxis should call emergency services straight away and use the person's epinephrine injector (EpiPen) if available.  Rarely, some  cancers  can cause a person to sweat profusely. These cancers include:  Treatment for diaphoresis varies depending on the cause. In many cases, treating the underlying condition will clear up any excessive sweating.  When medication is the cause, a doctor may prescribe different medications. If this is not possible, they may be able to recommend ways to manage the sweating.  For example, for underarm sweat, a person can try stronger underarm antiperspirants. Some people may also experience short-term relief with the use of onabotulinumtoxina injections, commonly known as Botox.  Iontophoresis uses a small electrical shock to help reduce and prevent sweating from the feet and hands. Similar to injections, this provides only temporary relief and may require several sessions.  Lastly, a doctor may prescribe an oral anticholinergic medication. Oxybutynin or glycopyrrolate are two potential medications that help reduce sweating.  Prevention is not always possible, but there are some steps a person can take to reduce diaphoresis. These steps include:  Anyone experiencing excessive sweating with no apparent cause should speak to their doctor, especially if it is affecting their everyday life or occurs with additional symptoms.  A person should also talk to their doctor if sweating causes a rash that lasts longer than a few days. This may indicate a skin infection.  If sweating occurs only on one side of the body, a person may be experiencing a neurologic condition that requires immediate medical attention.  Other reasons to visit a doctor, as soon as possible, include excessive sweating accompanied by:  Diaphoresis is not always a cause for concern and treating the underlying cause will often clear up the condition.  A person should be aware of other symptoms that may signal more serious underlying causes. If in doubt, they should seek medical attention for a proper diagnosis and treatment.    
 Diseases and conditions that can cause diaphoresis. (n.d.).  Diseases and conditions that can cause diaphoresis. (n.d.).  Menopause and sleep. (n.d.).  Mold, J. W., Roberts, M., &amp; Aboshady, H. M. (2004, September). Prevalence and predictors of night sweats, day sweats, and hot flashes in older primary care patients: An OKPRN study.  The Annals of Family Medicine ,  2 (5), 391–397.  Pathophysiology of excessive sweating. (n.d.).  Perspiration. (n.d.)  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Diaphoresis: What causes excessive sweating?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Apr. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321663.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, April 30). "Diaphoresis: What causes excessive sweating?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  