 Medications used to treat kidney disease can also raise  potassium  levels. One the best ways to manage potassium levels is by making dietary changes. This may mean avoiding high-potassium foods and replacing them with low-potassium alternatives.  People with  chronic kidney disease  or CKD should avoid or limit foods that are high in potassium.  High-potassium levels can cause serious symptoms, including an irregular heartbeat and muscle cramping. Low-potassium levels can cause muscles to become weak.  A doctor or dietitian can help explain the right amount of potassium to consume for each person's unique situation.  Some high-potassium foods that people with CKD should limit or avoid include:  Dietary restrictions can help prevent further damage to the kidneys in those with CKD.  Low-potassium foods are a safer option for people with CKD. According to the American Kidney Foundation, a potassium-restricted diet allows for  2,000 milligrams of potassium daily.   However, a doctor or dietitian is in the best position to advise a person on their individual needs.  There are plenty of foods that are low in potassium. For these foods, a  half cup is the recommended  serving size.  Eating more than one serving can turn a low potassium option into a high potassium snack, so it is essential to stay within the recommended guidelines.  Low-potassium foods include:  People should not cut out potassium entirely, as it is an essential nutrient that helps manage many of the body's functions.  Potassium has many essential roles in the body, including:  According to the National Kidney Foundation, CKD affects over  30 million Americans  and is the result of a gradual loss of kidney function over time. Causes of CKD include  high blood pressure  and  diabetes .  CKD can get worse over time. It is possible for kidneys to stop working completely, but this is rare. With proper treatment and dietary changes, people with CKD can lead healthy lives and avoid complications.  There is no cure for CKD, but treatment can manage symptoms and keep the kidneys functioning. Most people manage their disease with a healthy lifestyle, management of underlying conditions, such as diabetes, high blood pressure, and high  cholesterol , and medications to treat symptoms.  In the early stages of kidney disease, a person may not experience any symptoms. As CKD progresses, it may cause:  Because CKD is a lifelong condition, it is vital to have regular check-ups to monitor kidney function.  People with CKD have an increased risk for cardiovascular events, including  heart attack  and  stroke . Regular checkups can help discover problems early and prevent complications.  When kidneys fail, they cannot remove excess potassium from the body. This allows the extra potassium to build up and cause problems.  Having high levels of potassium in the blood is called hyperkalemia, which is common in people with advanced CKD.  High-potassium levels usually develop gradually. Symptoms of  high levels of potassium  include:  If potassium levels increase suddenly and quickly, a person may experience the following:  These symptoms can indicate a life-threatening situation, and a person should seek immediate medical attention.  People with CKD need to work towards reducing the amount of potassium they consume. It is also essential for them to have regular checkups with a doctor to monitor their kidney function.  In addition to working with a doctor, it may help to meet with a dietitian who can help a person understand  nutrition  labels, reduce portion sizes, and plan meals.    
 About chronic kidney disease. (2017, February 15).  About chronic kidney disease. (2017, February 15).  Bruce, M. A., Beech, B. M., Crook, E. D., Sims, M., Griffith, D. M., Simpson, S. L., … Norris, K.C. (2016, May 10).  Gender, weight status, and CKD among African Americans: The Jackson Heart Study.  Journal of Investigative Medicine ,  61 (4), 701–707.  Eating right for chronic kidney disease. (2016, October).  Facts about high potassium in patients with kidney disease. (n.d).  Nutrition for advanced chronic kidney disease in adults. (2014, March).   Potassium and your CKD diet. (n.d).  Potassium. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 21).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "High-potassium foods to avoid with kidney disease."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321750.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, May 9). "High-potassium foods to avoid with kidney disease."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  