 Palpitations can also feel like the heart is pounding, fluttering, or beating irregularly. A person may experience these sensations in the throat or the neck. They can last for a few seconds or several minutes.  Heart palpitations can be frightening, especially when experienced for the first time. However, they are usually nothing to worry about.  A heart palpitation happens when someone suddenly feels one or more heartbeats. Because the heart pumps blood automatically, people are usually unaware of individual beats.  This pumping allows the blood to circulate throughout the body, delivering oxygen and other essential components. The heart has four chambers that are attached by one-way valves.  A heartbeat is a pumping action that takes about 1 second and happens in two parts:  Below is an interactive animation of a normal heartbeat.  Explore the animation with your mouse pad or touchscreen.  The heart skipping a beat can be the result of a number of factors, including:  Strenuous exercise, not getting enough sleep, or drinking too much caffeine or alcohol can all lead to heart palpitations.  Smoking tobacco, using illicit drugs such as cocaine, or eating rich or spicy foods can also cause the heart to skip a beat.  Palpitations can be caused by  stress  or  anxiety .  They may also occur during a  panic attack . Other symptoms of a panic attack include:  A number of medicines can trigger heart palpitations. These include:  Anyone who has frequent heart palpitations and is taking medication should check the list of possible side effects on the label.  They should not stop taking the drug, however, without speaking to a doctor. Usually, heart palpitations are a harmless side effect.  Periods, pregnancy, and  menopause  can all cause heart palpitations.   Arrhythmias  are a group of health conditions that can interfere with the heart's rhythm. Millions of people have arrhythmias, and they are  especially common  as people get older.  Most are harmless, but some require medical attention.  The following are examples of arrhythmias:  In some cases, palpitations can indicate problems with the heart. Examples include:  The following issues can also cause palpitations:  Heart palpitations tend to feel like a fluttering or churning in the chest or neck.  When more serious arrhythmias are responsible, palpitations can occur with the following symptoms:  In extreme cases, heart palpitations can lead to sudden cardiac arrest.  If heart palpitations happen occasionally and pass quickly, it is unlikely that the underlying cause is severe.  It is a good idea to speak to a doctor when palpitations:  Some cases require emergency medical attention. Seek medical help immediately when palpitations accompany any of these symptoms:  To investigate the cause of heart palpitations, a doctor will usually ask about a person's symptoms and medical history.  They may also recommend blood tests and an electrocardiogram to check the heartbeat. If the doctor suspects a heart problem or an arrhythmia, they may request:   Holter monitoring   Also called a continuous ambulatory electrocardiographic monitor, a person wears a Holter monitor for 24–48 hours to record the heart's rhythm.   Treadmill testing   Exercise or stress tests are designed to trigger a palpitation so that it can be diagnosed. A person will usually walk and run on a treadmill or ride a stationary bicycle while the heart rate and rhythm are monitored.   Echocardiogram   This test uses sound waves to create an image of the heart's size, structure, and motions.  Treatment will depend on the cause of the palpitations. When lifestyle factors such as excessive alcohol or caffeine consumption are responsible, a person can take steps to avoid those triggers.  A person with palpitations caused by stress, anxiety, or panic attacks may benefit from learning breathing exercises and stress-management techniques, such as  yoga  and meditation. It may also be a good idea to speak with a therapist.  Most arrhythmias are harmless and do not require treatment. However, some are classified as clinically significant and require long-term medication.  A person with a diagnosed heart condition, such as heart failure, will usually be given a treatment plan that includes lifestyle changes and medication.  While not everyone with a congenital heart defect will need treatment, some may require surgery or cardiac catheterization.    
 Arrhythmias and congenital defects. (2017, September 12).  Arrhythmias and congenital defects. (2017, September 12).  Care and treatment for congenital heart defects. (2018, January 19).  Common tests for arrhythmia. (2016, December 21).  Heart palpitations and ectopic beats. (2016, October 26).  Symptoms, diagnosis &amp; monitoring of arrhythmias. (2016, September 19).  Treatment options for heart failure. (2018, February 13).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "What causes the heart to skip a beat?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321793.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, May 13). "What causes the heart to skip a beat?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  