 Early diagnosis and treatment may lead to a quicker recovery and reduce the risk of complications.  Read on to learn more about identifying and treating a double ear infection.  The symptoms of a double ear infection are similar to those of a single ear infection, but they may be more severe when both ears are infected.  Symptoms may include:  Signs in infants and toddlers include:  People should see their doctor if symptoms continue for more than 24 hours.  People who have  pus  or bloody discharge coming from one or both ears will likely require more urgent treatment.  When a parent or carer notices the signs of an ear infection in an infant under 6 months old, they should take the child to a doctor as soon as possible.  Older children should see a doctor if symptoms are severe or last for more than 24 hours, especially if they have a fever or discharge from the ear.  Bacteria or viruses in the middle ear cause ear infections.  A person who has, or had, an upper respiratory infection may also develop an ear infection. Ear infections are not contagious. However, the respiratory infections that might accompany an ear infection are.  Enlarged adenoids, which are pads of tissue at the back of the nose, may also contribute to a double ear infection, especially in children.  An infection affecting only one ear may also occasionally develop into a double ear infection.  Hearing difficulties are probably the most common short-term complication of a double ear infection.  A person's hearing will typically return to normal once the infection clears up.  Persistent or recurrent infections can lead to:  Long-term complications following ear infections are uncommon.  A doctor will usually diagnose a double ear infection by checking a person's medical history and asking about their symptoms.  The doctor will examine both ears using a device called an otoscope. It comprises a light and a magnifying lens. Doctors typically look for redness, swelling, and signs of fluid behind the eardrum, which indicates infection.  A doctor may also use another device, called a pneumatic otoscope, to test how much the eardrum moves in response to pressure. If the eardrum does not respond to this pressure, it suggests fluid buildup behind the ear.  Many single ear infections clear up on their own. But double infections are more likely to require treatments such as:  A bacterial infection can be treated with  antibiotics , such as amoxicillin. A doctor may also prescribe antibiotic eardrops.  Antibiotic medications will not work for a viral infection, so a virus will have to run its course.  Children with recurrent ear infections may require surgery that involves fitting small ear tubes. The tubes help to ventilate the middle ear and prevent fluid buildup.  Some tubes are designed to remain in the ear for up to 12 months before falling out on their own. Other types of tubes stay in place for longer and must be surgically removed.  Home remedies aim to lessen the pain rather than treat the underlying infection. Home treatments include:  It is difficult to prevent ear infections in young children completely.  Steps to reduce the frequency or severity of infections include the following simple tips and habits:  Where possible, breast-feed infants, as breast milk provides additional protection from ear infections. Try to hold the infant in an upright position when feeding.  Also, avoid prolonged bottle-feeding at bedtime, as  research  suggests it can increase ear and sinus infections,  acid reflux , and cough.  A double ear infection should begin to heal within a few days of treatment. But symptoms may not fully resolve until a person has completed the full course of antibiotics, which can take up to 10 days.  Home remedies can reduce pain and discomfort in the meantime.  Anyone who notices the symptoms of an ear infection should seek prompt medical treatment for the best outlook.    
 Ear infections. (2018, May 1).  Ear infections. (2018, May 1).  Kim, H.-Y., Han, Y., Pyun, Y., Kim, J., Ahn, K., &amp; Lee, S.-I. (2011, April 26). Prolonged bedtime bottle feeding and respiratory symptoms in infants.  Asia Pacific Allergy ,  1 (1), 30–35.  Lieberthal, A. S., Carroll, A. E., Chonmaitree, T., Ganiats, T. G., Hoberman, A., Jackson, M. A., ... Tunkel, D. E. (2013, March). The diagnosis and management of acute otitis media [Abstract].  Pediatrics ,  131 (3), e964–e999.  Perforated eardrum. (2017, April 5).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What does it mean when you have a double ear infection?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321775.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, May 11). "What does it mean when you have a double ear infection?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  