 Milk blisters are often caused by:  Other causes include too much milk supply, or a yeast or bacterial infection. Wearing a bra that is too tight or that rubs uncomfortably on the nipple can also be a cause.  There are home remedies and medical treatments available to cure and prevent milk blisters.  Milk blisters can be treated at home or by a doctor. Popular treatments include:   1. Saline solution   To remove the blockage, soak the nipples in a solution of salt and warm water. Mix 2 teaspoons of Epsom salts in a cup of hot water and allow to cool slightly. Finally, soak the nipple three or four times daily until the duct becomes unblocked.   2. Nipple massage   Gently massage the nipple to release the blister. Also, try applying pressure behind the nipple.  This treatment works best when carried out after a bath, shower, or saline soak, as the skin will be very soft. Do not apply so much pressure to the nipple that it causes pain.   3. Warm compress   Use a warm compress on the nipple before breast-feeding. To make a compress, soak a cloth in warm water and wring out any excess liquid. Then, apply the compress to the nipple for up to 15 minutes. Gently pat the skin dry before nursing.   4. Olive oil   Keep the nipple soft and moist throughout the day with olive oil. Place an oil-soaked cotton pad inside the bra so that it covers the nipple.  Gently wipe off the nipple before nursing. Change the cotton pad twice daily.   5. Expressed milk   Breast milk has  antimicrobial properties , which is why breast-feeding is such an effective way to boost a baby's immune system. Some people claim these properties stop milk blisters from becoming infected.  There is no scientific evidence for this, but it cannot hurt to apply some expressed milk over the nipple to see if it alleviates discomfort.   6. Frequent breast-feeding   More regular feeding can stimulate the flow of milk through the milk ducts. The action of the baby's jaw and mouth is the most effective way to encourage this type of movement.  Keep the baby in the correct position while feeding for milk blister relief. Place the baby's chin and mouth directly over the blister so that the baby can suck as forcibly as possible around that area.  More frequent breast-feeding both removes and prevents blockages.   7. Hospital-grade breast pump   The milk in clogged pores sometimes has the consistency of toothpaste, and it requires more suction to express than regular milk.  It may be necessary to use a pump to remove thick milk from the ducts if milk blisters persist after using the remedies listed above.  Use a hospital-grade pump, and gradually increase the pump strength until the hardened milk comes out.   8. Soothing ointment   Soothing ointments for sore nipples are  available online  or in stores. Creams containing chamomile or calendula may be especially comforting.  They keep the nipple area moist and reduce itching and pain.  Many of these ointments are specially formulated for safe use while breast-feeding.   9. Lecithin supplements   Lecithin is a natural substance added to many foods as an emulsifier. Some people believe that lecithin can prevent blocked ducts by increasing the polyunsaturated fatty acid content of breast milk and decreasing "sticky" milk. Many lecithin supplements are  available online .  Lecithin is  "generally recognized as safe" (GRAS)  by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), but there are no scientific studies on its efficacy in treating milk blisters.   10. Dietary changes   Eating a healthful, balanced diet may boost the immune system and help fight off some of the fungal infections that cause milk blisters. In addition to eating more fruits and vegetables, nursing mothers should continue taking any prenatal multivitamins in the postpartum period as well.  It is essential to discuss the use of supplements during breast-feeding with a doctor.   11. Pain relievers   It can be helpful to apply ice packs to reduce swelling and discomfort if milk blisters are causing significant pain between feedings.  Some over-the-counter (OTC) pain relief medications are also suitable for women who are breast-feeding when taken according to the instructions.  For example, ibuprofen  is safe  to take by nursing women who do not have a stomach ulcer or  asthma . Only take ibuprofen for as long as necessary and never exceed the recommended dose.  People who have concerns about these medications should speak with their doctor or pharmacist about alternatives.   12. A sterile needle   A doctor can clear the blockage from the duct using a sterile needle if other home remedies do not alleviate milk blisters.  Do not attempt to carry out this treatment at home, as it increases the risk of infection and mastitis.  The duct can fill again if milk builds up in the area, so it is important to address the underlying cause of the blisters.   13. Prescription medications   Milk blisters caused by thrush or a bacterial infection may require medication. A doctor may prescribe an antifungal treatment for thrush for both mother and baby.  A doctor may prescribe topical  antibiotics  for other types of infection.  Milk blisters can happen again unless a person addresses the underlying cause.  Ways to prevent blocked milk ducts include the following:  Milk blisters usually resolve with home remedies. If they do not get better, it is advisable to see a doctor, especially if the milk blisters are very painful, interfere with breast-feeding, or show signs of infection. Signs of infection to watch for are  fevers , chills, body aches,  fatigue , localized breast pain, warmth, or swelling.  Nursing mothers should also let their doctor know if they wish to use supplements or OTC medications. People should always consult their doctor before starting supplements, since even medications available without a prescription may not be safe for everyone to take.  Milk blisters affect many women who are breast-feeding. Several treatments can ease symptoms and prevent future milk blisters from forming.  If milk blisters do not resolve with home remedies, contact a lactation consultant or doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Ackerman, D. L., Doster, R. S., Weitkamp, J. H., Aronoff, D. M., Gaddy, J. A., &amp; Townsend, S. D. (2017, June 1). Human milk oligosaccharides exhibit antimicrobial and antibiofilm properties against group B streptococcus [Abstract].  ACS Infectious Diseases ,  3 (8), 595–605.  Ackerman, D. L., Doster, R. S., Weitkamp, J. H., Aronoff, D. M., Gaddy, J. A., &amp; Townsend, S. D. (2017, June 1). Human milk oligosaccharides exhibit antimicrobial and antibiofilm properties against group B streptococcus [Abstract].  ACS Infectious Diseases ,  3 (8), 595–605.  Can I take ibuprofen while I'm breastfeeding? (2018, February 28).  Lactmed: Lecithin. (n.d.).  Milk blebs. (2009).  Vitamins and other nutritional supplements for baby. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "How do you treat a milk blister?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321714.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, May 3). "How do you treat a milk blister?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  