 While it can occur in people of any age,  C. difficile  ( Clostridium difficile ) is most common in older adults. People who have recently taken  antibiotics  and who are in a hospital or long-term care facility are also more likely to develop the infection.  Antibiotics can destroy the healthful bacteria in a person's intestines, making it easier for disease-causing bacteria, such as  C. difficile , to grow in its place.  When a person has  C. difficile , the bacteria will be in their stool. This bacteria can contaminate any surface or material that it comes into contact with.  C. difficile  spores can survive on a surface for up to 5 months without proper decontamination and disinfection.  Surfaces where these spores may live include:  Healthcare workers can inadvertently spread the infection when they come into contact with the bacteria or spores on one of these contaminated surfaces and then touch or care for another person.  According to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , nearly 500,000 people were infected with  C. difficile  in the United States in 2011. Approximately 29,000 people who contracted the infection died within 30 days of diagnosis. Many of these people were over 65 years old.  The symptoms of a  C. difficile  infection include:  Dietary changes are an important part of treating a  C. difficile  infection, though the exact diet will vary depending on the severity of the infection.  Anyone with this type of infection should make sure to speak with their doctor about what they should and should not eat.  Someone with mild diarrhea may benefit from the following:  Someone with severe diarrhea may become very dehydrated, meaning that they have lost too much fluid.  Young children and older adults are at higher risk for  dehydration  and complications associated with it.  Someone with severe diarrhea may require an oral rehydration solution, such as Gatorade, to prevent complications from occurring. If these do not help or if diarrhea worsens, hospitalization and intravenous fluids may be necessary.  According to  one study , introducing healthful bacteria into the diet by consuming probiotic-rich foods or a supplement reduces the symptoms of  C. difficile .  Foods rich in probiotics include fermented foods, such as:  Diagnosing  C. difficile  begins with a thorough medical history and physical examination. The doctor will ask when the symptoms began and discuss their severity.  If the doctor suspects an infection, they may take a small sample of stool for analysis in a lab. This test can determine which species of bacteria is causing the infection, as well as the best antibiotic to treat it.  If tests identify  C. difficile , additional testing may be needed to determine whether the infection is damaging the colon. These tests can include:  When a person develops the  C. difficile  infection as a result of taking antibiotics for another illness, they may need to stop taking them. However, this may not be possible in all situations, especially for people who have severe infections.  A person who experiences mild symptoms will also require additional antibiotics to get rid of the infection.  Doctors can prescribe a  variety of antibiotics , including:  In the past, metronidazole (Flagyl) was the first-line treatment for  C. difficile.  Now, doctors prefer to prescribe vancomycin or fidaxomicin, if available, as they are more effective.  A person with  C. difficile  infection should never take antidiarrheal medications due to the risk of serious complications.  Someone with a severe infection and damage to the colon may also require surgery. If a person's colon is severely damaged, they may need surgery to remove it.  If antibiotics do not work, a doctor may recommend a fecal microbioa transplant (FMT). During this procedure, stool from a healthy donor is collected, rinsed and diluted with saline or another solution, and then transplanted directly into the infected person. Doctors can do this using a colonoscopy, a sigmoidoscopy, or an enema.  This procedure allows healthful gut bacteria from the donor stool to move into the injured or diseased colon, which makes it easier for the colon to heal after a  C. difficile  infection.  While FMT is a relatively new treatment, there have been  no documented cases  of a person contracting a new infection from the transplant.   C. difficile  infection is a bowel infection that can lead to serious complications without treatment. It is essential for anyone who develops diarrhea or abdominal pain after taking antibiotics to see a doctor.  If a doctor identifies  C. difficile  infection, they will start treatment immediately.  Dietary changes are an essential part of treatment and can allow the colon rest and heal.    
 Claro, T.,  et al . (2014). Detecting  Clostridium difficile  spores from inanimate surfaces of the hospital environment: Which method is best? [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25009047  
  Clostridium difficile  infection. (2015).  Claro, T.,  et al . (2014). Detecting  Clostridium difficile  spores from inanimate surfaces of the hospital environment: Which method is best? [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25009047    Clostridium difficile  infection. (2015).  Clostridium difficile infections. (2018).   Clostridium difficile  infection information for patients. (2015).  Faecal microbiota (stool) transplantation (FMT). (2017).  Johnston, B. C.,  et al . (2012). Probiotics for the prevention of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23362517   McDonald, L. C.  et al . (2018). Clinical practice guidelines for  Clostridium difficile  infection in adults and children: 2017 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA).  https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/66/7/e1/4855916   Surawicz, C. M. (2016). C. difficile infection.  http://patients.gi.org/topics/c-difficile-infection/   Tracking  Clostridium difficile  infection. (2015).  https://www.cdc.gov/hai/organisms/cdiff/tracking-cdiff.html   What is Clostridium difficile infection? (n.d.).  https://www.summitmedicalgroup.com/library/adult_health/aha_clostridium_difficile/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "What to eat if you have a C. diff infection."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321704.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, May 1). "What to eat if you have a C. diff infection."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  