 Although medically known as lymphatic filariasis, the term elephantiasis is commonly used because symptoms include swelling and enlargement of the arms and legs.  The  World Health Organization (WHO)  estimate that 120 million people worldwide are affected by elephantiasis.  Read on to learn more about treating and preventing this neglected tropical disease.   Most people  who are infected will not show symptoms, despite damage to the lymph system and kidneys.  Those who do get symptoms most commonly experience swelling of the:  People with elephantiasis will have impaired immune function because of damage to their lymph system. They tend to get more bacterial infections of the skin, causing it to become dry, thick, and ulcerated with repeated infections.  Other symptoms during these repeated bacterial infections include a  fever  and chills.  The following 3 types of parasitic  roundworms  cause elephantiasis:   Wuchereria bancrofti  worms cause  90 percent  of all cases of elephantiasis.  Brugia malayi  causes most of the others.  Mosquitoes are responsible for spreading the parasites that cause elephantiasis.  Firstly, mosquitoes become infected with roundworm larvae when they take a blood meal from an infected human.  The mosquitoes then bite someone else, passing the larvae into their bloodstream.  Finally, the worm larvae migrate to the lymphatics via the bloodstream and mature in the lymph system.  Elephantiasis can affect anyone who is exposed to the parasites that cause the disease.  The risk of exposure is greatest for people who:  The regions where these roundworms are found  include :  To diagnose elephantiasis, a doctor will:  A blood examination will be required to confirm a parasitic infection. In most parts of the world the roundworms are most active at night, so the blood sample must be collected during this time, according to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) .  Alternative tests may be used to detect the parasites, but they may show negative results because symptoms can develop years after the initial infection.  X-rays and  ultrasounds  may also be done to rule out other conditions that could be causing the swelling.  People with an active infection can take medications to kill the worms in the blood. These medications stop the spread of the illness to others, but they do not completely kill off all the parasites.  Antiparasitic drugs that may be prescribed include:  Other symptoms may be  managed with :  Not everyone with elephantiasis will need medication. This is because they may no longer carry the worms in their system despite the presence of symptoms. People can  manage the swelling  and skin infections in these cases by:  Surgery may be recommended in rare cases to remove damaged lymphatic tissue or relieve pressure in certain areas, such as the scrotum.  Some people with elephantiasis may wish to seek emotional and psychological support in the form of:  Without medical treatment, the microscopic parasites may live for years in the lymphatic system, causing destruction and damage.  The lymph system is responsible for transporting excess fluid and proteins and fighting infections. Fluid builds up when it does not function correctly. The accumulation of fluid leads to swelling of the tissue and reduced immune function.  Elephantiasis is associated with several physical and emotional complications, including:  The best way to prevent elephantiasis is to avoid mosquito bites.  People who visit or live in countries at risk should:  Elephantiasis is a tropical disease spread through mosquito bites. People living in affected tropical or subtropical areas are most at risk of infection. However, short-term visitors to these regions have a  very low risk  of getting elephantiasis or related conditions, according to the CDC.  People with symptoms of the condition, including swelling and skin thickening, should see their doctor immediately. Elephantiasis symptoms can be managed through medications, lifestyle changes, and emotional support.    
 Elephantiasis. (2009).  Elephantiasis. (2009).  Frequently asked questions (FAQs). (2013, June 14).  Hoerauf, A. (2008, December). Filariasis: New drugs and new opportunities for lymphatic filariasis and onchocerciasis [Abstract].  Current Opinion in Infectious Diseases ,  21 (6), 673–681.  Lymphatic filariasis. (2018, February 16).  Parasites. (2013, June 14).  Prevention and treatment. (2006).  Shenoy, R. K. (2008, September 20). Clinical and pathological aspects of filarial lymphedema and its management.  The Korean Journal of Parasitology ,  46 (3), 119–125.  Stocks, M. E., Freeman, M. C., &amp; Addiss, D. G. (2015, October 23). The effect of hygiene-based lymphedema management in lymphatic filariasis-endemic areas: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases ,  9 (10), e0004171.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Can you treat elephantiasis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321797.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, May 14). "Can you treat elephantiasis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  