 But hunger pangs can happen even if the body does not need food. Several other situations and conditions can lead to hunger pangs, including:  Read on to learn more about hunger pains and discover how to ease them.  People get hunger pangs or hunger pains for several different reasons. Seven reasons are explained here:  The brain triggers the release of a hormone called ghrelin in response to an empty stomach or in anticipation of the next meal.  Ghrelin signals the body to release stomach acids to digest food. If food is not consumed, the stomach acids begin to attack the lining of the stomach, causing hunger pains.  Studies have shown that ghrelin increases hunger by up to  30 percent  when it is administered to adults.  Hunger pangs can happen even when the body does not need  calories .  This is because ghrelin interacts with  insulin , the hormone that regulates blood sugar. Falling levels of insulin cause ghrelin, and therefore hunger, levels to rise.  Junk food contains high amounts of sugar and simple  carbohydrates . Eating it causes a spike in insulin levels, followed by a quick drop. Ghrelin then increases, even though the food was consumed only an hour or so beforehand.  In this way, eating even large amounts of poor quality food can increase hunger and cause the pang response in the body.  Many people cannot tell the difference between hunger and thirst because the symptoms are so similar.  Thirst can cause symptoms, such as:  Some people experience pangs in response to smells and sights. Many people have a physical response to the smell of freshly baked goods or cooking. Images of food on T.V. or online can also cause the mouth to water.  Although this type of hunger may not be based on a need for food, it causes very real physical symptoms, including hunger pains.  Overeating and excess weight have long been associated with sleep deprivation. It appears that hunger pains may be linked to a lack of sleep or poor-quality sleep.  Lack of sleep increases the effects of a chemical that makes eating sweet, salty, and high-fat foods more appealing, a  2016 study  suggests.  The sleep-deprived study participants ate a meal containing 90 percent of their daily calories but were unable to resist junk foods just 2 hours later.  People may mistake their brain signals for food as hunger pains in some cases. This situation can occur when someone is in a heightened emotional state.   Research suggests  that  stress  and other negative emotions can make it seem like the body urgently needs food, even when it may not.  A rumbling or growling stomach can sometimes help distinguish between emotional and physical hunger. The noises can only be heard when the stomach is empty.  Hunger pangs may be caused by medical conditions in rare cases. This is true for people with  diabetes , as hunger increases when blood sugar crashes.  It can indicate an infection or digestive illness that requires medical attention if pains occur alongside other symptoms. Look out for symptoms, such as:  Some medications, including certain  antidepressants , may interfere with hunger signals and ghrelin release.  Hunger pains feel like a gnawing or rumbling in the stomach. They may also present as contractions or the feeling of emptiness.  Other symptoms may include:  Once food is consumed, hunger pains and other hunger symptoms usually go away. The stomach adjusts to this new level of fullness (or emptiness), so they may even subside without eating anything.   Research  on mice has found that there is an instinctive desire to reduce hunger pangs and other hunger signals. Certain neurons in the brain kick in to fuel appetite once a certain amount of bodyweight has been lost.  This may explain why it is challenging to stick to a diet when experiencing hunger pains.  There may be other ways to control hunger pangs while losing weight even though the researchers suggest that manipulating these neurons will help people maintain their diets.  To alleviate hunger pains, especially when dieting, people can try the following:  Ghrelin is released in response to what someone's usual mealtimes are.  Sticking to a schedule will ensure food reaches the stomach in time to meet the stomach acid released in response to ghrelin spikes.  It can also be helpful to carry healthful, low-calorie snacks, such as fruit and nuts, when outside the home, in case it is not possible to eat a full meal at a designated meal time.  Avoid insulin dips by choosing healthful food options instead of processed ones.  Eat balanced meals that contain:  A person should try to limit the intake of foods that are high in sugar, salt, saturated fats, and trans fats. Refined carbohydrates, including white bread and white pasta, should be eaten in moderation or not at all.  Some low-calorie foods are considered high-volume, meaning they take up space in the stomach yet do not contribute to weight gain.  A full stomach will cause levels of ghrelin to drop, which alleviates hunger pains. High-volume, low-calorie foods include:  Sip water throughout the day. Aim to drink 8 glasses daily. Limit diuretic drinks, such as caffeine and alcohol, which contribute to dehydration.  It is sensible to avoid food cravings caused by sleep deprivation by establishing a sleep routine. It helps to go to bed and get up at the same time every day and aim to sleep for 7 to 9 hours nightly.  When eating, focus on the taste and texture of each bite. Chew food thoroughly. Do not watch television during mealtimes.  A person can try to ignore hunger pains if they are not based on a real need for food.  Effective distractions include:  Consult a doctor if hunger pains regularly persist despite eating balanced meals. Stomach pains may suggest a gastrointestinal disorder or infection.  People who experience the following symptoms along with their hunger pangs should also see a doctor:  Stomach pains are a normal response to hunger. Although they may signal a need for food, it is possible to experience hunger pangs in response to other situations, including dehydration, sleep loss, and  anxiety .  Hunger pains rarely need medical attention, as they usually go away once food is eaten.  People who are dieting may wish to take steps to alleviate their hunger pains to meet their weight loss goals.    
 Betley, J. N., Xu, S., Cao, Z. F. H., Gong, R., Magnus, C. J., Yu, Y., &amp; Sternson, S. M. (2015, May 14). Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal [Abstract].  Nature ,  521 , 180–185.  Betley, J. N., Xu, S., Cao, Z. F. H., Gong, R., Magnus, C. J., Yu, Y., &amp; Sternson, S. M. (2015, May 14). Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal [Abstract].  Nature ,  521 , 180–185.  Ghrelin. (2018, March).  Hanlon, E. C., Tasali, E., Leproult, R., Stuhr, K. L., Doncheck, E., de Wit, H., ... Van Cauter, E. (2016, March 1). Sleep restriction enhances the daily rhythm of circulating levels of endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol.  Sleep ,  39 (3), 653–664.  Tan, C. C., &amp; Chow, C. M. (2014, March 21). Stress and emotional eating: The mediating role of eating dysregulation.  Personality and Individual Differences ,  66 , 1–4.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Biggers, Alana. "How do you stop hunger pains?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321725.php&gt;    APA  Biggers, A. (2018, May 4). "How do you stop hunger pains?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  