 Different types of food can combat different types of illness. A person with a  sore throat  may benefit from foods that would not help someone who feels nauseous.  In this article, we provide a list of foods to eat and avoid for people with common illnesses.  A blocked nose, a cough, and a sore throat are common symptoms of colds and  flu . The following foods can help to ease congestion and  inflammation  and boost the immune system.   1. Herbal teas   When experiencing cold and flu symptoms, it is important to stay hydrated. Herbal teas are refreshing, and breathing in their steam can help to clear mucus from the sinuses.  Adding ground turmeric to a cup of hot water may help to relieve a sore throat. Research suggests that turmeric has both  anti-inflammatory  and  antiseptic  properties.  Tea leaves are abundant in natural plant compounds, such as polyphenols, flavonoids, and catechins. These stimulate the immune system. Catechins, in particular, may  protect  against certain types of  influenza  virus.  Some people recommend drinking  Echinacea  tea to shorten the duration of cold and flu symptoms. However, this effect has  yet to be proven  by scientific research.   2. Honey   A sore throat can be caused by a bacterial infection. Honey is rich in antimicrobials that help to clear these types of infection.  Honey may also be effective in treating children's coughs, though it should not be given to infants under 12 months of age.  A  review  published in 2018 compared honey with common over-the-counter children's cough remedies, a  placebo , and no treatment.  The authors found that honey appeared to be more effective than diphenhydramine and salbutamol, which are drugs often used in cough medicines. Honey also produced similar results as dextromethorphan, another common ingredient.  The results were limited, however, as most studies in the review only looked at 1-night acute coughs.   3. Citrus fruits and berries   Citrus fruits, such as oranges, lemons, and grapefruits, contain high levels of flavonoids and  vitamin  C. These decrease inflammation and boost immunity, which  may help  to fight a  fever .   Some studies  suggest that a flavonoid called quercetin, which is also found in berries, may help to treat rhinovirus infections. This virus is responsible for the majority of common colds.  Frozen, slushy fruit juices can often help to soothe a sore throat.

   Dairy  is believed by many to increase mucus production, although there is little scientific evidence to support this. Dairy  may  make mucus thicker, however, which can worsen sinus congestion.   Caffeine  can cause  dehydration , which makes congestion worse. However, some caffeinated drinks, such as tea and  coffee , contain immune-boosting  antioxidants , and they may be helpful in moderation.   Alcohol  can dehydrate and trigger an inflammatory response, which may aggravate cold and flu symptoms.  When someone has one or more of these symptoms, the key is to eat foods that settle the stomach. Doing so should help people to regain their appetite.   1. Ginger    Research  suggests that  ginger  could help to reduce the effects of nausea and vomiting, although more studies are required to confirm these findings.  A person can make ginger tea by adding 1–2 teaspoons of fresh ginger to a cup of hot water. Steep the ginger for 5 minutes before straining the mixture and sweetening it with a little honey.  Crystallized ginger should be eaten in moderation, due to its high sugar content.  Avoid fizzy ginger ale, as this can further irritate an  upset stomach .   2. BRAT foods   BRAT stands for:  bananas , rice, applesauce, and toast. These foods are bland and gentle on the stomach.  The diet is rich in starch and contains little fiber, which can have a binding effect on loose stools and speed up recovery from  diarrhea .  Other bland foods that can be added to a BRAT diet include:  A person should start slowly, sipping water regularly for the first few hours, before gently introducing other liquids, such as apple juice or broth.  If the stomach remains settled, it may be safe to try more solid BRAT foods.  Those sensitive to gluten should make sure to choose gluten-free options.  It will usually be safe to return to a more regular diet after  around 48 hours .   3. Coconut water   An upset stomach occurs when the stomach lining becomes inflamed. Compounds called tannins that are present in coconut water  may help  to reduce this inflammation.  Coconut water is also high in minerals such as sodium and  potassium . They can help the body to rehydrate quickly after diarrhea or vomiting.  One  study  found that coconut water may provide the same level of hydration as a sports drink. It is also more healthful, containing no added sugar. However, it is worth noting that this study only included 12 participants.   Greasy foods  contain high levels of fats, which are difficult to digest and can irritate the stomach, worsening nausea.   Chilies  contain capsaicin, a chemical that can irritate the lining of the stomach, causing pain and discomfort.   Caffeine  acts as a muscle stimulant that can cause stomach cramps and increase bowel movements.   Dairy  products contain a sugar called lactose that can be difficult to digest after diarrhea, causing bloating and nausea.   Artificial sweeteners  can have a laxative effect.  The key to relieving  constipation  is to increase fiber intake.  Fiber is either soluble or insoluble. Soluble fiber traps water in the stools, making them softer and easier to pass. It also helps to nourish gut bacteria. Insoluble fiber adds bulk to stools, helping to clear the intestines.  Be aware that eating more dietary fiber can cause excess gas. A person should increase their intake gradually to avoid bloating.  Soluble fiber also absorbs a lot of water, so be sure to drink plenty.   1. Oatmeal and oat bran   A single cup of oatmeal made with water contains about  4 grams  of fiber, around 16 percent of an adult's  recommended daily intake .  While oatmeal only contains the germ of the oat, oat bran contains the fibrous husk as well. Because of this, it provides  5.7 grams  of fiber per cup, so bran is even better for digestion.  Raw oats contain more fiber per serving than cooked oats and make an excellent addition to smoothies. Rolled oats are digested more easily than steel-cut oats when in the raw form.  It is important to stay hydrated when eating dry oats. The extra fiber from blended fruits will also help to relieve constipation.   2. Dried fruits   All fruits are good sources of fiber, but dried fruits, such as apricots, figs, and prunes, typically contain the highest levels.  These fruits also contain a natural laxative known as sorbitol, which promotes bowel movements by  drawing water  into the intestines.  Prunes and apricots also contain polyphenols, which  can increase  the amount of healthful gut bacteria, such as  Lactobacillus  and  Bifidobacterium . These bacteria help to stimulate the intestines.   3. Flaxseed   Due to its high soluble fiber content, flaxseed is particularly good at supporting regular bowel movements.  It is also an excellent source of  omega-3  essential fatty acids. There is some  evidence  that omega-3 acids reduce bowel inflammation, which can occur after prolonged constipation.  The outer shell of the seed cannot be digested, so people should eat pre-ground flax. This will allow the body to absorb the beneficial nutrients.  Ground flaxseed can be added to porridge and smoothies or used in baking.   Processed foods  tend to be high in fats and salt, and low in fiber. Fats are difficult to digest, while salt decreases levels of moisture in stools.   Processed grains , such as white bread and white rice, have been stripped of the bran and germ. These are the parts that provide the highest levels of fiber.   Caffeine and alcohol  can both cause dehydration, depleting the water needed to soften stools.  Dietary changes can provide some relief when an individual feels sick. A person should try to follow the recommended diet for their symptoms while avoiding foods that will worsen them.  It is important to remember that prevention is better than a cure. Staying hydrated and eating a healthful diet rich in nutrients will help to stave off many of the ailments listed above.    
 5 tips: Natural products for the flu and colds: What does the science say? (2017, December 1).  5 tips: Natural products for the flu and colds: What does the science say? (2017, December 1).  Barbalho, S. M., de Alvares Goulart, R., Quesada, K., Bechara, M. D., &amp; de Carvalho, A. C. A. (2016, January–March). Inflammatory bowel disease: Can omega-3 fatty acids really help?  Annals of Gastroenterology ,  29 (1), 37–43.  Basic report: 08123, cereals, oats, instant, fortified, plain, prepared with water (boiling water added or microwaved). (2018, April).  Basic report: 20033, oat bran, raw. (2018, April).  Basic report: 20034, oat bran, cooked. (2018, April).  BRAT diet: Recovering from an upset stomach. (2017, March 14).  De Jesus, N. Z. T., Falcão, H. S., Gomes, I. F., Leite, T. J. A., Lima, G. R. M., Barbosa-Filho, J. M., ... Batista, L. M. (2012, March 8). Tannins, peptic ulcers and related mechanisms.  International Journal of Molecular Sciences ,  13 (3), 3203–3228.  Halland, M., &amp; Saito, Y. A. (2015, June 27). Irritable bowel syndrome: New and emerging treatments.  BMJ , 29–32.  Ide, K., Kawasaki, Y., Kawakami, K., &amp; Yamada, H. (2016). Anti-influenza virus effects of catechins: A molecular and clinical review.  Current Medicinal Chemistry ,  23 (42), 4773–4783.  Kalman, D. S., Feldman, S., Krieger, D. R., &amp; Bloomer, R. J. (2012, January 18). Comparison of coconut water and a carbohydrate-electrolyte sport drink on measures of hydration and physical performance in exercise-trained men.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  9 (1).  Marx, W., Kiss, N., &amp; Isenring, L. (2015, June). Is ginger beneficial for nausea and vomiting? An update of the literature [Abstract].  Current Opinion in Supportive and Palliative Care ,  9 (2), 189–195.  Oduwole, O., Udoh, E. E., Oyo‐Ita, A., &amp; Meremikwu, M. M. (2018, April 10). Honey for acute cough in children.  Evidence‐Based Child Health: A Cochrane Review Journal ,  9 (2), 401–444.  Owuor, N., Nalamala, N., Gimenes Jr., J. A., &amp; Sajjan, U. S. (2017, September 7).  Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine ,  2 (3), 1–3.  Pérez-Cano, F. J., &amp; Castell, M. (2016). Flavonoids, inflammation and immune system.  Nutrients ,  8 (10), 659.  Steckelberg, J. M. (2016, February 16). Cold symptoms: Does drinking milk increase phlegm?  Toden, S., Theiss, A. L., Wang, X., &amp; Goel, A. (2017). Essential turmeric oils enhance anti-inflammatory efficacy of curcumin in dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis.  Scientific Reports ,  7 (1), 814.  Vaughn, A. R., Branum, A., Sivamani, R. K. (2016, August). Effects of turmeric (Curcuma longa) on skin health: A systematic review of the clinical evidence [Abstract].  Phytotherapy Research ,  30 (8), 1243–1264.  Whole grains and fiber. (2016, October 11).  Zhao, Y., &amp; Yu, Y.-B. (2016, July 19). Intestinal microbiota and chronic constipation.  Springerplus ,  5 (1), 1130.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lillis, Charlotte. "What should you eat when you are sick?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321786.php&gt;    APA  Lillis, C. (2018, May 12). "What should you eat when you are sick?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  