 Air can get stuck in this area because of trauma or leakage from the lungs or windpipe. It is  known as  spontaneous pneumomediastinum when there is no apparent cause. The condition is rare and accounts for between  1 in 7,000 and 1 in 45,000  cases of hospital admittance.  Read on to learn more about the symptoms and treatment of pneumomediastinum.  The main symptom is normally a severe pain in the center of the chest. Other  symptoms  can include:  A doctor, listening to the chest of someone with a pneumomediastinum, may hear a crunching noise that is in time with the heartbeat. This sound is known as Hamman's crunch.  The mediastinum may fill with air due to:  The Valsalva maneuver may also  cause  a pneumomediastinum. This maneuver involves forcefully exhaling against a closed airway. The Valsalva maneuver is commonly done to pop the ears.  Factors that increase the likelihood of a pneumomediastinum include:  A doctor will take a medical history and perform a physical examination to diagnose pneumomediastinum. They will probably listen to the chest with a stethoscope.  Imaging tests are usually required to see the lungs, airways, and mediastinum. They may include:  Other less commonly used tests may be done to identify or confirm an underlying medical condition. These include:  Pneumomediastinum is rarely serious and will usually resolve on its own. Treatment is aimed at managing symptoms and any underlying cause.  Most people will spend at least 24 hours in a hospital for observation. Recommended treatments include:  If a lung condition is contributing to pneumomediastinum, that condition will typically require treatment. Doctors may prescribe  antibiotics  for infections or breathing treatments for asthma, for example.  Spontaneous pneumomediastinum usually resolves without treatment, although it has been known to persist for over 2 months in some cases.  Treatment also includes dealing with complications such as pneumothorax, also known as a collapsed lung.  Pneumothorax results from the buildup of air between the lungs and wall of the chest. People with a collapsed lung may require the insertion of a chest tube to release the air and allow the lung to re-inflate.  Complications can also affect the heart. Rarely, a pneumomediastinum can lead to air accumulating around the sack of the heart, making it difficult for the heart to beat  normally .  Pneumomediastinum may affect approximately  2 in every 1,000 births . Its occurrence is, however, probably underestimated because it does not always cause symptoms that lead to a diagnosis.  It is more likely to occur in newborns who:  If a newborn has symptoms they can include:  A baby will receive oxygen to help them breathe and encourage reabsorption of air if they show symptoms of breathing distress. Antibiotics and other treatments will be prescribed for any other underlying problems.  It is often necessary to monitor the newborn in the neonatal intensive care unit or NICU while the pneumomediastinum is treated.  Pneumomediastinum is not usually a cause for concern and typically has a good outlook. Some symptoms, such as pain and breathing difficulties, can, however, cause distress. Treatments are aimed at minimizing these symptoms until the air in the chest dissipates.  Follow-ups after the pneumomediastinum has resolved is not usually required because the condition is unlikely to reoccur. Recurrent cases, however, have been reported, especially where drug use or lung illness are involved    
 Bilir, O., Yavasi, O., Ersunan, G., Kayayurt, K., &amp; Giakoup, B. (2014, May 13). Pneumomediastinum associated with pneumopericardium and epidural pneumatosis [Abstract]. Case Reports in Emergency Medicine,  2014 .  Bilir, O., Yavasi, O., Ersunan, G., Kayayurt, K., &amp; Giakoup, B. (2014, May 13). Pneumomediastinum associated with pneumopericardium and epidural pneumatosis [Abstract]. Case Reports in Emergency Medicine,  2014 .  Cicak, B., Verona, E., Mihatov-Stefanović, I., &amp; Vrsalović, R. (2009, September). Spontaneous pneumomediastinum in a healthy adolescent [Abstract].  Acta Clinica Croatica ,  48 (4), 461–467.  Kouritas, V. K., Papagiannopoulos, K., Lazaridis, G., Baka, S., Mpoukovinas, I., Karavasilis, V., … &amp; Zarogoulidis, P. (2015, February). Pneumomediastinum.  Journal of Thoracic Disease ,  7 (Suppl 1), S44–S49.  Meireles, J., Neves, S., Castro, A., &amp; França, M. (2011). Spontaneous pneumomediastinum revisited.  Respiratory Medicine CME ,  4 (4), 181–183.  Rocha, G., &amp; Guimarães, H. (2018, February). Spontaneous pneumomediastinum in a term neonate — case report.  Clinical Case Reports ,  6 (2), 314–316.  Zachariah, S., Gharahbaghian, L., Perera, P., &amp; Joshi, N. (2015, March 13). Spontaneous pneumomediastinum on bedside ultrasound: Case report and review of the literature.  Western Journal of Emergency Medicine ,  16 (2), 321–324.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What causes a pneumomediastinum?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321796.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, May 13). "What causes a pneumomediastinum?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  