 These types of attack have different intensities and durations.   Panic attacks  are generally more intense than  anxiety  attacks. They also come on out of the blue, while anxiety attacks are often associated with a trigger.  Symptoms of anxiety are linked to numerous  mental health  conditions, including  obsessive-compulsive disorder  and trauma, while panic attacks mainly affect those with panic disorder.  The differences between anxiety and panic attacks are best highlighted by comparing the symptoms of each condition:  Panic attacks come on suddenly, without an obvious trigger.  Symptoms include:  People experiencing a panic attack may also:  Symptoms of panic tend to peak after 10 minutes, then gradually subside.  However, several panic attacks can occur in a row, making it seem like an attack is lasting for much longer.  After an attack, many people feel stressed, worried, or otherwise unusual for the rest of the day.  While panic attacks come on suddenly, symptoms of anxiety follow a period of excessive worry.  Symptoms may become more pronounced over a few minutes or hours. They are typically less intense than those of panic attacks.  Anxiety attack symptoms include:  Anxiety symptoms often last longer than the symptoms of a panic attack. They may persist for days, weeks, or months.  Because the symptoms are so similar, it can be difficult to tell the difference between panic and anxiety attacks.  Here are some tips that can help:  Panic attacks can be expected or unexpected. Unexpected attacks have no apparent triggers.  Anxiety attacks and expected panic attacks can be triggered by:  People are more likely to experience panic attacks if they have:  Females are more likely than males to have anxiety or panic attacks.  A doctor or mental health professional can diagnose a panic attack, panic disorder, or anxiety disorder.  They base their diagnoses on definitions contained in the   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition  (DSM-5).  These professionals cannot diagnose an anxiety attack, because it is not a clinically defined condition in the DSM-5. They can, however, recognize the symptoms of anxiety.  To diagnose any of these conditions, a doctor will discuss symptoms and life events. They may also perform a psychological evaluation to see what category, if any, the symptoms fall into.  It may be necessary to rule out physiological conditions that share similar symptoms.  To do this, a doctor may perform:  The following strategies can help:  The symptoms of a panic or anxiety attack can be extremely frightening. Acknowledging the situation and remembering that symptoms will soon pass can reduce anxiety and fear.  Difficulty breathing is among the most common and alarming symptoms of these types of attack.  To slow breathing down, focus the attention on the breath. Inhale and exhale at a slow and steady rate until symptoms subside.  Count to four during each inhalation and exhalation.  Methods of relaxation, such as progressive muscle relaxation and guided imagery, can reduce feelings of panic and anxiety.  A person can learn these techniques online or by working with a qualified therapist.  Mindfulness helps people to stay grounded in the present moment.  It can be especially beneficial for people with anxiety, who tend to worry about perceived and potential stressors.  Practice mindfulness by actively noticing thoughts, emotions, and sensations without judging or reacting to them.  A doctor or mental health professional can tailor treatment to help individuals deal with anxiety or panic attacks.  The  Anxiety and Depression Association of America  recommend the following home remedies for  stress  and anxiety:  People debating whether to seek treatment often wonder:  Engaging in therapy can help to identify triggers and manage symptoms. Therapy also aims to help people to accept their pasts and work toward their futures.  One type, called  cognitive behavioral therapy , may be  especially helpful  for people with anxiety and panic disorders.  Medication can reduce symptoms in people with severe or recurrent panic or anxiety. It can be used in conjunction with therapy or as a stand-alone treatment.  A doctor may prescribe:  Panic and anxiety attacks are different, but they share some symptoms.  Anxiety attacks often follow periods of prolonged worry. Panic attacks tend to occur suddenly, and the symptoms are often more intense.  Panic and anxiety can be distressing and disruptive, but self-help strategies can reduce the intensity of symptoms. Therapy and medication can prevent or reduce the number of future episodes.  The sooner a person seeks help, the better the outcome.    
 Gloster, A. T., Hauke, C., Höfler, M., Einsle, F., Fydrich, T., Hamm, A., &amp; Wittchen, H. U. (2013, December). Long-term stability of cognitive behavioral therapy effects for panic disorder with agoraphobia: A two-year follow-up study [Abstract].  Behaviour Research and Therapy ,  51 (12), 830–839.  Gloster, A. T., Hauke, C., Höfler, M., Einsle, F., Fydrich, T., Hamm, A., &amp; Wittchen, H. U. (2013, December). Long-term stability of cognitive behavioral therapy effects for panic disorder with agoraphobia: A two-year follow-up study [Abstract].  Behaviour Research and Therapy ,  51 (12), 830–839.  Grillon, C., O’Connell, K., Lieberman, L., Alvarez, G., Geraci, M., Pine, D. S., &amp; Ernst, M. (2017, October). Distinct responses to predictable and unpredictable threat in anxiety pathologies: Effect of panic attack [Abstract].  Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging ,  2 (7), 575–581.  Tips to manage anxiety and stress. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "How do you know if you're having a panic or anxiety attack?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321798.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, May 14). "How do you know if you're having a panic or anxiety attack?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  