 Anyone can have pitting  edema , but because some causes are more dangerous than others, it is often a good idea to consult a doctor.  In this article, we describe who is at risk for pitting edema. We also explore accompanying symptoms, treatments, and prevention techniques.  This condition is most common in the lower body, particularly in the legs, ankles, and feet.  Swelling caused by edema will usually make the skin feel tight, heavy, or sore. Other symptoms depend on the cause, but they can include:  People who experience chest pain, shortness of breath, or swelling in only one limb should seek immediate medical attention.  Edema occurs when fluid that accumulates in tissues leads to swelling. When pressure is applied to a swollen area, it may leave a pit, in the skin.  In non-pitting edema, the skin will return to its swollen shape once the pressure has been removed.  A variety of factors can lead to pitting edema, including:  Alternatively, any of the following conditions may be responsible:  Pitting edema may also be a side effect of medications such as:  Pitting edema can affect anyone, though certain factors can increase a person's risk.  These include:  In most cases, a doctor should determine the cause of pitting edema and, if necessary, refer a person to a specialist.  Some accompanying symptoms require urgent care. Anyone experiencing shortness of breath, difficulty breathing, chest pain, or swelling in a single limb should seek immediate medical attention.  When  leg pain  and swelling persist after a person has been sitting for several hours, this may indicate deep vein thrombosis. This occurs when a blood clot develops deep in the leg. Anyone who suspects this should seek urgent medical care.  Pregnancy can cause pitting edema, and it usually resolves as the pregnancy ends.  However, it is a good idea to discuss every new symptom with a doctor, who can test to rule out serious conditions linked with edema, such as very high blood pressure or  preeclampsia .  Pitting edema is often diagnosed with a physical exam. The doctor may apply pressure to the swollen skin for about 15 seconds to check for lasting indentation.  Because some associated conditions are more dangerous than others, it is important to find the underlying cause of the edema. This may require thorough testing. The edema will usually resolve once the cause has been treated.  To properly identify the underlying cause, a doctor may take a detailed medical history and ask about medications. They may then refer the person to a doctor who specializes in issues concerning the veins or circulatory system.  Tests that can aid in a diagnosis of pitting edema include:  Pitting edema is classified based on the depth and duration of the indentation. The following scale is used to rate the severity:   Grade 1 : The pressure applied by the doctor leaves an indentation of 0–2 millimeters (mm) that rebounds immediately. This is the least severe type of pitting edema.   Grade 2 : The pressure leaves an indentation of 3–4 mm that rebounds in fewer than 15 seconds.   Grade 3 : The pressure leaves an indentation of 5–6 mm that takes up to 30 seconds to rebound.   Grade 4 : The pressure leaves an indentation of 8 mm or deeper. It takes more than 20 seconds to rebound.  Understanding the severity of edema can help a doctor to identify the underlying cause and best course of treatment.  This involves addressing the underlying cause of the edema. A range of treatments correspond with the range of causes, but common methods include:  When the underlying cause has been successfully treated, edema is unlikely to recur.  Some adjustments to lifestyle and diet can reduce the likelihood of developing edema, particularly if a person has a high risk.  These changes may include staying active, avoiding sitting or standing for long periods, and doing gentle exercises to reduce swelling.  Pitting edema is a common symptom. It is usually not a cause for concern in itself, but many underlying conditions require treatment, sometimes urgently.  Edema should not cause any long-term complications. After working with a doctor, many people find lasting relief from the symptom.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Pitting  edema . (n.d.).  Pitting  edema . (n.d.).  Siddall, E., Khatri, M., &amp; Radhakrishnan, J. (2017, July). Capillary leak syndrome: Etiologies, pathophysiology, and management [Abstract].  Kidney International ,  92 (1), 37–46.  Stoll, B. C. (2014, February 22).  Practical  approach to lower extremity  edema .  Trayes, K. P., Studdiford, J. S., Pickle, S., &amp; Tully, A. S. (2013, July 15). Edema: Diagnosis and management.  American Family Physician ,  88 (2), 102–110.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "How to identify pitting edema."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321773.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, May 12). "How to identify pitting edema."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  