 Ghee can be used as a substitute for butter, and many people think that ghee might be a more healthful alternative for using in cooking.  In this article, we look at the differences between ghee and butter in terms of production,  nutrition , and healthfulness, as well as the risks associated with these products.  Ghee is a form of highly-clarified butter that is traditionally used in Asian cooking. Like butter, ghee is typically made from cow's milk.  Ghee is made by melting regular butter. The butter separates into liquid fats and milk solids. Once separated, the milk solids are removed, which means that ghee has less lactose than butter.  Traditionally, ghee has been used as cooking oil, an ingredient in dishes, and in Ayurveda therapies. Ghee is still used in Ayurvedic massage and as a base for herbal ointments to treat burns and rashes.  Ghee is heated for longer than other types of clarified butter, which contributes to a stronger and nuttier flavor, as well as a darker hue.  Ghee has a higher burning point than standard clarified butter, which means it is ideal for frying or sautéing foods.  A person can make ghee at home using regular unsalted butter. Melt the butter slowly and skim off the solids that gather on the surface. Continue to cook the butter until all the milk solids have sunk to the bottom and the liquid is clear — this is clarified butter.  Continue to cook for a few more minutes until the milk solids at the bottom of the pan turn brown. The cooked milk solids give the ghee its flavor and color. Sieve the liquid into a jar or bottle and let it cool and solidify.  Because ghee and butter both derive from cow's milk, their nutritional profiles and fat content are very similar.  However, because ghee does not contain the same levels of dairy proteins as butter, it may be better for people who do not tolerate dairy products well.  Various research studies have looked at the possible benefits and risks of including ghee in a person's diet. These include:  According to research from  2010 , ghee contains almost 50 percent saturated fat, which has led to concerns that ghee might increase the risk of  coronary artery disease  (CAD) in India.  However, a  2018  study looking at 200 people in north India suggests that the fat and  cholesterol  in the blood was healthier in the people who ate more ghee and less mustard oil as sources of fat in their diets. Results included lower LDL or bad cholesterol levels and higher HDL or good cholesterol levels.  This study only compared results between ghee and mustard oil and not butter. Some forms of mustard oil are banned for consumption in the United States, Canada, and Europe because they contain erucic acid.  Because ghee has had many of its dairy proteins removed, it contains much lower levels of dairy proteins, such as casein, and lactose than regular butter.  A person who is sensitive or intolerant to lactose and casein may find that it is beneficial to use ghee as a substitute for butter.  Ghee contains a fatty acid called butyrate acid, which plays an essential role in digestive health. It may also have anti-inflammatory effects.  However, as butyrate is produced by bacterial fermentation of fiber in the colon, a person does not need to consume saturated fat to obtain this.  According to the  United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) , real butter does not contain any trans fats. However, it does contain high levels of saturated fat, which can contribute to high blood cholesterol levels and  heart disease  if not eaten in moderation.  The American Heart Association recommends that a person should get no more than  5 to 6 percent  of their total daily  calories  from saturated fat, which is about 13 grams per day.  However, fats are essential for a healthful diet. A person should limit their intake of saturated fats and increase their intake of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats, which are healthful fats.  Good sources of healthful fats include fish, nuts, seeds, and olives.  Ghee is another form of butter, and the nutritional profile and fat content of the two are similar. However, ghee may be better for people who are sensitive to lactose and casein because it contains less of both.  While ghee and butter should be limited, a person can occasionally include both foods in a varied and balanced diet.   Article last updated by Phil Riches on Wed  5 December 2018.  Visit our  Nutrition / Diet  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Nutrition / Diet.   
 Canani, R. B., Di Costanzo, M., Leone, L., Pedata, M., Meli, R., &amp; Calignano, A. (2011, March 28). Potential beneficial effects of butyrate in intestinal and extraintestinal diseases.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  17 (12), 1519–1528.  Canani, R. B., Di Costanzo, M., Leone, L., Pedata, M., Meli, R., &amp; Calignano, A. (2011, March 28). Potential beneficial effects of butyrate in intestinal and extraintestinal diseases.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  17 (12), 1519–1528.  Choosemyplate.gov. (2018, April 6).  Dietary guidelines for Americans, 2015–2020 (8th ed.). (2015, December).  Engel, S., &amp; Tholstrup, T. (2015, August). Butter increased total and LDL cholesterol compared with olive oil but resulted in higher HDL cholesterol compared with a habitual diet [Abstract].  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  102 (2), 309–315.  Farvid, M. S., Ding, M., Pan, A., Sun, Q., Chiuve, S. E., Steffen, L. M., ... Hu, F. B. (2014, August 26). Dietary linoleic acid and risk of coronary heart disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies [Abstract].  Circulation ,  137 (18).  Household USDA foods fact sheet: Butter. (2013, May).  Import alert #26-04. (2016, November 18).  Manna, S., Sharma, H. B., Vyas, S., &amp; Kumar, J. (2016, October). Comparison of mustard oil and ghee consumption on the history of coronary heart disease in urban population of India.  Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research ,  10 (10), 1–5.  Saturated fats. (2016, October 12).  Sharma, H. B., Vyas, S., Kumar, J., &amp; Manna, S. (2018, January 24). Beneficial effect of ghee consumption over mustard oil on lipid profile: A study in North Indian adult population [Abstract].  Journal of Complementary and Integrative Medicine .  Sharma, H., Zhang, X., &amp; Dwivedi, C. (2010, April–June). The effect of ghee (clarified butter) on serum lipid levels and microsomal lipid peroxidation.  Ayu ,  31 (2), 134–140.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Railton, David. "Is ghee more healthful than butter?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Dec. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321707.php&gt;    APA  Railton, D. (2018, December 5). "Is ghee more healthful than butter?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  