 If left untreated, hypomagnesemia can cause chronic health problems and decrease the body's levels of  calcium  and  potassium .  In this article, we take a close look at what factors can cause low levels of  magnesium . We also explore the effects on the body and methods of treatment.  Magnesium is a mineral and electrolyte that has a number of vital roles in the body. Because the body cannot produce it, magnesium must be consumed as part of a person's diet.  According to the  National Institutes of Health , an estimated 50–60 percent of the body's magnesium is stored in the bones, and less than 1 percent is found in the blood.  Detecting a deficiency can be difficult, as it is not part of routine blood work.  Results of a 2012 study suggest that around  48 percent  of Americans do not get enough magnesium in their diets. However, it is relatively  uncommon  for low magnesium intake to cause symptoms in healthy people.  Magnesium plays a role in more than 300 of the body's enzyme reactions. It contributes significantly to the:  People with mild hypomagnesemia may have no symptoms, but these can include:  More severe magnesium deficiency can cause:   In rare cases , the change in rhythm can be life-threatening.  Hypomagnesemia can occur when a person does not absorb enough magnesium from their diet. Or, they may release too much magnesium from the kidneys or through the gastrointestinal tract.   Malnutrition , possibly caused by  anorexia ,  bulimia , or frequent vomiting can result in a magnesium deficiency. However, malnutrition is unlikely to be responsible for low levels of the mineral in otherwise healthy people.  Other causes of a magnesium deficiency include:  People on certain medications may also lose large amounts of magnesium. These medicines include:  Individuals receiving the hormone vasopressin or certain thyroid hormones may be similarly affected.  When a magnesium deficiency causes symptoms, a doctor will usually prescribe supplements.  The following foods are also rich in this electrolyte:  When deficiencies are severe, or the methods above are ruled out, a doctor may recommend oral magnesium salts. Magnesium can also be injected into a muscle or vein. Ongoing monitoring can determine whether the treatment is working.  A magnesium deficiency is linked to other mineral deficiencies, and a doctor may treat them at the same time. For example, it is common to receive calcium and magnesium together.  It is important also to treat any underlying condition, such as diabetes, that could be responsible for low magnesium. A magnesium deficiency can indicate that the current treatment is not working. An improved treatment plan may include lifestyle changes or new medication.  A person with very low levels of magnesium may also have a calcium deficiency, called hypocalcemia, and a potassium deficiency, called hypokalemia.  Magnesium helps to transport calcium and potassium ions in and out of cells. It may also contribute to the absorption of these important minerals.  Treating only a magnesium deficiency can make a calcium deficiency worse because magnesium binds to calcium. Doctors who suspect hypomagnesemia will often test for other deficiencies at the same time.  A doctor may suspect that magnesium levels are low based on symptoms, or because a person has a condition commonly linked to a magnesium deficiency.  A blood test can confirm the diagnosis, and it is important that a doctor also check levels of calcium and potassium.  However, because most magnesium is located in the bones or tissues, a person may still have a deficiency, even when levels in the blood are normal. A person with a calcium or potassium deficiency may still need treatment for hypomagnesemia.  Most people with low levels of magnesium are unable to absorb the right amounts. Others may see improvement by adding magnesium-rich foods to the diet.  Foods that contain large amounts of both magnesium and calcium, such as milk and cheese, may provide more benefits.  Many people with a magnesium deficiency will never know it. When symptoms develop, immediate treatment is required. The deficiency is easily reversed, and a person may be surprised by how quickly their symptoms improve.  It is important, however, not to self-diagnose a magnesium deficiency and begin supplementation without seeing a doctor. Too much of any nutrient, including magnesium, can be harmful and may cause an imbalance in other minerals.  Speak with a doctor about any symptoms of hypomagnesemia.    
 Assadi, F. (2010, January). Hypomagnesemia: An evidence-based approach to clinical cases [Abstract].  Iranian Journal of Kidney Diseases ,  4 (1), 13–9.  Assadi, F. (2010, January). Hypomagnesemia: An evidence-based approach to clinical cases [Abstract].  Iranian Journal of Kidney Diseases ,  4 (1), 13–9.  Gommers, L. M. M., Hoenderop, J. G. J., Bindels, R. J. M., &amp; de Baaij, J. H. F. (2016, January). Hypomagnesemia in type 2 diabetes: A vicious circle?  Diabetes ,  65 (1), 3–13.  Lewis, J. L., III. (n.d.). Hypomagnesemia (low level of magnesium in the blood).  Lewis, J. L., III. (2018, March). Hypomagnesemia.  Magnesium. (2018, March 2).  Rosanoff, A., Weaver, C. M., &amp; Rude, R. K. (2012, March). Suboptimal magnesium status in the United States: Are the health consequences underestimated? [Abstract].  Nutrition Reviews ,  70 (3), 153–164.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What to know about magnesium deficiency."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321735.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, May 5). "What to know about magnesium deficiency."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  