 Yellowing of the eyes and skin are almost always symptoms of a condition that requires medical treatment.  Anyone with yellow eyes should contact a doctor as soon as possible or seek emergency medical attention. This can prevent serious complications, including organ damage.  The best way to get rid of the yellowing is to treat the underlying cause and any other conditions present.  When  jaundice  is caused by an infection, such as  hepatitis C  or  malaria , a person may need to take  antibiotics , antifungals, or antivirals.  When jaundice is the result of alcohol or drug use, a person may need medical assistance to help with quitting or reducing consumption.  If dietary habits are behind jaundice, a person should eat more fruits, vegetables, whole grains, beans, legumes, and lean meats.  Jaundice can also result from organ damage, sometimes caused by:  Depending on the extent of damage and the organs affected, treatments may include surgery, radiation,  chemotherapy , or blood transfusions.  Jaundice is very common in newborns, and only around  1 in 20 infants  affected will require medical treatment.  Neonatal jaundice can usually be resolved by increasing breast-feeding sessions to 8–12 times daily. The aim is to speed up digestion and bilirubin removal.  When treatment is necessary, a doctor may recommend phototherapy with fiber optic blankets.  Yellow eyes are usually associated with conditions affecting the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, or intestines. It is important to see a doctor for diagnosis and treatment.  Some lifestyle adjustments can make it easier for these organs to function, which may reduce symptoms.  The following tips may help to reduce the yellowing of eyes:  Many recommend natural remedies for jaundice and yellow eyes. However, research that supports these methods is often weak or lacking.  The following natural supplements and preparations are commonly recommended to help with liver problems:  Neonatal jaundice is very common and can often not be prevented. However, a parent or caregiver may find the following tips helpful:  Jaundice refers to a yellowing of the whites of the eyes or the skin. It is often the result of a medical condition that causes a yellow-pigmented compound called bilirubin to build up in the blood.  When heme, a component of red blood cells, is broken down in the spleen, liver, or  bone marrow , the body releases bilirubin.  There are many causes of jaundice. The most common involve conditions that impact organs responsible for digesting and processing bilirubin, such as the:  An estimated  60 percent  of newborns experience neonatal jaundice, often because their organs are not developed enough to filter bilirubin from the blood.  Neonatal jaundice usually develops within the first few days of life and resolves within a few weeks, once the baby's liver has fully developed.  In adults, most cases of severe jaundice result from conditions that directly involve the liver or liver cells.  Causes of jaundice include:  Less common causes of jaundice include:  Yellow eyes and skin are sometimes unrelated to jaundice. A person may be consuming excessive amounts of foods or supplements rich in  beta-carotene .  Addison's disease  and  anorexia  can also cause yellowing of the eyes and skin, as can the use of some spray tanning products.  If a person has yellow eyes or suspects jaundice they should contact a doctor as soon as possible. Most conditions that cause jaundice require medical treatment.  If severe or left untreated, several underlying conditions that cause jaundice can result in complications such tissue damage and organ failure.  If the yellowing of the eyes is dark, seek emergency medical attention.  Causes of yellow eyes range from infection to genetic conditions.  While adopting healthy habits and taking supplements may reduce symptoms, jaundice usually only disappears once the underlying condition is treated.  Anyone with yellow eyes should talk to a doctor. People with dark yellow eyes should seek emergency medical attention.    
 Fargo, M. V., Grogan, S. P., &amp; Saguil, A. (2017, February 1). Evaluation of jaundice in adults.  American Family Physician ,  95 (3), 164–168.  Fargo, M. V., Grogan, S. P., &amp; Saguil, A. (2017, February 1). Evaluation of jaundice in adults.  American Family Physician ,  95 (3), 164–168.  Jaundice. (2018, January 30).  Newborn jaundice. (2015, October 13).  Porter, M. L., &amp; Dennis, B. L. (2002, February 15). Hyperbilirubinemia in the term newborn.  American Family Physician ,  65 (4), 599–607.  Xiong, F., &amp; Guan, Y.-S. (2017, May 21). Cautiously using natural medicine to treat liver problems.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  23 (19), 3388–3395.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "How to get rid of yellow eyes."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321746.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, May 9). "How to get rid of yellow eyes."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  