 A person might feel the itchiness on the surface of their fingers, under the skin, or only on some fingers. While most of the time itchy fingers are nothing to worry about, in some cases it may be a sign of an underlying condition that needs a doctor's attention.  In this article, we look at the causes, symptoms, and treatment of itchy fingers. We also give tips on how to get rid of the itching.  There are many different reasons why a person's fingers might itch. In the list below, we discuss the common causes and their associated symptoms.  Contact dermatitis, also known as contact  eczema , occurs when a person touches something that irritates their skin.  A person with contact dermatitis may also notice:  Because the hands and fingers come into contact with many different things over the course of the day, it may take some time to determine what is causing the allergic reaction.  People who have regular flare-ups should keep a diary of common allergens they come into contact with and their symptoms to look for a pattern.  Common triggers for contact dermatitis include:   Treatment   The best way to prevent contact dermatitis is to identify and avoid the allergen.  When a person comes into contact with an allergen, they can relieve their painful, itching symptoms by using the following:  A person can get antihistamine creams  online , and stronger versions can be obtained on prescription from a doctor. Corticosteroid creams can also be bought  online  or obtained on prescription.  A person with dyshidrotic eczema, also called foot-and-hand eczema or pompholyx, will notice tiny, itchy, fluid-filled blisters on their hands, fingers and often toes and feet. This condition is thought to be associated with  stress , skin irritants, and seasonal allergies.  A person with dyshidrotic eczema may notice:  People who are susceptible to allergies are more likely to be affected, and women are  twice as likely  to have dyshidrotic eczema than men.   Treatment   To treat dyshidrotic eczema, a person can try:   Psoriasis  is a skin condition that causes skin cells to quickly build up, resulting in patches of flaky, itchy, scaly skin. Psoriasis can affect different areas of a person's body, primarily the joints, but also areas such as fingers and nails.  Along with itching skin, a person with psoriasis may also notice:   Treatment   Psoriasis can be stubborn, and it is often a case of trial and error to find an effective treatment.  Possible treatments include:  Peripheral  neuropathy  is a condition related to  diabetes . It occurs when high blood sugar levels cause nerve damage. This can affect both the hands and feet.  A person with diabetic peripheral neuropathy may notice:  Diabetic peripheral neuropathy cannot be cured, though there are treatments to help relieve symptoms and to slow its progress.   Treatment   To treat peripheral neuropathy, a person can try:   Scabies  occurs when tiny mites burrow into a person's skin and lay their eggs, causing small, itchy bumps. The symptoms can appear up to  8 weeks  after a person comes into contact with the scabies mite.  The mites usually burrow in areas where the skin folds, including between the fingers and toes, inner elbows and knees, and genitals.  Scabies is common and extremely contagious. It is one of the  most common  skin conditions in the developing world.  A person with scabies may notice:  Scabies tends to spread through skin-to-skin contact, though sharing clothing, towels or bedding can also pass it on.   Treatment   To treat scabies a person must see their doctor to get scabicide treatments that kill the mites and their eggs. Scabies can be notoriously difficult to get rid of and may need several rounds of treatment.  A person may be able to manage the symptoms of itchy fingers at home, though if the underlying cause is not known, they should consult their doctor. Diagnosing the cause is key to finding the correct treatment.  Sometimes medication is not necessary and, by making a few adjustments, a person may see a significant improvement in their symptoms.  The following steps may help, in many cases, to treat or prevent itchy fingers from occurring:  Some people find that calamine lotion can be soothing for itchy skin lesions.  In more severe cases, topical medications, such as corticosteroid, antifungal, and antimicrobial creams, may be needed.  If home remedies and topical treatments are not working, a person may need to visit a doctor who can prescribe oral medication, such as  antibiotics , antifungals, corticosteroids, immune suppressants, or modulators to help get rid of the condition.  While itchy fingers can be frustrating, if there are no additional symptoms, it may be that keeping them well moisturized can help to reduce or eliminate the itchiness.  If the itchiness does not go away or keeps coming back, a person should visit their doctor to rule out any underlying problems.    
 Contact dermatitis. (n.d.).  Contact dermatitis. (n.d.).  Contact dermatitis. (2016, October 10).  Diabetic neuropathy. (n.d.).  Dyshidrotic eczema. (n.d.).  Hands, feet, and nails. (n.d.).  Hay, R. J., Steer, A. C., Engelman, D., &amp; Walton, S. (2012, April). Scabies in the developing world—its prevalence, complications, and management.  Clinical Microbiology and Infection ,  18 (4), 313–323.  Infections: Scabies. (2014, June).  Neuropathy (nerve damage). (n.d.).  Peripheral neuropathy. (2016, May 16).  Pompholyx (dyshidrotic eczema). (2015, July 6).  Psoriasis. (2015, May 27).  Scabies. (2017, November 10).  Steps to prevent or delay nerve damage. (2013, December 5).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What causes itchy fingers?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321733.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, May 4). "What causes itchy fingers?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  