 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) report that  strokes  are the  fifth-leading  cause of death in the United States. They are  more common  and more likely to be fatal in women, while men tend to have strokes at a younger age.  Being aware of all symptoms, including those specific to sex, can help a person to seek lifesaving medical attention for a loved one.  In this article, we look at the early warning signs of a stroke and symptoms men are more likely to experience. We also describe the recovery process.  Authors of a study published in  2009  investigated differences in how strokes affected men and women.  They found that the most common symptoms in men were:  Women were more likely to report "nontraditional" symptoms, such as lightheadedness,  headaches , and a change in mental status, such as confusion. Men can also exhibit these symptoms.  However, because men tend to exhibit better-known symptoms, bystanders and medical personnel may recognize strokes more quickly in men, reducing the time between the stroke and treatment.  An ischemic stroke is the most common type. It involves a piece of plaque or a blood clot blocking an artery in the brain.  Hemorrhagic strokes are less common, and they involve bleeding in the brain.  A person may experience a  transient ischemic attack  (TIA), or a " mini-stroke ." These may feature short-term, stroke-like symptoms, and they can serve as a warning sign for a stroke.  The acronym  FAST  can help a person to remember the most common symptoms of a stroke, which are:  Other symptoms of a stroke include:  A person having a stroke may show several symptoms or only one, such as one-sided weakness.  A stroke cuts off blood flow to the brain, depriving brain cells of oxygen and nutrients. If a person does not get medical attention quickly, they are at risk of permanent brain damage or death.  Results of a  2005 study  suggest that men who have had strokes may leave the hospital with fewer disabilities than women. In the aftermath of a stroke, men also tended to have higher rates of daily activity.  This may be because men tend to be younger than women when they have strokes. As a result, their bodies may be better able to recover.  Recovery after a stroke depends on many factors. These include:  Some people fully recover from a stroke and experience no lasting effects. Others require long-term  physical therapy  and medications. These may:  If a person suspects that anyone is having a stroke, they should contact emergency services immediately. People in the U.S. should dial 911.  Identifying and quickly treating a stroke reduces the risk of brain damage or death. Within 3 hours of the onset of a stroke, a doctor can administer a clot-busting medication.  However, a person who suspects that they are having a stroke should not drive.  A stroke is severe, regardless of a person's sex. Men with warning signs such as  high blood pressure  and a history of smoking have an increased risk.  However, the causes of a stroke can usually be prevented. A person can significantly reduce their risk by avoiding smoking and drinking alcohol, and maintaining an active lifestyle and healthful diet.  Understanding and remembering the FAST acronym can help with recognizing the symptoms of a stroke and ensuring that the person receives urgent treatment.  The sooner a person receives treatment, the more likely they are to recover.    
 Barker-Collo, S., Bennett, D. A., Krishnamurthi, R. V., Parmar, P., Feigin, V. L., Naghavi, M. … Roth, G. A. (2015, October). Sex differences in stroke incidence, prevalence, mortality, and disability-adjusted life years: Results from the global burden of disease study 2013.  Neuroepidemiology ,  45 (3), 203–214.  Barker-Collo, S., Bennett, D. A., Krishnamurthi, R. V., Parmar, P., Feigin, V. L., Naghavi, M. … Roth, G. A. (2015, October). Sex differences in stroke incidence, prevalence, mortality, and disability-adjusted life years: Results from the global burden of disease study 2013.  Neuroepidemiology ,  45 (3), 203–214.  Family history and other characteristics that increase risk for stroke. (2018, March 27).  Know the signs of stroke. (n.d.).  Lai, S.-M., Duncan, P. W., Dew, P., &amp; Keighley, J. (2005, July). Sex differences in stroke recovery.  Preventing Chronic Disease ,  2 (3), A13.  Lisabeth, L. D., Brown, D. L., Hughes, R., Majersik, J. J., &amp; Morgenstern, L. B. (2009, May 22). Acute stroke symptoms: Comparing women and men.  Stroke ,  40 (6), 2031–2036.  Men and stroke. (n.d.).  Stroke. (2018, May 3).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Warning signs of stroke in men."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321778.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, May 12). "Warning signs of stroke in men."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  