 They most frequently occur in newborns once the stump of umbilical cord has fallen off.  The umbilical cord connects the baby to the placenta during pregnancy. Containing arteries and veins, it carries nutrients, oxygen, and waste between the mother and baby.  After birth, the umbilical cord is cut, separating the baby from the placenta. A small stump of the cord is left on the navel, and it usually falls off within 1 to 2 weeks.  A doctor or midwife will provide guidance about caring for the healing navel before the baby is discharged from the hospital or birthing center.  An umbilical granuloma is a moist, red lump of tissue on the navel. Additional symptoms may include:  Umbilical granulomas are usually not a cause for concern, and they do not cause pain or discomfort.  However, they occasionally become infected. Symptoms of an infection may include:  A doctor will examine a newborn's navel during each checkup, especially after the stump of umbilical cord has fallen off.  A parent or caregiver should report any unusual symptoms at these visits. If they suspect an infection, they should contact a doctor right away.  The medical community is uncertain what causes umbilical granulomas. They are not related to the quality of care a baby receives or any other health conditions.  However, these granulomas may be more likely to develop if it takes longer than 2 weeks for the umbilical cord to fall off.  It is rare but possible for an adult to develop an umbilical granuloma. They most commonly form after navel piercings.  As a piercing heals, granulation tissue will form around the area. This tissue is new and rich in small blood vessels. When too much granulation tissue is produced, a granuloma can form.  Doctors recommend the same treatments when these granulomas form in adults and newborns. However, if the granuloma does not go away with treatment, a piercing should be removed to encourage complete healing.  A doctor may suggest watching and waiting to see if a granuloma goes away without treatment. They examine it at regular checkups and make sure that it is healing.  If the granuloma does not go away over time, the following options are available:  Removing an umbilical granuloma does not cause discomfort or pain.  At follow-up visits, a doctor will determine if the granuloma is healing appropriately or if additional treatment is required.  Follow a doctor's instructions when caring for an infant with a granuloma.  Some instructions may include:  Umbilical granulomas are common abnormalities in newborns. In most cases, treatment will provide a complete recovery without complications.  Speak to a doctor if a granuloma shows any signs of infection, or if it does not heal over time.    
 Cutting the umbilical cord. (2017, March 14).  Cutting the umbilical cord. (2017, March 14).  Umbilical granuloma: Care instructions. (2017, May 12).  Umbilical (bellybutton) granuloma. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "Umbilical granuloma: When to see a doctor."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 8 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321741.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, May 8). "Umbilical granuloma: When to see a doctor."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  