  Erectile dysfunction , or ED, is when a man has difficulty achieving or maintaining an erection. An estimated  30 million  men experience ED at some point. A wide range of factors can influence ED.  In this article, we look at the relationship between hydration and both ED and sex drive, how you can tell if you are dehydrated, and other causes of erectile dysfunction.  It is possible for a person's hydration levels to influence temporary ED. A lack of sufficient body water can affect a person physiologically and mentally.  Several elements are needed for a man to achieve and maintain an erection. A breakdown in one or more of these steps means he may not be able to achieve an erection that is firm enough for sex. The process includes:  When a man is dehydrated, he does not have as much blood volume in his body as when he is properly hydrated. Therefore, his blood vessels become constricted, as there is not enough blood to keep them tense. This impairs blood flow to all parts of the body, including the penis.  Little research has looked at whether  dehydration  directly causes erectile dysfunction, so further studies are needed.  When a person is dehydrated, their body releases greater amounts of the enzyme angiotensin I, which leads to the blood vessels constricting.  The presence of angiotensin II, which the body makes from angiotensin I, has been associated with sexual dysfunction in animal studies, although more research is needed into how this affects humans.  In addition to the physical effects of dehydration that impact penile erection, mood is also associated with dehydration.  A small scale  2011  study found that mild dehydration was associated with impaired memory, tension, and  anxiety  in men.  A person's mental state can have a profound effect on their sex drive and ED. According to the  American Academy of Family Physicians ,  stress , anxiety,  depression , and nervousness can all contribute to ED. Therefore, it is possible that the mood changes associated with dehydration could lead to ED.  A person's fluid needs may vary based on their body size, physical activity level, and exposure to warm temperatures.  When a person is mildly dehydrated, they may experience symptoms that include:  Drinking enough water can help a person feel better on several levels, including sexual performance. A person should drink enough water, so their urine is clear in color, and they do not feel thirsty.  If a person does not drink water or other fluids when they start having signs of dehydration, they may progress to severe dehydration. This can turn into a medical emergency.  Symptoms of severe dehydration include:  A man can experience ED for a number of reasons. Men of all ages can experience the condition. While people associate getting older with ED, this does not have to be the case.  Certain conditions that affect blood flow can cause ED, including:  Taking certain medications is also associated with ED. These include  antidepressants , blood pressure-lowering medicines, and medications for pain.  In addition,  mental health  disorders, anxiety, or a dysfunctional relationship with a partner can all contribute to ED in men.  ED is a common and often treatable condition affecting men. Although doctors have not conducted specific research studies related to how dehydration specifically affects ED, there are other studies and literature that can establish a link.  However, dehydration is usually a temporary condition and not typically the sole contributor to long-term ED. If a man is consistently having trouble getting or maintaining an erection, he should talk to his doctor for a diagnosis.    
 Alcohol and sex. (n.d.).  Alcohol and sex. (n.d.).  Dehydration. (2017, October 10).  Erectile dysfunction (ED). (2017, June 7).  Ganio, M. S., Armstrong, L. E., Casa, D. J., &amp; McDermott, B. P. (2011, November 28). Mild dehydration impairs cognitive performance and mood of men [Abstract].  British Journal of Nutrition ,  106 (10), 1535–1543.  https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/british-journal-of-nutrition/article/mild-dehydration-impairs-cognitive-performance-and-mood-of-men/3388AB36B8DF73E844C9AD19271A75BF#   Preventing erectile dysfunction. (2017, July).  Thornton, S. N. (2009, September). Hydration increases tissue perfusion and thus erectile function [Abstract].  The Journal of Sexual Medicine ,  6 (9), 2621–2622.  What is erectile dysfunction? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Does drinking water improve erectile dysfunction?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321795.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, May 14). "Does drinking water improve erectile dysfunction?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  