 Whenever the skin is broken, there is a risk of infection, scarring, allergies, or other skin problems.  In this article, we look at the causes and symptoms of piercing rejection, and how to stop it from happening.  Sometimes, the body's immune response sees the jewelry as a foreign object and rejects it.  Piercing rejection can cause discomfort and scarring.  The following can help reduce the risk of piercing rejection:  Anyone who has piercings should keep a careful eye on them while they heal. Catching a piercing rejection early can reduce scarring or damage to the skin.  A piercing rejection usually happens gradually. Symptoms tend to appear several days or weeks before the body finally pushes the jewelry out of the skin in a process called migration.  Signs that a piercing is migrating and possibly being rejected include:  Any piercing has the potential to be rejected. Rejection depends on the person's immune system and how well the piercing heals. But, the body tends to reject some types of piercings more often than others.  Surface piercings are the  most common  types of piercing to be rejected by the body. Surface piercings travel along an area of skin, rather than going directly through a body part. The jewelry punctures only a small amount of the skin's surface.  Examples of surface piercings include eyebrows, neck, hip, and wrist.  Surface piercings may be prone to rejection just because it is easier for the body to push the jewelry out of a small amount of skin.  Non-surface piercings include the earlobe, ear cartilage, lip, or tongue. These types of piercings go all the way through the body tissue — in one side and out the other.  Non-surface piercings may be rejected less often because there is more tissue to hold them in place, making it more difficult for the body to push them out.  Sometimes, a piercing rejection occurs without an apparent cause. However, the following steps may make a piercing rejection less likely to happen.  It is essential to select a piercer who is familiar with the body's  anatomy , the healing process, and where best to place a piercing. Before getting a piercing, talk to the piercer about:  Also, consider reading online reviews or talking to previous customers. Choosing an experienced, skilled, and hygienic piercer is crucial.  A qualified piercer should recommend a size and type of jewelry best suited to the indivdual's body and the location of the piercing.  Using a thicker piece of jewelry might reduce the risk of rejection.  Using materials such as niobium and titanium offer the lowest risk of irritation and allergies. This can also help speed up the healing process and prevent complications. Research the specific piercing beforehand and the best jewelry size and material for it.  Keeping a piercing clean is vital for healing and preventing infection. Do not use harsh cleansers such as peroxide, antibacterial soaps, or alcohol, as they can irritate the skin and delay healing.  Ideally, clean the area with a sterile saline solution or a product recommended by a professional piercer.  Take care not to bump piercings, especially while they heal. An injury to the area could cause irritation, rejection, or migration. Ask the piercer about what precautions to take to protect the piercing during contact sports.  If the piercing appears to be migrating toward the surface, take the following steps:  Most people who experience a piercing rejection will recover without any lasting health issues. However, there may be scarring, which can range from mild to severe.  Scarring can make it difficult or impossible to get a new piercing in the same location. It may also be a cosmetic concern. People who are prone to raised or keloid scars are generally advised to avoid piercings.   Antibiotics  may be needed if an infection occurs. Anyone who suspects a piercing infection should discuss it with a doctor.  Signs of infection include the following at the piercing location:  With proper antibiotic treatment, most piercing infections heal without long-term problems.  After a piercing rejection, people should think about what may have caused it. Did they follow proper aftercare instructions? Did the piercer use appropriate equipment, technique, and jewelry?  If the piercing was done correctly and the person looked after it properly, the rejection may just be bad luck. A person can sometimes have one rejection then have no problems with future piercings. People should consider the risk of another piercing rejection before getting pierced again.    
 Body piercings, teens &amp; potential health risks: AAP report explained. (2017, September 18).  Body piercings, teens &amp; potential health risks: AAP report explained. (2017, September 18).  Meltzer, D. I. (2005, November 15). Complications of body piercing.  American Family Physician ,  72 (10), 2029–2034.  Picking your piercer. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "What causes a piercing rejection to occur?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321770.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, May 11). "What causes a piercing rejection to occur?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  