 Most donated livers come from people who have died. They come from registered organ donors or people whose next of kin consent to them becoming a donor. Less commonly, liver transplants involve a living donor, often a friend, family member, or stranger whose tissue matches, and who donates a segment of their liver.  Typically, surgeons will only perform a liver transplant when all other treatment options have been ruled out. Nevertheless, liver transplants are the second most common type of transplant surgery after kidney transplants, with more than  157,000  carried out in the United States since 1988.  In 2015 alone,  7,100  liver transplants took place, with 600 of those surgeries performed on people 17 years of age or younger.  Though liver transplants carry a risk of significant complications, the procedure has a high success rate. The operation typically helps save or greatly extend the lives of people with severe liver conditions.  Due to a variety of complicated factors, it is almost impossible to predict an individual's chances of having a successful liver transplant or how long they will survive afterward.  However, the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) list the following  average survival rates  for people who have had liver transplant surgery from a deceased donor:  Reported survival rate estimates vary depending on the type of information used, as well as when and how they were calculated.  Although liver transplants have high success and survival rates, an individual's chances of surviving and thriving after the surgery depend on a mix of critical factors.  Factors include:  Age and BMI are two significant factors that influence survival rates after liver transplants.  A  2017 study  found that long-term survival rates were lower in older people and those whose BMIs were above normal and who were designated as overweight.  According to a  2013 study,  the cause of the liver failure may also influence the outcome of a liver transplant.  The study concluded that children and adults whose liver failure was caused by genetic conditions had higher survival rates than those whose conditions were due to lifestyle choices or infection.  The process of finding a donor liver can be extremely challenging, stressful, and lengthy.  Once someone is approved for a liver transplant, their doctor will contact the non-profit organization  United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS),  and ask for the recipient's name to be added to the national organ donor waiting list.  Some people have to wait up to  5 years  or longer for a match with a donor liver.  When looking for a matching donor liver, doctors consider several factors, including:  The severity of someone's liver failure is measured according to a model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score, or pediatric end-stage liver disease (PELD) score for those under 12 years of age. The scores range from 6 to 40.  On average, roughly  15,000  Americans are estimated to be on the waiting list for a liver donor each year.  While the number of people needing a liver transplant  is increasing,  the number of new donor livers available is decreasing.  The number of people who have died while waiting for a donor liver or have been taken off the waiting list because they have become too sick to undergo the treatment has also increased by  30 percent  in the last decade.  Liver transplants typically involve the surgical removal of any diseased, dead, or injured liver tissue, including removal of the entire organ. Surgeons will then reconnect a whole donor liver or a segment of a deceased donor's liver.  Segmental liver transplants allow the use of live donors and for two people to receive transplants from one donor liver. However, this procedure is higher risk due to more frequent complications.  In 2013,  96 percent  of liver transplants used deceased donor livers, while just 4 percent used segments from a living donor.  As more people become aware of segmental liver transplant surgery, it may occur more frequently and become safer.  A liver transplant is a major surgery that comes with several risks and potential complications, ranging in severity and including:  Immediately after surgery, most people will stay in the intensive care unit (ICU) for a day or two. They will remain on a ventilator to help them breathe and be closely monitored to ensure the new liver is working properly.  They will also be given immunosuppressant (anti-rejection) medications to help prevent their body from destroying the donor liver. People who have an organ transplant must take immunosuppressant drugs for the rest of their lives.  When the person is ready, doctors will move them from the ICU to a regular room in the hospital. After the surgery, a person who has had a liver transplant will need to spend  around 2 weeks  in the hospital before going home.  Many people require 2 or 3 months before they feel well enough to return to everyday activities. Also, it can take years for the full effect of the surgery to be realized.  Most people who have donor livers will also need to make certain lifestyle changes to keep their new liver healthy.  These changes include:  Infection and organ rejection can lead to sepsis, multiple organ failure, and death. Therefore, it is essential that people with donor livers know how to recognize the signs of these potential complications. They should always seek medical attention as soon as possible to prevent further complications.  Signs of infection include:  Organ rejection does not always cause noticeable symptoms, but symptoms can include:  Liver transplants are reasonably safe procedures with good survival rates. However, many factors can influence an individual's chances of a successful surgery, and determine how long they live after the surgery. These factors include their overall health, lifestyle habits, and additional conditions.  Recovery time for people who receive a liver transplant will vary but mean between 3 and 6 months before they can return to everyday activities.  As long as they take immunosuppressant drugs, as prescribed for them and make the recommended lifestyle changes, most people can enjoy a good quality of life for decades after liver transplant surgery.    
 American College of Surgeons. (2013, April 5). Liver transplantation has high survival rate [Press Release].  American College of Surgeons. (2013, April 5). Liver transplantation has high survival rate [Press Release].  Chen, H.-P., Tsai, Y.-F., Lin, J.-R., Liu, F.-C, Yu, H.-P. (2016, March 28). Recipient age and mortality risk after liver transplantation: A population-based cohort study.  PLoS ONE ,  11 (3), e0152324.  Data. (n.d.).  Definition &amp; facts of liver transplant. (2017, March).  Fayek, S. A., Quintini, C., Chavin, K. D., &amp; Marsh, C. L. (2016, August 22). The current state of liver transplantation in the United States.  American Journal of Transplantation ,  16 (11), 3093–3104.  Kim, P. T. W., &amp; Testa, G. (2016, April). Living donor liver transplantation in the USA.  Hepatobiliary Surgery and Nutrition ,  5 (2), 133–140.  Pischke, S., Lege, M. C., von Wulffen, M., Galante, A., Otto, B., Wehmeyer, M. H., … Sterneck, M. (2017, March 18). Factors associated with long-term survival after liver transplantation: A retrospective cohort study.  World Journal of Hepatology , 9 (8), 427–435.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "How long will I survive after a liver transplant?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321754.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, May 10). "How long will I survive after a liver transplant?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  