 The treatment for glazed or glassy eyes depends on the underlying cause. After identifying and treating the cause, a person can take steps to prevent this symptom from recurring.  Tears lubricate the eyes, which become dry when there is limited or no tear production.   Dry eyes  can take on a glassy appearance. This is often the result of too much time spent looking at a computer screen, but it can also result from eye surgery.  Eye drops can replace a lack of tears and are available to purchase over-the-counter or  online .  Allergic reactions can affect the sinuses and eyes. Often the eyes become irritated and itchy, causing them to appear red and glassy.  Common allergens that affect eyes include:  Eye drops and medications containing loratadine or diphenhydramine can reduce symptoms associated with allergies. They are available to buy over-the-counter or  online .  When a person has consumed alcohol or used any street drug, their eyes may become glazed. The condition is most common in people who use marijuana or drink alcohol excessively.  These substances affect the  central nervous system , which controls subconscious responses such as blinking. The eyes become dry when blinking ceases or slows down, resulting in a glassy appearance.  An intoxicated person often has:  A doctor can test the blood, breath, and urine for signs of intoxication. Detox often takes several hours, after which the eyes usually lose their glassiness.  Some medications can cause the appearance of glassy eyes. Like drugs or alcohol, these suppress the central nervous system. This reduces blinking and can dry out the eyes.  Dry, glassy eyes can be a symptom of  dehydration , especially in children.  Other symptoms may include:  While drinking water often reverses the effects of mild dehydration, severe cases may require a hospital visit and intravenous fluids.  Signs of severe dehydration include:  When any of these symptoms are present, seek medical care.   Conjunctivitis  is commonly referred to as pink eye. Bacteria, viruses, or fungi may be responsible, and the infection is highly contagious. The infected eye will turn red and glassy. A crust may form around the edges.  See a doctor to determine the cause and best course of action. Treatment will usually involve medicated eye drops.   Herpes  is a  sexually transmitted disease  that typically affects the mouth and genitals. The strain that causes oral symptoms can cause issues with the eyes.  Eye-related symptoms include:  This autoimmune disease causes the eyelid to retract more than usual.  Graves' disease  can cause the eyes to dry out and appear glassy and uncommonly large.  Other symptoms may include:   Hypoglycemia  occurs when a person's blood sugar is low, and it is common in cases of  diabetes .  In addition to glassy eyes, symptoms of hypoglycemia include:  Hypoglycemia can have dangerous complications if left untreated. Consuming  carbohydrates  or sugary drinks can treat mild symptoms, but a person with severe hypoglycemia should receive medical attention.   Cholera  is a bacterial infection that is rare in the United States. It is typically spread through contact with contaminated water.  Cholera outbreaks often occur in parts of:  Some symptoms of cholera include:  Cholera can be fatal if left untreated. Treatment often involves rehydration and  antibiotics .  A person should:  The easiest way to prevent dehydration is to drink more water throughout the day. When a person is properly hydrated, their eyes are unlikely to appear glassy.  Spending too long staring at a screen can strain the eyes and cause them to dry out.  The  American Optometric Association  recommend:  A person should visit the eye doctor once a year. Attending regular checkups can help an ophthalmologist or optometrist to identify conditions early.  The doctor can also recommend healthy habits that will prevent symptoms such as glassy eyes.  The  National Eye Institute  warn against sharing products that come into contact with the eyes, to prevent the spread of infections such as pink eye.  A person should avoid touching the eyes directly, and ensure that their hands are clean before touching the surrounding area.  Wash the hands thoroughly before changing contact lenses.  Several systems of support are available for people who want to reduce the amount of alcohol they consume.  When a person receives treatment for the underlying cause of glassy eyes, the symptom will resolve.  It is important to report any accompanying symptoms, which can signal a more serious condition. In many cases, the conditions responsible for glassy eyes are easy to treat.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Computer vision syndrome. (n.d.).  Computer vision syndrome. (n.d.).  Eye allergy. (n.d.).  Facts about pink eye. (2015, November).  Low blood glucose (hypoglycemia). (2016, August).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "What does it mean when your eyes are glassy?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321766.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, May 11). "What does it mean when your eyes are glassy?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  