 In this article, we look at the causes, diagnosis, and treatment of burning eyes.  Stinging or irritation of the eyes is often referred to as burning eyes. Common causes of burning eyes include:   Blepharitis    Blepharitis  is characterized by flaky, dandruff-like skin at the base of the eyelids. It is caused by a bacterial infection. Additional symptoms include eye redness and swelling.   Dry eyes    Dry eyes  can result when the tear ducts do not produce enough tears or the right kind of tears. Dry eyes tend to occur  more often  in women and older people. Additional symptoms can include:   Eye allergies   Also known as  allergic conjunctivitis , eye allergies occur when irritating substances get into the eye. The body responds to these substances by producing histamines, which can cause burning eyes.  Common triggers of eye allergies include dust, pollen, smoke, perfumes, pet dander, and foods.  Other symptoms of eye allergies include:   Eye sunburn   Overexposure to the ultraviolet (UV) light from the sun's rays can cause eye  sunburn , which is also known as photokeratitis.  In addition to burning eyes, symptoms include:   Ocular rosacea   Ocular  rosacea  is a condition that causes  inflammation  of the eyelids. It affects people who have  acne   rosacea , a skin condition characterized by redness and flushing on the face.  Additional symptoms of ocular rosacea include:   Pterygium   Pterygium is a growth of fleshy tissue on the white part of the eye. It usually occurs nearest to the nose, although it can also appear on the outer portion of the eye.  It is thought  to be caused by a combination of dry eyes and UV light.  Symptoms include:  In some cases, the growth can extend to cover the cornea, which can affect vision.  Identifying the underlying cause of burning eyes is important. People experiencing burning eyes should see a doctor as soon as possible.  A doctor will begin to diagnose burning eyes by taking a medical history and asking the person about their symptoms. They will ask questions about when the symptoms started, what makes them worse or better, and if the person has a history of any other conditions affecting the eyes.  A doctor will also review the medications the person is taking. Some medicines, such as decongestants, can contribute to burning eyes.  In addition to taking a medical history, a doctor will also carry out a physical exam of the eyes. They will examine the eyes for signs of irregularities, dryness, and damage. They may use scopes or other specialized equipment to view the eyes more clearly and closely.  Eye doctors may also apply drops to the eyes that allow them to observe the flow of tears and moisture levels in the eyes.  The treatments for burning eyes will often depend upon the underlying cause. For example, if burning eyes are due to a bacterial infection, a doctor may recommend  antibiotic  eye drops to treat the infection.  Treatments often aim at reducing eye dryness.  Other interventions a doctor may recommend for burning eyes include:  In rare instances of very dry eyes, a doctor may recommend surgery. Examples of surgery include inserting plugs into the tear ducts to prevent tears draining away from the eyes.  While burning eyes can be painful, they are often highly treatable through correcting any underlying causes and reducing eye dryness.  If a person has symptoms such as vision loss, they should see their doctor immediately.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Boyd, K. (2017, September 1). What is blepharitis?  Boyd, K. (2017, September 1). What is blepharitis?  Boyd, K. (2017, September 1). What is dry eye?  Boyd, K. (2017, September 1). What is a pinguecula and a pterygium (surfer's eye)?  Burning eyes. (2015, December 7).  Dry eye. (n.d.).  Facts about dry eye. (2017, July).  Rosacea treatment: Eye problems. (n.d.).  Turbert, D. (2017, September 1). What are eye allergies?  Wladis, E. J., &amp; Adam, A. P. (2013). Current and emerging therapies for ocular rosacea.  U.S. Ophthalmic Review,   6 (2), 86–88.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What causes burning eyes?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 8 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321739.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, May 8). "What causes burning eyes?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  