 In total, blood is made up of four main components: plasma, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Platelets make up 1–2 percent of blood and help it to clot.  Thin blood is known as thrombocytopenia and is caused by low numbers of platelets.  The normal level of platelets in the blood is between  150,000–400,000 per milliliter (mL) . If levels of platelets fall below 150,000/mL, it may indicate thin blood.  This article will look at the causes of thin blood, the symptoms, and what a person can do about it.  Platelets are made in the spleen. Once formed, platelets have a short lifespan of between 7 and 10 days.  Thin blood is due to a low number of platelets. A range of factors may cause a low platelet count, including the following:   Decreased platelet production   Viral infections, such as  HIV ,  hepatitis C , mumps, rubella, or the Epstein-Barr virus may cause platelet numbers to fall.   Bone marrow  disorders, such as  leukemia  and  lymphoma , can also affect how many platelets are produced.   Medication   Some people take blood-thinning medications to reduce their risk of  heart attack  and  stroke . Two main types of medication thin the blood:   Disorders of the spleen   The spleen produces platelets, so problems with the spleen can cause thin blood. Conditions that affect the spleen include:   Increased breakdown of platelets   Certain autoimmune conditions, such as  rheumatoid arthritis  and systemic  lupus  erythematosus (SLE), can increase the number of platelets that are destroyed. If new platelets are not made fast enough, a person may have thin blood.   Chronic liver disease (CLD)   CLD lowers thrombopoietin levels, which is the hormone responsible for stimulating platelet production. Low thrombopoietin levels reduce the rate at which platelets are produced.   Other facts   There are also some physiological variables that affect platelet count:  Thin blood does not often have symptoms. It is usually diagnosed during a blood test for another condition.  Low platelet counts can make it harder than usual for blood to clot, so anyone who experiences excessive or long-lasting bleeding, even from a minor cut, may have thin blood.  Other signs include bleeding gums, nosebleeds, blood in the stools, and heavy menstrual flow without clots.  Occasionally, a person with thin blood may also be  prone  to sudden bruising known as purpura, or pinprick hemorrhages on the skin that are called petechiae.  A doctor can diagnose thin blood by looking at platelet numbers in a complete blood count or CBC.  When talking with a doctor, it is essential for a person to tell them about any medications or supplements that might be causing thin blood. These include over-the-counter painkillers, such as aspirin.  Thin blood presents problems with clotting, wound-healing, and bruising.  On the other hand, thick blood can increase the risk of blood clots and thrombosis, which can be life-threatening.  Risk factors for thick blood include:  Polycythemia is a condition that causes blood to thicken due to high numbers of red blood cells.  Doctors can prescribe anticoagulant medications, such as heparin and warfarin, when blood is thick, and a person has an increased risk of blood clots, stroke, or heart attack.  Treatment for thin blood will depend on the underlying cause. However, sometimes treating the underlying cause may not change the platelet count and the blood will remain thin.  On occasions, doctors will prescribe corticosteroids to treat thin blood in conditions such as idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). In severe cases, they may recommend a platelet transfusion.  It is crucial to see a doctor for a diagnosis if a person has symptoms that might indicate thin blood. A doctor can help determine the underlying cause and develop a personalized treatment plan.  They can also advise a person on how to take precautions and manage problems caused by thin blood, including excessive bleeding.    
 Anticoagulant medicines. (2015, June 16).  Anticoagulant medicines. (2015, June 16).  Aspirin. (2016, May 6).  Assinger, A. (2014, December 18). Platelets and infection – an emerging role of platelets in viral infection.  Frontiers in Immunology ,  5 , 649.  Balduini, C. L., &amp; Noris, P. (2014, June). Platelet count and aging.  Haematologica ,   99 (6), 953–955.  Chapman, J., &amp; Azevedo, A. M. (2017, October 5). Splenomegaly.  Daly, M. E. (2011, January). Determinants of platelet counts in humans.  Haematologica ,  96 (1), 10–13.  Garcia, D. (2016, May–June). Corticosteroids for ITP: A comparison of two approaches.  Diffusion ,  13 (3).  Izak, M., &amp; Bussel, J. B. (2014, June 2). Management of thrombocytopenia.  F1000 Prime Reports ,  6 , 45.  Kostapanos, M. S., Florentin, M., Elisaf, M. S., &amp; Mikhailidis, D. P. (2013, November). Hemostatic factors and the metabolic syndrome [Abstract].  Current Vascular Pharmacology ,  11 (6), 880–905.  Lv, Y., Lau, W. Y., Li, Y., Deng, J., Han, X., Gong, X., … Wu, H. (2016, October). Hypersplenism: History and current status.  Experimental and Therapeutic Medicine ,  12 (4), 2377–2382.  Mitchell, O., Feldman, D. M., Diakow, M., &amp; Sigal, S. H. (2016, April 15). The pathophysiology of thrombocytopenia in chronic liver disease.  Hepatic Medicine: Evidence and Research ,  8 , 39–50.  Polycythaemia. (2016, May 26).  Shameer, K., Denny, J. C., Ding, K., Jouni, H., Crosslin, D. R., de Andrade, M., … Kullo, I. J. (2014, January). A genome- and phenome-wide association study to identify genetic variants influencing platelet count and volume and their pleiotropic effects.  Human Genetics ,  133 (1), 1–24.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  RNutr, Jo Lewin. "Everything you need to know about thin blood."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321785.php&gt;    APA  RNutr, J. (2018, May 12). "Everything you need to know about thin blood."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  