 The  Demodex folliculorum  mite is a type of parasite that lives on humans. Most of the time, these mites are harmless and will go unnoticed. However, larger numbers of  D. folliculorum  mites can cause unwanted symptoms and skin problems.   D. folliculorum  mites live in or around hair follicles, feeding on the dead skin cells, oils, and hormones that build up there. These mites usually live on the face, including the eyelids and eyelashes.   D. folliculorum  mites are   more common   in males than in females, with people aged 20–30 years old the most likely to be affected.  In this article, we look at what causes  D. folliculorum  mites to become a problem and the conditions associated with their presence. We also cover diagnosis and treatment, including home remedies.   D. folliculorum  mites are usually harmless but can cause problems for people with weakened immune systems.  Therefore, people at risk of experiencing symptoms include those who:  Some other people may be genetically susceptible to  D. folliculorum  and thus more sensitive to the presence of the mites.  Also,  D. folliculorum  mites are sometimes present in greater numbers in people with certain skin conditions. Examples of these include:   Rosacea  is an inflammatory skin condition that causes facial flushing, redness, and dry lesions on the face.   Some studies  have found that a person with rosacea can sometimes have four times more  Demodex  mites on their face than someone without the condition. Among people with rosacea, those with subtype 1 are more likely to have a high number of these mites on their skin.   D. folliculorum mites  have also been found in the tear ducts of people with ocular rosacea, which is a type of rosacea that affects the eyes.   Blepharitis  is an  inflammation  of the eyelids that can cause crusting, watering, and redness. Increased numbers of  Demodex  mites have been noted in people with blepharitis.  Androgenetic alopecia is an inherited hair-loss condition that affects both men and women. It has   been suggested   that a chemical produced by the mites may trigger an inflammatory reaction that affects hair follicles. Although  Demodex  mites do not cause androgenetic alopecia, they may worsen the condition.  Increased numbers of  Demodex  mites are also associated with symptoms of non-specific dermatitis on the face. These symptoms include itching, acne-like blemishes, and spots around the lips.  Large numbers of  D. folliculorum  mites can cause rosacea-like symptoms on the skin of the face. These symptoms include:  The symptoms caused by  D. folliculorum  mites are sometimes mistaken for  acne  or severe skin dryness.  A doctor will start the diagnosis of  D. folliculorum  by taking a medical history and examining the skin.  The mites are too small to be seen with the naked eye, so the doctor will usually do a skin biopsy. This involves taking a sample of the skin and examining it under a microscope.  It is important to determine the quantity of mites living on the skin. A small number of mites is unlikely to be the cause of an individual's skin problems.   D. folliculorum  mites are more likely to occur on the face. This can make treatment more challenging because the skin there is very sensitive.  A doctor may recommend treatment with creams such as crotamiton or permethrin. These are topical insecticides that can kill mites and so reduce their numbers. The doctor may also prescribe topical or oral metronidazole, which is an  antibiotic  medication.  A person can clean around their eyes using  Demodex  facial wipes or towelettes. Suitable products include Cliradex and Demodex Control. These products and others are  available online .  Doctors may also apply a high-concentration alcohol solution to a person's face. This brings the  Demodex  mites to the surface. The doctor can then apply substances to the skin that kill the mites and treat the condition.  For people who have a severely weakened immune system, a doctor may prescribe ivermectin.  There are also some preventive measures that a person can take at home. These include:  Keeping the skin clean and dry as well as addressing any underlying conditions may help to reduce the number of  D. folliculorum  mites.  For most people, the presence of  D. folliculorum  mites on the face is harmless.  However, in larger numbers, these mites can cause rosacea-like symptoms. Individuals with certain skin conditions or weakened immune systems are at greater risk of developing these symptoms.  A doctor can do a skin biopsy to determine if a person is living with an abnormally high level of mites. Treatment involves cleaning the face regularly and using various medications to kill the mites.   Rosacea is a chronic, inflammatory skin condition that most often affects the face. An estimated 1 in 20 people in the U.S. have rosacea, but it is…    Dust mites are microscopic parasites that feed on dead skin cells. They are also a common cause of allergic reactions through their waste and remains…    Blepharitis causes inflammation around the base of the eyelashes and makes a person's eyes sticky. Doctors are not sure why it happens, and they do…    A chigger is a form of mite that feeds on human skin cells. Although they are so small that the naked eye cannot see them, chiggers can inflict…    Scabies is a skin condition caused by microscopic mites called Sarcoptes scabei. Scabies causes itching and rashes and can be spread through close…  