 The best way to avoid chafing is to take preventive measures. Luckily, there are many ways to both treat and prevent chafing.  Repeated rubbing, especially combined with moisture, makes skin more susceptible to damage.  Common situations that cause chafing include:  The best way to avoid chafing is by taking preventive measures. While it is not always possible to avoid chafing, following these tips can reduce the severity and frequency:  Chafing can cause irritation, itching, and pain. There is a range of things a person can do to treat chafing and get relief, including:  In severe cases, a person should speak to a doctor, who might prescribe a topical  antibiotic  or corticosteroid.  Chafing is skin irritation that can occur when clothing rubs against the skin or skin rubs against another part of the body. Exposure to moisture and irritating fabric also contribute to chafing.  Prolonged irritation causes the skin to become raw and reddened and can lead to stinging and burning. In severe cases, chafing can also cause swelling, crusting, or bleeding.  Chafing can occur on any skin surface of the body but most commonly occurs in the inner thighs, groin, armpits, buttocks, feet, and nipples.  People can prevent chafing by wearing well-fitting clothing, keeping the skin dry, and moisturizing often.  When chafing occurs, people can use a lubricant such as petroleum jelly to protect and soothe affected skin, as well as allow a couple of days for the skin heal.  If the area shows any signs of infection, a person should speak to a doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Dean, J. (2011, January). Skin health: Prevention and treatment of skin breakdown.  Dean, J. (2011, January). Skin health: Prevention and treatment of skin breakdown.  Sore or cracked nipples when breast-feeding. (2016, January 29).  Sports injuries: Examples. (2017, March 21).  Varaei, S., Mohaddes Ardabili, F., Sabaghzadeh Irani, P., &amp; Ranjbar, H. (2017, May). The effect of  Aloe vera  gel and nitrofurazone on dressing related pain of superficial burn wounds.  World Journal of Plastic Surgery ,  6 (2), 254–256.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Brosek, Shannon. "How to deal with chafing."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321848.php&gt;    APA  Brosek, S. (2018, May 18). "How to deal with chafing."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  