 When responding to the rating scale questions, most people will only be able to base their observations on how the individual behaves in one setting (for instance at home or school). These people are probably not aware of specific behaviors that the person displays in other settings. To get a complete picture of an individual, it is essential that a variety of people, including relatives and teachers, complete the rating scale forms.  Doctors use the information collected from the rating scale forms to help them make a diagnosis and recommendations for treatment. Doctors may also recommend using multiple rating scales.  A range of different  ADHD  scales is available.  They will often include a selection of questions about how often the person in question displays ADHD-related behaviors and symptoms of hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattentiveness.  The ADHD rating scale will contain questions about typical behaviors including:  Some tests will also ask about classroom performance or performance at work. Typical questions will include rating how often someone:  Most questions use a scale from either 0 to 3 or 0 to 4, with 0 meaning the behavior never happens and 3 or 4 meaning it occurs frequently.  There are different ADHD rating scale tests designed specifically for children, teenagers, and adults.  Common rating scales for children include:  There may also be some behavioral variations between children of different sexes, so some forms will have separate questions based on sex.  ADHD behaviors present differently in adults. Tests specifically designed to measure signs of ADHD in adults include:  The scoring for ADHD rating scales varies according to the choice of test and the age of the person under consideration. Two of the most commonly used tests are the NICHQ Vanderbilt Assessment Scale and the CBRS.  The Vanderbilt scale is popular with healthcare professionals who are diagnosing children between 6 and 12. It consists of two different forms for parents or teachers, which vary slightly.  If a child displays at least six behaviors suggesting inattention or hyperactivity with a score of 2 or 3, the healthcare professional will consider diagnosing ADHD.  The Vanderbilt scale also asks questions relating to performance.  The Conners CBRS is designed to determine whether or not young students qualify for inclusion in special education. It may also be used to find a treatment plan for symptoms or to find out if a particular treatment for symptoms has been effective.  There are separate forms available for the child, their parent, and a teacher. The shorter version of the test, used for following up on progress or symptoms, includes 25 questions and may only take about 5 minutes to complete.  Scores above 60 indicate signs of ADHD, but a doctor will want to break down these scores more thoroughly before making a diagnosis.  The 5th Edition of the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders  ( DSM-5 ) includes criteria for ADHD including a checklist of symptoms.  The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  has compiled the lists to help people understand what extent of behavioral change may lead to an ADHD diagnosis.  An ADHD diagnosis is a possibility for people showing six or more signs of hyperactivity, impulsivity, or inattention.  In addition to a person having multiple symptoms for more than 6 months, the following conditions must also apply:  If a person notices six or more signs of ADHD that meet these requirements in themselves or their child, they should see a doctor for a more thorough diagnosis.  Anyone can take a test and analyze themselves or their child online, but a thorough diagnosis from a qualified doctor is the only acceptable way to diagnose ADHD.  A doctor may request that parents ask their child's teachers to fill out rating scales forms. This will give the doctor several different perspectives on the child's behavior.  If the scores indicate ADHD, doctors are likely to begin a conversation about various ADHD treatment options.  Following an ADHD diagnosis, a person may receive treatments such as:  Children with ADHD may find that their symptoms stay with them throughout life, but it is also possible that they will fade away with age.  Most of the time ADHD is highly manageable, especially when following a multifaceted treatment plan under the guidance of a  mental health  professional.    
 Conners, C. K. (n.d.). Conners CBRS.  Conners, C. K. (n.d.). Conners CBRS.  Reynolds, C.R. (2017, October 3). Diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment of ADHD under the BASC-3 model of assessment and intervention.  Symptoms and diagnosis. (2017, August 31).  Vahia, V. N. (2013, July–September). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 5: A quick glance.  Indian Journal of Psychiatry ,  55 (3), 220–223.  Vanderbilt ADHD diagnostic teacher rating scale. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "How is ADHD rated?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321867.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, May 21). "How is ADHD rated?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  