 In this article, we cover simple methods to remove a splinter and explain when a person should seek medical attention.  It is possible to remove a splinter at home using one of several methods. The best method depends on:  Below are the most common methods for getting rid of a splinter:  Most people with a small, easy-to-access splinter will use tweezers to remove it. Tweezers make it possible to pinch the splinter and pull it out.  This method involves:  Duct tape is a very strong tape that can help remove a deeper splinter. This method is often painless.  A person can use duct tape to remove a splinter by:  If this method does not work the first time, it is worth trying again.  When the splinter has fully punctured the skin, and no part of the material is visible, a person may be able to expose part of it using a needle. Once part of the splinter is exposed, they can then use the tweezers to remove it.  A person can remove a splinter using a needle and tweezers by:  While this method still needs medical testing, some people try soaking the area in a solution in an attempt to draw out a buried splinter.  Some commonly used solutions include:  Using one of these solutions, try removing the splinter by:  However, if a splinter is completely beneath the skin, it is usually best to visit a doctor to have it removed.      It is important for a person to assess their wound before choosing a removal method. Things to look for include:  Before getting started, a person should thoroughly wash their hands with soapy water and sanitize any equipment that they plan to use, such as tweezers. Always clean the wound after removal to help avoid infection.  If available, use a magnifying glass to help see the splinter. It is also possible to use a lamp or bright natural light from a window.  Finally, it is essential never to squeeze or pinch the skin around the splinter. Applying pressure can cause the splinter to break into more pieces or push it further below the surface.  A person should seek medical attention when:  A splinter is a common but painful injury that it is usually easy to treat at home. Before removing a splinter, a person should be sure to follow proper precautions, such as washing their hands and sanitizing any equipment.  A person should ask a medical professional to remove the splinter if it is very large, is positioned near the eye, or appears infected.    
 Chan, C., &amp; Salam, G. A. (2003, June 15). Splinter removal.  American Family Physician ,  67 (12), 2557–2562.  Chan, C., &amp; Salam, G. A. (2003, June 15). Splinter removal.  American Family Physician ,  67 (12), 2557–2562.  How to remove a splinter. (n.d.).  Splinters and other foreign bodies in the skin. (2015, November 21).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "How to get a splinter out."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321876.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, May 22). "How to get a splinter out."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  