 The following are signs that medication for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) is effective. A person may notice themselves:  When a few symptoms improve, this is a good indication that medication is working.  To tell whether a medication is effective, it is important to understand what it is designed to do. Medications may be used to:  It is unlikely that all symptoms will disappear completely, but most ADHD medications can help to make physical and mental symptoms more manageable.  Medication may be working if a person is:  When medication is working, some symptoms may remain, while others become easier to handle.  Most ADHD medications have side effects, and these can show that the drug is having an effect on the body.  Side effects of ADHD medicines can impact each individual differently. If they become difficult or impossible to manage, a doctor should adjust the medication.  Stimulant drugs like Ritalin and Adderall may help a person to be more attentive, stay focused on a task, and listen to instructions.  These results may not be apparent at first, and some people notice side effects before an improvement in symptoms.  Side effects for stimulant-type drugs often include:  These should be manageable for most people, and they may fade after a few weeks of taking the medication.  Non-stimulant drugs for ADHD can also cause side effects. These vary, based on a person's age and the type of drug.  Side effects may include:  Sexual side effects can also occur. A person may experience a loss of interest in sex or trouble having an orgasm.  While side effects show that the drug is having an effect on the body, they do not always indicate that the medicine is working.  Anyone who experiences side effects without noticing a change in their symptoms may need to see a doctor, who can alter their dosage or switch their medication.  The following are some common signs that ADHD medication should be adjusted:  Signs that medication should be changed vary. The dosage may be too high or low, or an individual may need a different type of medicine.  Medications should be seen as one part of a broader ADHD treatment plan.  When prescribing medication for ADHD, many doctors also recommend behavioral therapy.  A  mental health  professional can identify patterns in behavior and help a person to work toward personal goals.  Making lifestyle changes can also help a person to feel satisfied with their treatment.  A full night's sleep can refresh the brain and body, helping an individual to feel rested and alert throughout the day.  This can stimulate brain function and release pent-up energy. Chemical medications are designed to increase receptors in the brain, and exercise may have a similar effect.  Mindfulness meditation can help to calm the mind. It may be a beneficial addition in a broader ADHD treatment.  ADHD can affect people differently, and the same is true for ADHD medication. Doctors often have to fine-tune dosages, and some people may notice side effects more than an improvement in symptoms.  Anyone feeling unsatisfied with the results of their medication or experiencing side effects with no reduction in symptoms should see a doctor to discuss other options.    
 Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. (2016, March).  Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. (2016, March).  Berwid, O. G., &amp; Halperin, J. M. (2013, October 1). Emerging support for a role of exercise in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder intervention planning.  Current Psychiatry Reports ,  14 (5), 543–551.  Janssen, L., Kan, C. C., Carpentier, P. J., Sizoo, B., Hepark, S., Schellekens, M. P., ... Speckens, A. E. M. (2018, February 28). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy v. treatment as usual in adults with ADHD: A multicentre, single-blind, randomised controlled trial.  Psychological Medicine , 1–11.  Southammakosane, C., &amp; Schmitz, K. (2015, August). Pediatric psychopharmacology for treatment of ADHD, depression, and anxiety.  Pediatrics ,  136 (2), 351–359.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Is my ADHD medication working?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321895.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, May 23). "Is my ADHD medication working?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  