 A sprain is an overstretched, torn, or twisted ligament. A ligament is a tough band of fibrous tissue that connects bones to other bones or cartilage. Ligaments are usually located around joints. Commonly sprained areas include the wrists, ankles, thumbs, and knees.  A strain is an overstretched, torn, or twisted tendon or muscle. A tendon is a tough cord of fibrous tissue that connects muscles to bones. Commonly strained areas include the legs, knees, feet, and back.  A sprain usually happens suddenly around a joint. Symptoms may be mild or severe, according to how many tissue fibers are affected. Symptoms include:  A strain can also occur suddenly, but it may develop over time. Symptoms include:  The most common causes of sprains are falling, twisting, or experiencing trauma to the joint. These types of injuries may cause the joint to move out of its normal range of movement, tearing or stretching the ligament as this happens.  Situations that may result in a sprain include:  Strains may occur suddenly (acute) or develop slowly over time (chronic).  Causes of acute strains include:  Causes of chronic strains include playing sports and activities that involve repetitive movements, such as rowing, tennis or running. Sitting or standing in an awkward position for prolonged periods can also cause chronic strains.  It is important to follow the four-step RICE protocol for both sprains and strains to reduce swelling and relieve pressure on the affected area:  RICE stands for:  Over-the-counter medications, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) and ibuprofen (Motrin IB or Advil), can also help reduce pain and swelling.  A person should see a doctor if they experience any of the following with a strain or sprain:  People can help to prevent sprains and strains by:  Not all sprains or strains are preventable, but with proper aftercare, people can ensure they do not cause any permanent damage or complications.  Mild to moderate strains and sprains should take between 2 days and 1 week to heal. After this, it is essential to ensure the affected body part is well supported to avoid further injury.  Severe sprains and strains may need more time to heal. In some cases, a person may benefit from seeing a physical therapist to regain their range of motion.    
 Sprains and strains. (2018, January 12).  Sprains and strains. (2018, January 12).  Sprains and strains. (2018, March 1).  Strains and sprains. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Strudwick, Tracey Williams. "What is the difference between a sprain and a strain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321807.php&gt;    APA  Strudwick, T. (2018, May 15). "What is the difference between a sprain and a strain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  