 In fact, according to some research, the average person passes gas about  12–25 times a day . In this article, learn about why people produce gas and discover some other fascinating facts.  The body produces intestinal gas as part of the process of digestion. Once this gas is inside the body, it needs to be released somehow. It is usually expelled through the anus as  flatulence  or out of the mouth as a burp.  Some intestinal gas comes from the air that people swallow when they are eating, chewing gum, drinking through a straw, or smoking.  Oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide are the primary external gases found inside the body. They make up what is called exogenous air.  Intestinal gas is produced within the body when bacteria in the colon break down food. This is called endogenous gas.  Endogenous gas consists mainly of hydrogen and, for some people, methane. It can also contain small amounts of other gases, such as hydrogen sulfide, which make farts smell bad.  However, bad smells only apply to about 1 percent of the gas that people expel, most of which is almost odor-free.  Undigested  carbohydrates  are a common cause of gas, as the stomach and the small intestine cannot break these foods down. Instead, these carbohydrates move into the large intestine, where bacteria begin to break them down, releasing intestinal gas in the process.  Undigested carbohydrates include:  According to the  International Foundation for Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders (IFFGD) , foods that make one person fart will not necessarily have the same effect on someone else.  However, some foods are known to create high levels of intestinal gas, including:  Although everyone farts, people with certain conditions may have more problems with intestinal gas than others. These conditions include:  Individuals who think they may have one of these conditions should see a doctor for a confirmed diagnosis.  Some diets can help people with gastrointestinal conditions reduce their symptoms. One of these is known as the low-FODMAP diet.  By following a low-FODMAP diet, a person will consume fewer foods that are fermentable, or that contain oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols.  Studies have found that  50–86 percent  of people with IBS who followed this diet had a reduction in symptoms.  Although farting is not typically a conversation starter, there is plenty to learn about it. Facts about flatulence include:  Although farting is as natural as eating or breathing, it can still cause embarrassment. Even people whose level of intestinal gas is well within the normal range may try to limit how much gas they pass.  Fortunately,  studies  have found that adjusting a person's diet can result in fewer farts.  Over-the-counter commercial enzyme products, such as Beano, can also reduce the body's production of intestinal gas. However, these products are not usually suitable for long-term use.  For a more natural approach, a person can eat smaller meals more frequently and drink peppermint tea to relieve bloating and flatulence.    
 Azpiroz, F., Hernandez, C., Guyonnet, D., Accarino, A., Santos, J., Malagelada, J. R., &amp; Guarner, F. (2014, June). Effect of a low-flatulogenic diet in patients with flatulence and functional digestive symptoms [Abstract].  Neurogastroenterology &amp; Motility ,  26 (6), 779–785.  Azpiroz, F., Hernandez, C., Guyonnet, D., Accarino, A., Santos, J., Malagelada, J. R., &amp; Guarner, F. (2014, June). Effect of a low-flatulogenic diet in patients with flatulence and functional digestive symptoms [Abstract].  Neurogastroenterology &amp; Motility ,  26 (6), 779–785.  Controlling intestinal gas. (2015, September 4).  Eating, diet, &amp; nutrition for gas in the digestive tract. (2016, July).  Gibson, P.R. (2017, February 28). History of the low FODMAP diet.  Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology ,  32 (S1), 5–7.  Hill, P., Muir, J.G., &amp; Gibson, P.R. (2017, January). Controversies and recent developments of the low-FODMAP diet.  Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  13 (1), 36–45.  Intestinal gas overview. (n.d.).  Intestinal gas production. (n.d.).  Manichanh, C., Eck, A., Varela, E., Roca, J., Clemente, J.C., González, A., … Azpiroz, F. (2014). Anal gas evacuation and colonic microbiota in patients with flatulence: Effect of diet.  Gut ,  63 (3), 401–408.  Pennsylvania State University. (2017, November 30). Uncertainty surrounds US livestock methane emission estimates [Press release].  Pommergaard, H. C., Burcharth, J., Fischer, A., Thomas, W. E. G., &amp; Rosenberg, J. (2013, February 15). Flatulence on airplanes: Just let it go. [Abstract]  The New Zealand Medical Journal ,  126 (1369), 68–74.  Reporter's guide to irritable bowel syndrome. (2018).  Sugar alcohols. (n.d.).  Symptoms. (n.d.).  Symptoms &amp; causes of gas in the digestive tract. (2016, July).  Wade, L. (2015, December 28). Who farts? And who cares?  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "Ten facts about why we fart."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321866.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, May 21). "Ten facts about why we fart."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  