 When thyroid hormone levels become extremely low, a person may experience symptoms such as drowsiness, confusion, and  hypothermia , as well as changes to the skin.  One life-threatening complication of  hypothyroidism  is myxedema  coma . This complication is also known as myxedema crisis, which is a more accurate term, as a person experiencing myxedema coma may not fall into a comatose state.  Myxedema occurs because of severe hypothyroidism that is not diagnosed or is not treated successfully. A person ceasing to take their medication can cause this complication.  Hypothyroidism develops because the thyroid stops working as it should. Causes of hypothyroidism include:  Myxedema is a serious condition. Any person displaying symptoms of myxedema or severe hypothyroidism must receive medical attention urgently.  A person with myxedema may notice swelling in their face, legs, or tongue. Their skin may also become dry and pale.  Other symptoms of severe hypothyroidism can include:  Myxedema can also lead to low oxygen and high carbon dioxide levels in the blood.  Hypothyroidism is treated with a synthetic version of the T4 thyroxine hormone called levothyroxine. This restores T4 hormone levels and can help relieve associated symptoms.  A person with myxedema is likely to stay in an intensive care unit with continual monitoring and treatment, and recovery may take several weeks.  A myxedema coma requires immediate admission to a hospital. Treatment involves administering thyroid hormone replacement medication into a vein.  Antibiotics , steroid treatment, and breathing support may be necessary also.  A person may need breathing assistance, such as continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) if carbon dioxide levels in the blood are very high. Doctors will also monitor heart rhythms and  blood pressure  carefully.  A person who recovers from myxedema will need to continue to take medication, probably for the rest of their life.  A doctor will make a diagnosis after seeing if a person's symptoms are consistent with severe hypothyroidism. They may also perform a blood test to be sure.  A person with a high level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) may have hypothyroidism, as the body may produce extra TSH to make up for the underactive thyroid. As a result, a doctor may measure how much TSH a person's pituitary gland produces.  A thyroxine or T4 test can also be taken to measure a person's T4 level. Low levels of T4 are a good indicator of hypothyroidism, especially if combined with high levels of TSH.  If a doctor believes that a person has hypothyroidism, they will perform more tests to measure thyroid function and to find an underlying cause.  If a doctor suspects myxedema coma, they will recommend that treatment begins immediately. The sooner a person is treated, the more likely they are to recover.  Complications of myxedema include:  Myxedema coma is a rare but severe complication of myxedema. It is a life-threatening complication with a mortality rate of  25–60 percent  and tends to affect  older adults .  Symptoms of myxedema coma include a severe drop in body temperature, reduced breathing, and  central nervous system  failure, alongside other symptoms of hypothyroidism.  The sooner a person with advanced hypothyroidism receives treatment, the less likely they are to develop dangerous complications. Even with treatment, the mortality rate for a person with myxedema coma is relatively high.  A person has a much higher chance of recovery if myxedema is recognized and treated early with thyroid replacement therapy and supportive care.  Lifelong treatment to manage hypothyroidism is necessary, but if the condition is well-controlled, it will not affect the person's life expectancy.    
 Carter, Y., Sippel, R. S., &amp; Chen, H. (2014, January). Hypothyroidism after a cancer diagnosis: Etiology, diagnosis, complications, and management.  The Oncologist ,  19 (1), 34–43.  Carter, Y., Sippel, R. S., &amp; Chen, H. (2014, January). Hypothyroidism after a cancer diagnosis: Etiology, diagnosis, complications, and management.  The Oncologist ,  19 (1), 34–43.  Gunatilake, S. S. C., &amp; Bulugahapitiya, U. (2017, May 2). Myxedema crisis presenting with seizures: A rare life-threatening presentation—A case report and review of the literature.  Case Reports in Endocrinology , 2017.  Hartmann, K. (2015, March–April). Thyroid disorders in the oncology patient.  Journal of the Advanced Practitioner in Oncology ,  6 (2), 99–106.  Hashimoto's disease. (2018, April 27).  Heart attack. (2016, November 10).  Hershman, J. M. (2018, April). Hypothyroidism (myxedema).  Hypothyroidism (underactive). (n.d.).  Mathew, V., Misgar, R. A., Ghosh, S., Mukhopadhyay, P., Roychowdhury, P., Pandit, K., ... Chowdhury, S. (2011, May 12). Myxedema coma: A new look into an old crisis.  Journal of Thyroid Research , 2011.  Safer, J. D. (2011, July 1). Thyroid hormone action on skin.  Dermato-Endocrinology ,  3 (3), 211–215.  Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism). (2018, April 27).  Wiersinga, W. M. (2014, March 28). Adult hypothyroidism.  Endotext .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What is myxedema and how is it treated?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321886.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, May 22). "What is myxedema and how is it treated?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  