 Polyphenols are the active ingredients in  green tea  that may be responsible for helping manage benign prostatic hyperplasia or BPH.  Polyphenols are chemical compounds found in a category called phytochemicals, which occur naturally in plants.  Various  studies  have shown that the prostate absorbs polyphenols more easily than other tissues in the body. This suggests that the prostate should be receptive to polyphenols when used in the management of BPH.  Green tea has increased in popularity and is now the  second most consumed beverage  in the world.  As a beverage, green tea is an alternative to  coffee  and soft drinks, with the added health benefits from the polyphenol compounds present.  Polyphenols are plentiful in plant foods, and are:  Green tea's active ingredients include:  In recent animal trials and  in vitro  studies in laboratories, one particular polyphenol called  epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)  appears to have promising results. EGCG reduced the over-production of cells and even prevented the onset of BPH.  It is worth noting that most studies into green tea have been done outside the human body, for example, in lab cultures or animals. These studies also use concentrated versions of polyphenols, not the green tea itself, or other whole foods.  Overall, specific polyphenols, some of which occur in green tea, have been found to treat the causes and symptoms of BPH. This suggests that green tea could assist in managing BPH alongside medications and other treatments.  Green tea has a wide variety of health benefits  due to its anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties .  The benefits of green tea are not only due to anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. The drink may help in the treatment of  obesity  and non-insulin dependent  diabetes mellitus .   Studies  suggest that green tea might help with weight management, alongside exercise and improvement of diet. More studies are needed, however, to confirm the positive effects conclusively.  Green tea may also be able to assist in glucose control in people with metabolic syndrome.  Furthermore, some  studies  suggest there is a link between metabolic syndrome and diseases of the prostate.  Metabolic syndrome causes an increase in free radicals in the body. This increases oxidative  stress , which is considered a risk factor for developing BPH.  Increasing intake of polyphenol-containing foods such as green tea may help manage metabolic syndrome and other conditions at the same time.  Whatever the health reason for someone consuming green tea, it is essential to continue taking required medications, eating a diet high in vegetables and fruit, exercising, and making regular visits to a doctor.  There are a variety of treatments for BPH, and which procedure is used depends on the severity of the condition, what the individual finds tolerable, and the associated side effects.  If symptoms are not too bad people can implement a few  lifestyle changes  to manage BPH.  These include:  There are  two types  of medications that have been found to be effective in treating BPH.   Other medications used  may include:  Medications are only useful for treating BPH and do not prevent the condition. However, they also come with some side effects.  People may choose natural alternatives and lifestyle changes if the side effects of their medication are worse than their BPH symptoms.  Side effects include:  Polyphenols, in general, have been shown to have anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects on the body. Many polyphenols have been used in animal and clinical trials to determine if these can help manage symptoms of BPH.  Specific foods can be incorporated into the diet to help manage BPH alongside medications. These foods are listed here followed by the active ingredient or ingredients they contain:  People should be cautious about using concentrated versions of polyphenols as there is too little research on possible side effects. Also, they could affect other medications a person is taking or have other unwanted side effects.  It is best to try and obtain all your nutrients through whole foods when possible.  Herbal remedies are another type of home treatment that could also assist in managing BPH.   Saw palmetto and red stinkwood  have both been shown to help manage symptoms.  People should be cautious if using herbal remedies, however, as they may affect other medications.  Surgery is a further option if other treatments for BPH have not helped to alleviate symptoms.  Many men find surgery effective, but it does not always alleviate symptoms immediately or to the desired level.  If someone experiences the symptoms of BPH, they should visit their doctor.  It is vital to establish what is causing these symptoms as some are common with  prostate cancer . Also, it is  possible to have BPH and prostate cancer  at the same time.  A treatment plan should be discussed with a doctor before using home remedies or natural therapies.  Fortunately, living with BPH does not mean a person is more likely to get prostate cancer than someone without the condition. Improvements to diet, management with medication, and attempting to decrease risk factors, mean the outlook is good.  Adding green tea as a beverage to the diet could also be helpful in managing BPH, as well as chronic  inflammation  associated with metabolic disorder and obesity.  If adding green tea to the diet replaces soft drinks and other high-calorie beverages, there is the added benefit of reducing  calories  from foods that often have poor nutritional value.    
 Castelli, T., Russo, G. I., Reale, G., Privitera, S., Chisari, M., Fragalà, E., … Morgia, G. (2016, May–June). Metabolic syndrome and prostatic disease: Potentially role of polyphenols in preventive strategies. A review.  International Brazilian Journal of Urology ,  42 (3), 422–430.  Castelli, T., Russo, G. I., Reale, G., Privitera, S., Chisari, M., Fragalà, E., … Morgia, G. (2016, May–June). Metabolic syndrome and prostatic disease: Potentially role of polyphenols in preventive strategies. A review.  International Brazilian Journal of Urology ,  42 (3), 422–430.  Egan, K. B., Burnett, A. L., McVary, K. T., Ni, X., Suh, M., Wong, D. G., &amp; Rosen, R. C. (2015, September). The co-occurring syndrome-coexisting erectile dysfunction and benign prostatic hyperplasia and  their  clinical correlates in  aging  men: Results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.  Urology ,  86 (3), 570–580.  Eleazu, C., Eleazu, K., &amp; Kanu, W. (2017, April 28). Management of benign prostatic hyperplasia: Could dietary polyphenols be an alternative to existing therapies? [Abstract].  Frontiers in Pharmacology ,  8 , 234.  Ferreira, M. A., Silva, D. M., de Morais Jr, A. C., Mota, J. F., &amp; Botelho, P. B. (2016, December). Therapeutic potential of green tea on risk factors for type 2 diabetes in obese adults — a review [Abstract].  Obesity Reviews ,  17 (12), 1316–1328.  Mann, J., &amp; Truswell, S. (2017, April 13).  Essentials of Human Nutrition (5th ed) . Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.  Tepedelen, B. E., Soya, E., &amp; Korkmaz, M. (2017, December 15). Epigallocatechin-3-gallate reduces the proliferation of benign prostatic hyperplasia cells via regulation of focal adhesions.  Life Sciences ,  191 , 78–81.  What is benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "Is green tea good for BPH?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321887.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, May 23). "Is green tea good for BPH?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  