 In this article, we look at what alcoholic  neuropathy  is, what causes it, and how it may feel. We also explore how the condition is diagnosed and treated.  A person who drinks alcohol in excess may start to feel a tingling sensation in their limbs. This happens when alcohol has damaged the peripheral nerves.  These nerves connect the brain and spinal cord to the muscles, limbs, and sensory organs. Through the peripheral nerves, the brain is able to control the body and receive sensory information.  When alcohol is responsible for damage to the peripheral nerves, a person has alcoholic neuropathy. People who drink heavily on a regular basis are at risk of developing this condition.  Some researchers estimate that  65 percent  of people in the United States who have been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder also have alcoholic neuropathy.  Excessive, long-term consumption of alcohol can lead to  malnutrition  as well as nerve damage, and both contribute to the development of alcoholic neuropathy.  Alcohol can impede the processing, transportation, and absorption of essential nutrients. Some people with alcohol use disorder also have inadequate food intake. This can lead to deficiencies in:  Deficiencies in these nutrients can harm overall health and stop nerves from functioning correctly.  Alcoholic neuropathy shows itself in different ways. Some may experience only one symptom, while others experience several.  People who drink heavily on a regular basis and have one or more of the following symptoms should contact a doctor.  Below are symptoms of alcoholic neuropathy, organized by the parts of the body most affected:  When speaking with a doctor, it is important to be honest about alcohol consumption. There are several possible causes of neuropathy, and knowing about a person's alcohol intake can help the doctor to make an accurate diagnosis.  Several tests can be used to diagnose alcoholic neuropathy, and more than one may be necessary. They include:  
A doctor may also want to test the functioning of the kidneys, liver, and thyroid. In addition, they may order blood tests to check for vitamin and nutrient deficiencies.  The best thing a person with alcoholic neuropathy can do is to stop or significantly reduce their alcohol intake. It will likely be the first thing a doctor suggests. Some doctors may insist on it before testing or treatment continues.  An inpatient detox may be suggested when a person's alcohol use disorder is very severe. Others may opt for an outpatient rehab.  Community-based support is also available from organizations such as Alcoholics Anonymous and Self-Management and Recovery Training. A doctor may also recommend other options.  Alcoholic neuropathy can make daily life difficult, so it is essential to begin by managing the symptoms. Individuals have different needs, and a treatment plan may involve one or more of the following:  If a person can benefit from exercise, a doctor can likely recommend a physiotherapist who specializes in neuropathy.  When significantly limiting or cutting off alcohol consumption, receiving ongoing support is essential.  Alcoholic neuropathy is a severe condition that can lead to chronic pain, loss of some bodily functions, and permanent disability. However, recognizing the symptoms and seeking medical attention early can minimize the impact of the condition.  A person can improve their outlook by significantly reducing or cutting off their alcohol intake and ensuring that they are receiving the right balance of nutrients. A wide range of support networks and medical treatments are available.  Individuals with alcoholic neuropathy often make a partial or full recovery, depending on the extent and duration of their alcohol consumption.    
 Chopra, K., &amp; Tiwari, V. (2012, March). Alcoholic neuropathy: Possible mechanisms and future treatment possibilities.  British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology ,  73 (3), 348–362.  Chopra, K., &amp; Tiwari, V. (2012, March). Alcoholic neuropathy: Possible mechanisms and future treatment possibilities.  British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology ,  73 (3), 348–362.  Electromyography. (n.d.).  Goldberg, C. (2015, October). The neurological examination.  Loss of sensation: Safety tips. (n.d.).  Nerve conduction studies. (2017, April 26).  Nerve/skin/muscle biopsy. (n.d.).  Nutrition recommendations for those who consume alcohol. (2017, November 21).  Saxena, A. (n.d.). What are orthotics?  Understanding lab tests I: Complete blood count and blood chemistry. (2017, August 22).  Upper gastrointestinal series. (n.d.).  Urinary retention. (2014, August).  Zeng, L., Alongkronrusmee, D., &amp; van Rijn, R. M. (2017, January 20). An integrated perspective on diabetic, alcoholic, and drug-induced neuropathy, etiology, and treatment in the US.  Journal of Pain Research ,  10 , 219–228.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crawford, Jamie. "Understanding and treating alcoholic neuropathy."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321858.php&gt;    APA  Crawford, J. (2018, May 18). "Understanding and treating alcoholic neuropathy."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  