 Deficiency is uncommon and typically the result of an underlying condition. Some premature infants also have low levels.   Vitamin  E occurs in eight chemical forms. With a blood test, a doctor can learn how much of one form,  alpha-tocopherol , a person has. Using this information, they can determine whether a person's overall level of vitamin E.  A normal level is usually with the range of 5.5–17 milligrams per liter (mg/L). The normal range may be different for premature infants and children under 17. Normal ranges can also vary slightly among labs.  When an adult has less than 4 mg/L of vitamin E in their blood, they usually require supplementation.  Low levels of vitamin E can lead to:  Muscle weakness and difficulties with coordination are neurological symptoms that indicate damage to the central and peripheral nervous systems.  The peripheral system is the network of nerves located beyond the brain and spinal cord. These neurons pass messages throughout the body.  The central nervous system communicates between the brain and the spinal cord.  The sheaths of neurons are mostly composed of fats. When the body has too little vitamin E, it contains fewer antioxidants that protect these fats, and the function of the nervous system breaks down.  Vitamin E deficiency often runs in families.  Learning about family history can make diagnosing certain rare, inherited diseases easier. Two of these diseases,  congenital abetalipoproteinemia  and  familial isolated vitamin E deficiency , are chronic and result in extremely low vitamin E levels.  Vitamin E deficiency can also result from diseases that severely reduce the absorption of fat. This is because the body requires fat to absorb vitamin E correctly.  Some of these diseases include:  Deficiency is also  common  in newborns and babies born prematurely who have lower birth weights and less fat.  Premature infants are at particular risk because an immature digestive tract can  interfere  with fat and vitamin E absorption.  Vitamin E deficiencies in these infants can also lead to hemolytic  anemia , which destroys red blood cells.  When a person has no history of genetic disease but experiences any symptoms of a vitamin E deficiency, they should contact a doctor.  An extremely low level of vitamin E in the blood can indicate an underlying health issue. Further testing will help to determine the cause and treatment options.  Vitamin E supplementation is often effective.   Newborns and premature babies   Current practice involves providing vitamin E supplementation through a tube in the stomach. When necessary, it can also be administered intravenously.  While one dose can sufficiently raise blood levels of vitamin E, multiple doses may be required.   Children and adults   Children and adults with deficiencies caused by inherited conditions  require supplementation  with high doses of vitamin E.  Supplementation can stop the progression of the disease. When the deficiency is detected early, it may prevent neurological symptoms.  It is highly unlikely that a person has low levels of vitamin E unless they have an underlying chronic disease, a genetic condition, or a diet extremely low in fat. For others, supplementation is usually not necessary.  Vitamin E is plentiful in a wide variety of foods. The body cannot produce it, so it must be obtained from the diet or a supplement.  Foods that contain vitamin E include:  A person should not take too many supplements of fat-soluble vitamins, including vitamins A, D, E, and K.  Excessive levels of vitamin E may cause abnormal bleeding, muscle aches,  diarrhea , and vomiting. The bleeding can increase the risk of a  stroke  and  early  death.  Too much vitamin E can also interact with blood thinners, such as warfarin, and  chemotherapy  medications.  A person should inform the doctor of all supplements and vitamins they take regularly. Do not exceed the recommended dosage of supplements unless instructed to by a physician.  When an adult has a vitamin E deficiency, a chronic illness or genetic condition is likely responsible.  A person should seek treatment from a specialist and a qualified dietitian who has experience with the illness.  When a diet extremely low in fat is responsible for the deficiency, it can be remedied by adding fats to the diet.  Ongoing vitamin E supplementation will be necessary to halt the progression of illness and prevent complications. When a person is diagnosed early and receives continuous treatment, their outlook is usually good.  Research continues on vitamin E supplementation, toxicity, and safe limits.    
 Abetalipoproteinemia. (2018, May 1).  Abetalipoproteinemia. (2018, May 1).  Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency. (2018, May 1).  Bell, E. F., Hansen, N. I., Brion, L. P., Ehrenkranz, R. A., Kennedy, K. A., Walsh, M. C., ... Higgins, R. D. (2013, December). Serum tocopherol levels in very preterm infants after a single dose of vitamin E at birth.  Pediatrics , 132 (6), e1626–1633.  Johnson, L. E. (n.d.). Vitamin E.  Kim, G. H., Chung, J. W., Lee, J. H., Ok, K. S., Jang, E. S., Kim, J., ... Kim, J.-W. (2015, December). Effect of vitamin e in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease with metabolic syndrome: A propensity score-matched cohort study.  Clinical and Molecular Hepatology ,  21 (4), 379–386.  Mâncio, R. D., Hermes, T. A., Macedo, A. B., Mizobuti, D. S., Valduga, A. H., Rupcic, I. F., &amp; Minatel, E. (2017, November–December). Vitamin E treatment decreases muscle injury in mdx mice [Abstract].  Nutrition , 43–44 , 39–46.  Okebukola, P. O., Kansra, S., &amp; Barrett, J. (2017, March 6). Vitamin E supplementation in people with cystic fibrosis.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , 3 .  Pacifici, G. M. (2016, May). Effects of vitamin A in neonates and young infants.  International Journal of Pediatrics ,  4 (5), 1745–1757.  Pae, M., Meydani, S. N., &amp; Wu, D. (2012, February). The role of nutrition in enhancing immunity in aging.  Aging and Disease ,  3 (1), 91–129.  Sato, K., Gosho, M., Yamamoto, T., Kobayashi, Y., Ishii, N., Ohashi, T., ... Yoneda, M. (2015, July–August). Vitamin E has a beneficial effect on non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials [Abstract].  Nutrition , 31 (7–8), 923–930.  Schuelke, M. (2016, October 13). Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency.  GeneReviews .  Truswell, S., &amp; Mann, J. (2017, April 27) Vitamin C &amp; E.  Essentials of Human Nutrition, Fifth Edition . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press  Ulatowski, L., Parker, R., Warrier, G., Sultana, R., Butterfield, D. A., &amp; Manor, D. (2014, February 28). Vitamin E is essential for Purkinje neuron integrity.  Neuroscience ,  260 , 120–129.  Vitamin E. (2018, March 2).  Wahlqvist, M. L. &amp; Wattanapenpaiboon, N. (2011). Vitamins, vitamin-like compounds and phytonutrients.  Food and Nutrition: Food and health systems in Australia and New Zealand . New South Wales, Australia: Allen &amp; Unwin.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "What are the symptoms of low vitamin E?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321800.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, May 14). "What are the symptoms of low vitamin E?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  