 Can applying essential oils to the scalp help stimulate hair growth? We look at the evidence.  While more research is needed, some evidence does exist to suggest that essential oils can help hair to grow healthier and stronger. Examples include:   Bergamot oil    One study  found that bergamot essential oil helps facilitate wound healing and reduce  inflammation . This may help promote hair growth and a healthy scalp.  Another  study  found that bergamot displays antimicrobial activity when applied to the scalp.   Jojoba oil   Jojoba oil comes from the seeds of the  Zizyphus jujube  plant. According to  one study , when jojoba oil was applied to shaved hair, it promoted faster hair growth than hair that did not have jojoba oil.   Peppermint oil   Some  research  found that peppermint oil promoted hair growth more effectively than topical applications of saline, jojoba oil, and minoxidil, which is a medication commonly used to treat  hair loss .  The researchers also found that peppermint essential oil increased scalp thickness and the number of hair follicles. They also suggested that peppermint oil may help to promote a more rapid growth stage for hair in the body.  Peppermint oil contains menthol, which causes the blood vessels just under the skin to dilate. This additional blood flow could help to promote further hair growth.   Additional oils   Other essential oils that  may be helpful  in promoting hair growth include chamomile, rosemary, and sage oil.  Essential oils are usually well-tolerated when diluted in a carrier oil. However, some people may experience allergic reactions, including itching, swelling, and irritation.  If a person has an adverse reaction to an essential oil, they should wash off the oil with soap and water as soon as possible.  Anyone experiencing problems breathing, dizziness, and changes in consciousness should seek emergency medical treatment.  Some essential oils can make the skin more sensitive to the sun, including  It is best to apply these oils before bed, so that a person is not immediately exposed to the sun after use.  According to the  National Association for Holistic Aromatherapy , some oils, such as sage and peppermint oils, should not be used during pregnancy or while breast-feeding.  Essential oils can be effective in even small amounts, as they are highly concentrated. However, it is crucial to mix essential oils with a carrier oil, such as olive, jojoba, or grapeseed.  To use essential oils for hair growth, a person should:  Combining essential oils may also be beneficial. Popular combinations include rosemary, thyme, and lavender, or peppermint and lavender with  coconut oil .  Essential oils and scalp massage may help stimulate hair growth related to inflammation or poor blood flow to the scalp.  Essential oils are very concentrated, so always mix them in small amounts with carrier oils before massaging them onto the scalp.  Some people may need repeated or frequent applications to see results from the essential oils. If a person does not experience their desired results, they can talk to a doctor about other options for reducing hair loss.  The essential oils listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Carvalho, I. T., Estevinho, B. N., &amp; Santos, L. (2015, April 29). Application of microencapsulated essential oils in cosmetic and personal healthcare products – a review.  International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,  38 (2), 109–119.  Carvalho, I. T., Estevinho, B. N., &amp; Santos, L. (2015, April 29). Application of microencapsulated essential oils in cosmetic and personal healthcare products – a review.  International Journal of Cosmetic Science ,  38 (2), 109–119.  Cosentino, M., Luini, A., Bombelli, R., Corasaniti, M. T., Bagetta, G., &amp; Marino, F. (2014, January 23). The essential oil of Bergamot stimulates reactive oxygen species production in human polymorphonuclear leukocytes [Abstract].  Phytotherapy Research ,  28 (8), 1232–1239.  Craighead, D. H., &amp; Alexander, L. M. (2016, September). Topical menthol increases cutaneous blood flow [Abstract].  Microvasvular Research ,  107 , 39–45.  Exploring aromatherapy. (n.d.).  Lv, F., Liang, H., Yuan, Q., &amp; Li, C. (2011, November). In vitro antimicrobial effects and mechanism of action of selected plant essential oil combinations against four food-related microorganisms [Abstract].  Food Research International ,  44 (9), 3057–3064.  Oh, J. Y., Park, M. A., &amp; Kim, Y. C. (2014, December). Peppermint oil promotes hair growth without toxic signs.  Toxicological Research ,  30 (4), 297–304.  Yoon, J. I., Al-Reza, S. M., &amp; Kang, S. C. (2010, May). Hair growth promoting effect of  Zizyphus jujube  essential oil [Abstract].  Food and Chemical Technology ,  48 (5), 1350–1354.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How to use essential oils for hair growth."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321877.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, May 22). "How to use essential oils for hair growth."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  