 There are many things you can do to help keep your heart healthy and disease-free.  You can schedule an annual checkup, exercise daily,  quit smoking , or take steps to reduce the level of  stress  in your life.  All of these things can have a positive effect on heart health. But, one of the simplest lifestyle changes that will benefit your heart is watching what you eat.  Nearly  6 million  people are currently living with  heart failure , and around half of these will die within 5 years of being diagnosed.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) warn that eating foods high in fat,  cholesterol , or sodium can be very bad for the heart. So, when taking steps to minimize the risk of  heart disease , diet is a good place to start.  In this article, we examine some of the best foods for ensuring that you keep a robust and healthy heart.  Asparagus is a natural source of  folate , which helps to prevent an amino acid called homocysteine from building up in the body. High homocysteine levels have been  linked with  an increased risk of heart-related conditions, such as  coronary artery disease  and  stroke .  Beans, peas, chickpeas, and lentils — otherwise known as pulses or legumes — can all  significantly  reduce levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) or "bad cholesterol." They are also packed with fiber, protein, and  antioxidant  polyphenols, all of which have beneficial effects on the heart and general health.  Berries are also full of antioxidant polyphenols, which help to  reduce heart disease  risk. Berries are a great source of fiber, folate, iron,  calcium ,  vitamin  A, and vitamin C, and they are low in fat.  Some studies suggest that regularly eating steamed broccoli can  lower cholesterol levels  and  prevent  heart disease.  These seeds are a rich plant-based source of  omega-3  fatty acids, such as  alpha-linolenic acid . Omega-3s have many beneficial effects, such as helping to lower levels of triglycerides, LDL, and total cholesterol. They also reduce  blood pressure  and minimize the buildup of fatty plaques in the arteries.  Omega-3s  decrease  the risk of disorders that can lead to  heart attack , such as thrombosis and  arrhythmias .  Dark chocolate is a rare example of a food that tastes amazing and is good for you (in moderation).  Scientists now believe that dark chocolate has protective benefits against  atherosclerosis , which is when plaque builds up inside the arteries, increasing risk of heart attack and stroke.  Dark chocolate seems to prevent two of the mechanisms implicated in atherosclerosis: stiffness of the arteries and white blood cell  adhesion , which is when white blood cells stick to the walls of blood vessels.  What is more, studies have found that increasing dark chocolate's flavanol content — which is the compound that makes it tasty and moreish — does not diminish these protective benefits.  Also in the "almost too good to be true" camp is  coffee . One recent study found that regularly drinking coffee was linked with a  decreased risk  of developing heart failure and stroke.  However, it is important to bear in mind that this study — which used machine learning to assess data from the Framingham Heart Study — can only observe an association between factors, and cannot conclusively identify cause and effect.  Fish is a strong source of heart-helping omega-3 fatty acids and protein but it is low in saturated fat. People who have heart disease, or are at risk of developing it, are often recommended to increase their intake of omega-3s by eating fish; this is because they lower the risk of abnormal heartbeats and slow the growth of plaque in the arteries.  According to the American Heart Association (AHA),  we should eat  a 3.5-ounce serving of fatty fish — such as salmon, mackerel, herring, lake trout, sardines, or albacore tuna — at least twice per week.  A 2011  systematic review  found that drinking  green tea  is associated with a small reduction in cholesterol, which, as we know, is a main contributor to heart disease and stroke. But the review could not pinpoint how much green tea someone would have to drink to receive any health benefits.  In 2014,  another review  studied the effects of drinking green tea on people with  high blood pressure . The report concluded that green tea was associated with a reduction in blood pressure. But, the authors were unable to determine if this modest reduction could help to prevent heart disease.  Almonds, hazelnuts, peanuts, pecans, pistachios, and walnuts are all heart-healthy nut options. These nuts are full of protein, fiber, minerals, vitamins, and antioxidants. Like fish and flaxseeds, walnuts are also ripe with  omega-3 fatty acids , making them a heart-healthy snack to have on the go.  Of all the organ meats, liver is the most  nutrient-dense . In particular, liver is bulging with  folic acid , iron, chromium,  copper , and zinc, which increase the blood's hemoglobin level and help to keep our heart healthy.  Because oatmeal is rich in soluble fiber, it may help to reduce the risk of heart disease. A 2008  review  of the evidence concluded that oat-based products significantly reduce LDL and total cholesterol without any adverse effects.  Many studies have noted the potential health benefits of the antioxidants in red wine. However, it is unlikely that the benefits of the antioxidants outweigh the dangers of alcohol.  Recently, however, a new study proposed that these same antioxidants could form the basis of a new stent for use during angioplasty — the process where narrow or obstructed veins are widened to treat atherosclerosis.  The researchers behind that study are currently developing a  new kind of stent  that releases red wine-like antioxidants into the blood to promote healing, prevent blood clotting, and reduce  inflammation  during angioplasty.  It is worth noting that drinking alcohol, in general, is  not healthy  for your heart. In fact, it is vitally important for cardiovascular health to drink alcohol  in moderation , if at all.  You can help to maintain a healthy heart rhythm by regularly consuming good sources of  magnesium . Spinach is one of the  best sources  of dietary magnesium, and consumption of Popeye's favorite food is associated with a raft of health benefits.  Tomatoes have lots of nutrients that might help keep our hearts healthy. The little red fruits are chock-full of fiber,  potassium , vitamin C, folate, and choline, which are all good for the heart.  As well as helping to keep heart disease at bay, potassium benefits muscles and bones, and helps prevent  kidney stones  from forming.  Scientists have argued that  increasing potassium  intake while decreasing sodium intake is the most important dietary change when attempting to reduce the risk of heart disease.  The AHA advise that we eat  eight or more  servings of fruit and vegetables each day. Vegetables are low in fat and  calories  but rich in fiber, minerals, and vitamins. A healthful amount of veggies in the diet can help to moderate weight and blood pressure.  