 Dry hair can be caused by factors, including:  Some possible medical causes of dry hair may be  anorexia nervosa , Menkes disease, hypoparathyroidism,  hypothyroidism , and other hormone abnormalities.  People can use home remedies to treat hair if it becomes dry and brittle. Listed below are 12 different home remedies that can be tried:  Olive oil is one of the most popular home remedies for dry hair. Besides olive oil, the following can also be used with good results:  All of these oils are rich in  vitamin  E and  antioxidants  and help to seal the outer hair layer or cuticle with moisture, thus repairing the damage.  To prepare this home remedy:  This treatment will strengthen and add shine to dry hair.  A person may want to try using gentle, sulfate-free shampoos and hair conditioners.  Also, they can shampoo less frequently, for example, only once or twice a week.  Beer contains a protein that helps to repair the hair cuticles, making the hair smooth and shiny.  If someone shampoos their hair as usual and then sprays on some drops of beer, allowing it to dry naturally, it will work as a good conditioner without leaving any smell on the hair.  Coconut oil has a soothing and moisturizing effect when applied to the hair.  People can prepare a simple hair mask by boiling curry leaves with coconut oil for 2–3 minutes and leaving it to rest in a cool place for a few days.  When the mixture has cooled, it can be gently rubbed into the hair and scalp with the fingertips and covered with a warm towel. It should then be left on for a few minutes before being rinsed.  Plain gelatin is a good protein source for the hair. It coats the hair strands and moisturizes them, making the hair smooth and shiny.  To prepare this home remedy:  Finally, leave the preparation on the hair for 10 minutes and rinse with tepid water.  Eggs and mayonnaise contain lots of protein, which helps to fortify and strengthen the hair and restore moisture to brittle or very dry hair.  People can prepare one of these protein-based mixtures at home in the following ways:  Or:  Or:  Yogurt and oil together can make an effective home treatment for dry hair.  To prepare this home remedy:  The avocado fruit is rich in vitamins A and E, saturated fats, and minerals, which all nourish damaged and dry hair, helping to moisturize and strengthen it.  To prepare an avocado paste, mash a ripe, peeled avocado with one egg and apply the mixture to wet hair for 20 minutes. Then rinse the hair several times.   Bananas  are high in  potassium  and have high moisture content, which makes them suitable for treating dry hair.  Because of their beneficial properties, bananas may prevent split ends, soften the hair, and improve elasticity.  To take advantage of these benefits, mash one banana and thoroughly spread it on the hair, from roots to ends. Leave it on for 1 hour and rinse with lukewarm water.  Eating healthfully, and including omega-3s and antioxidants to a person's diet can make hair look healthier and shinier.  The following products are rich in those beneficial compounds, and a person's can include them in their diet:  Taking the right supplements can also help to restore luster to hair. Helpful supplements include:   Omega-3:  This is a fatty acid that is good for keeping hair moisturized. People can get  omega-3  by taking one to three 250-milligrams (mg) capsules of borage oil, flaxseed oil, or evening primrose oil, one to three times a day.   Vitamins:  Taking vitamin A and C,  biotin  (sometimes called vitamin H), and iron supplements can help make hair look healthier and shinier.  Making some lifestyle changes and taking preventive measures can help alleviate dry hair. Tips include:  Dry hair can be tackled with some dietary and lifestyle adjustments, and with several home remedies that offer inexpensive and effective ways to bring back smoothness, moisture, and shine.    
 Ball, J. W., Dains, J. E., Flynn, J. A., Solomon, B. S., &amp; Stewart, R. W. (2015).  Seidel's Guide to Physical Examination, 8th Edition . St Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby.  Ball, J. W., Dains, J. E., Flynn, J. A., Solomon, B. S., &amp; Stewart, R. W. (2015).  Seidel's Guide to Physical Examination, 8th Edition . St Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby.  Chiu, C. H., Huang, S. H., &amp; Wang, H. M. (2015). A review: Hair health, concerns of shampoo Ingredients and scalp nourishing treatments [Abstract].  Current Pharmaceutical Biotechnology ,  16 (12), 1045–1052.  Del Campo, R., Zhang, Y., &amp; Wakeford, C. (2017, November 1). Effect of miracle fruit ( Synsepalum dulcificum ) Seed oil (MFSO®) on the measurable improvement of hair breakage in women with damaged hair: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, eight-month trial.  The Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology ,  10 (11), 39–48.  Gavazzoni Dias, M. F. R. (2015, January–March). Hair cosmetics: An overview.  International Journal of Trichology ,  7 (1), 2–15.  Keis, K., Persaud, D., Kamath, Y. K., &amp; Rele, A. S. (2005, September–October). Investigation of penetration abilities of various oils into human hair fibers [Abstract].  Journal of Cosmetic Science ,  56 (5), 283–295.  Rele, A. S., &amp; Mohile, R. B. (2003, March–April). Effect of mineral oil, sunflower oil, and coconut oil on prevention of hair damage [Abstract].  Journal of Cosmetic Science ,  54 (2), 175–192.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "How do I stop my hair from being dry?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321850.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, May 18). "How do I stop my hair from being dry?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  