 Sitting with a straight back and shoulders will not only improve a person's physical health but can make them feel more confident.  Many people spend the majority of their day sitting down as they tend to sit when commuting, working in an office or studying, and relaxing at home. Prolonged sitting can cause a range of adverse health effects, including bad posture and back health.  In this article, we look at what good posture means and explain the correct sitting position to achieve it, particularly when sitting at a computer.  Good posture means that the key parts of a person's body are correctly aligned and supported by the right amount of muscle tension.  Correct posture can help by:  The best sitting position depends on a person's height, the chair they are using, and the activity they are doing while sitting.  A person can improve posture and achieve a proper sitting position by:  People who have to sit for extended periods at a desk because of their work or schooling need to take extra precautions to make sure they maintain a healthy posture and back.  When working at a computer for long periods, a person can help improve their sitting posture by:  Once in the correct position, try doing a mental check every 10 to 15 minutes to see if the posture has altered and then correct any changes.  A person with poor posture can correct it with time, awareness, and commitment. It can take weeks to months for some people to see significant benefits from working on their posture. Once a person has improved their posture they will need to work at maintaining it, so they may often have to remind themselves to recognize unhealthy positions and correct them.  Anything that causes a misuse or overuse of specific muscles, ligaments, or tendons can adversely impact a person's posture and back health. Certain positions are worse than others for overworking or misusing postural tissues, especially some sitting positions.  To prevent bad posture and back health avoid:  Practicing good sitting habits is only one way to help improve posture and back health.  Every type of postural position and movement that the body makes involves or impacts the muscles, tendons, and ligaments that help support posture. Some lifestyle factors that may not seem directly related to posture are in fact crucial to overall postural health.  Everyday tips for a healthy posture and back include:  Many people spend long periods of time sitting down. Sitting incorrectly, especially at a desk, can be bad for back health and posture.  However, by knowing what a good sitting posture looks like and following a few simple rules, most people can learn how to self-correct and thus achieve good posture.  Making additional lifestyle changes, such as doing a good amount of various exercises and taking movement breaks throughout the day, can also help.    
 10 tips for a healthy back. (n.d.).  10 tips for a healthy back. (n.d.).  How to sit correctly. (2016, July 22).  Tips to maintain good posture. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Sitting positions for good posture."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321863.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, May 21). "Sitting positions for good posture."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  