 Some forms of  estrogen  are linked with how the body controls weight gain. As such, any changes in their levels could then lead to changes in  body weight .  So, what is the relationship between a woman's estrogen levels and her weight?  Read on for more information about this phenomenon and what to do about estrogen-related weight gain.  Estrogen levels can be low in women for many reasons.  The  most common  reason for low estrogen is  menopause . This is when a woman's reproductive hormones decline, and menstruation stops. Many women notice that they gain weight during this time in their life.  One reason why people might gain weight around menopause is changing hormone levels.  One form of estrogen called estradiol decreases at menopause. This hormone  helps  to regulate metabolism and body weight. Lower levels of estradiol may lead to weight gain.  Throughout their life, women may notice weight gain around their hips and thighs. However, after menopause, women tend to gain weight around their mid-section and abdomen.  This type of fat gain tends to build up in the abdomen and around the organs, where it is known as visceral fat.  Visceral fat can be very dangerous. It has been  linked  with several other medical conditions, including:  As well as changing estrogen levels, older women may tend to be less active and have less muscle mass, which means that they burn fewer  calories  during the day.  These factors can all increase a woman's risk for weight gain during the transition to menopause.  These age-related factors may play a more significant role in weight gain than changes to estrogen levels.  In line with this, one  review of studies  from 2012 concluded that weight gain did not appear to be affected by hormone changes related to menopause.  Menopause is not the only reason why a woman might have low estrogen levels. Other potential causes of estrogen imbalance include:   Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)   PCOS is a condition where a woman has multiple small  cysts  on the ovaries, as well as several hormonal imbalances. They may have high  testosterone  levels and an imbalance between estrogen and  progesterone  levels.  Women with this condition tend to have an issue with weight gain,  insulin resistance , and heart disease.   Lactation   Estrogen levels remain low after a woman has given birth and while she is breast-feeding. This hormonal change helps to encourage milk production and prevent  ovulation  and any further conception right away.   Ovary removal   A woman who has had both of her ovaries surgically removed will go through sudden menopause. She will no longer release eggs or produce estrogen and progesterone.   Anorexia    Anorexia  is a serious eating disorder where someone does not take in enough calories. This deficit puts their body in a state of starvation and will reduce the amount of estrogen their body produces.   Vigorous exercise   Vigorous or extreme exercise has  been shown  to decrease estrogen production due to low body fat levels.  Estrogen is one of the two primary female sex hormones and is involved in the onset of  puberty  and the menstrual cycle. It has many other essential functions, as well, including:  The ovaries, which are two small glands in the lower pelvis, are mainly responsible for the production of estrogen. The adrenal glands and fatty tissue also make estrogen in small amounts.  There are three main types of estrogen:  Symptoms of low estrogen include:  Women experiencing any of these symptoms should talk to a doctor about them. A doctor can run a simple blood test to measure estrogen levels and determine if an estrogen imbalance is to blame.  Women should keep track of their menstrual periods, including when they begin and end, and any other symptoms or problems that they are experiencing. Having this information readily available can help a doctor diagnose potential hormonal imbalances.  Maintaining a healthy weight, even if it is related to an estrogen imbalance, begins with eating well and staying active.  A healthful diet to manage weight means:  Being active is also very important for managing estrogen-related weight gain. In addition to regular cardio exercise, such as jogging, swimming, or walking, people should add in strength training to help build muscle and promote healthy bones.  Weight gain is a common complaint among women who reach menopause. Making healthful diet and lifestyle changes are the best way to manage weight gain.  People should talk to their doctor about any concerns that they may have related to weight gain or hormone imbalances.    
 Changes in weight and fat distribution. (n.d.).  Changes in weight and fat distribution. (n.d.).  Davis, S. R., Castelo-Branco, C., Chedraui, P., Lumsden, M. A., Nappi, R. E., Shah, D., &amp; Villaseca, P. (2012, September 15). Understanding weight gain at menopause.  Climacteric ,  15 (5), 419–429.  Kumar, P., &amp; Magon, N. (2013, February 21). Hormones in pregnancy.  Nigerian Medical Journal ,  53 (4), 179–183.  Russell, A. L., Grimes, J. M., Cruthirds, D. F., Westerfield, J., Wooten, L., Keil, M., … Larco, D. O. (2017, June). Dietary isoflavone-dependent and estradiol replacement effects on body weight in the ovariectomized (OVX) rat.  Hormone and Metabolic Research ,  49 (6), 457–465.  Visceral fat (active fat). (n.d.).  What is estrogen? (2014, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "Can estrogen levels affect weight gain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321837.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, May 17). "Can estrogen levels affect weight gain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  