 Diaper rash can be uncomfortable and painful, but most cases can be treated using over-the-counter (OTC) and home remedies.  Rashes that are severe, do not respond to basic care, or last more than 3 days may have developed as a result of infections or underlying medical conditions. Examples include yeast infections and long-term skin conditions, such as  psoriasis  and  eczema .  In this article, we look at the causes and symptoms of adult diaper rash, as well as options for prevention and treatment.  Anyone can develop diaper rash at any age. It is most common in babies and infants because diapers trap moisture and bacteria near the skin.  For the same reason, adults who wear pads or specially designed briefs with absorbent padding may also develop diaper rash.  People may need to use adult diapers or pads in a variety of situations, including when they are:  Using adult diapers,  incontinence  underwear, or pads can lead to diaper rash in adults.  The specific causes related to using these products include:  Not everyone who gets diaper rash wears or uses diapers. Diaper rash and the infections associated with it can also be caused by:  Diaper rash can develop anywhere on the groin, buttock, thighs, and hips.  Minor to mild cases of diaper rashes can cause:  Moderate cases of diaper rash often cause:  Severe or untreated diaper rash can lead to:  A diaper rash that occurs alongside a flare-up of another skin condition, such as psoriasis, eczema, or atopic dermatitis, may have similar symptoms as the underlying condition.  When an infection is the cause of diaper rash, it may also result in:  In most cases, the best way to treat adult diaper rash is to change briefs and pads frequently and as soon as possible after soiling them.  People with diaper rash should also:  A person can also encourage airflow by:  Ointments and creams containing zinc oxide and petroleum jelly can help relieve symptoms. A person can apply these products to the entire area daily.  People who find that zinc oxide creams are too sticky once they dry can apply a thin layer of a lubricating gel or cream, such as lanolin or petroleum jelly, on the top.  If a diaper rash does not improve with basic hygiene and OTC creams or ointments, a person should see a doctor. People should also seek advice if their rash is severe or lasts longer than 3 days.  A combination of poor hygiene and skin irritation is responsible for most cases of diaper rash, but several underlying medical conditions can cause similar symptoms.  For people with fungal infections, a doctor may prescribe topical antifungal medications, such as ciclopirox, nystatin, or a type of imidazole.  Most antifungal creams need to be applied twice daily for 7 to 10 days. People with severe fungal infections may need to take oral medications in addition to using creams.  If a bacterial infection is causing the rash, a doctor will prescribe antibacterial creams, such as those containing bacitracin or fusidic acid. A person will usually need to apply the creams two or three times a day for 7 to 10 days.  People who have underlying skin conditions, such as psoriasis and eczema, may need to use corticosteroid creams and ointments during flare-ups.  The best way to prevent diaper rash is to change briefs frequently and as soon as possible after they become wet or soiled.  Washing the entire area daily with a hypoallergenic cleanser or soap can also help reduce the risk of irritation. It is better to pat the skin dry or let it air dry rather than rubbing it.  Applying moisturizers or medicated creams before putting on briefs or pads can also reduce the risk of chafing and help to soothe inflamed skin.  Products and natural remedies are available in stores and online and include:  Adult briefs and pads are continually being improved to make them more comfortable and to decrease the chance of diaper rash.  Products that should help to reduce the risk of irritation and infection include:  Most cases of adult diaper rash resolve within 1 or 2 days with basic hygiene and the use of zinc oxide and lubricating creams.  However, severe diaper rashes and those caused by underlying medical conditions usually require treatment to avoid permanent skin damage and other health complications.  A person should speak to a doctor about rashes that:  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bonifaz, A., Saldaña, M., Escandón-Pérez, S., &amp; Tirado-Sánchez, A. (2017, December 28) Diaper dermatitis in elderly.  Journal of Dermatitis ,  2 (1), 106.  Bonifaz, A., Saldaña, M., Escandón-Pérez, S., &amp; Tirado-Sánchez, A. (2017, December 28) Diaper dermatitis in elderly.  Journal of Dermatitis ,  2 (1), 106.  Diaper rash: How to treat. (n.d.).  Stamatas, G. N., &amp; Tierney, N. K. (2014, January–February). Diaper dermatitis: Etiology, manifestations, prevention, and management [Abstract].  Pediatric Dermatology ,   31 (1), 1–7.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Adult diaper rash: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321857.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, May 18). "Adult diaper rash: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  