 Many people achieve healthy levels by eating a balanced diet and through other aspects of their lifestyle. However, some require medication to prevent additional health problems.  Dyslipidemia occurs when someone has abnormal levels of lipids in their blood. While the term describes a wide range of conditions, the most common forms of dyslipidemia involve:  Lipids, or fats, are building blocks of life and provide energy to cells. Lipids include:  Healthy blood lipid levels naturally vary from person to person. However, people with high levels of LDL and triglycerides or very low HDL levels tend to have a higher risk of developing  atherosclerosis .  Atherosclerosis develops when hard, fatty deposits called plaques accumulate in blood vessels, making it difficult for blood to flow.  Over time, these plaques can build up and cause major circulation problems, such as  heart attacks  and  strokes .  Unless it is severe, most people with dyslipidemia are unaware that they have it. A doctor will usually diagnose dyslipidemia during a routine blood test or a test for another condition.  Severe or untreated dyslipidemia can lead to other conditions, including  coronary artery disease  (CAD) and  peripheral artery disease  (PAD).  Both CAD and PAD can cause serious health complications, including heart attacks and strokes. Common symptoms of these conditions include:  These symptoms may get worse with activity or  stress  and get better when a person rests.  Talk with a doctor about chest pain, especially any of the above symptoms accompany it.  Anyone who experiences severe chest pain, dizziness, and fainting, or problems breathing should seek emergency care.  Dyslipidemia can be categorized into two types, based on the cause:  Genetic factors cause primary dyslipidemia, and it is inherited. Common causes of primary dyslipidemia include:  Secondary dyslipidemia is caused by lifestyle factors or medical conditions that interfere with blood lipid levels over time.  Common causes of secondary dyslipidemia include:  Several factors are known to increase the chances of developing dyslipidemia and related conditions. These risk factors include:  A doctor will usually focus on lowering a person's levels of triglycerides and LDL. However, treatment can vary, depending on the underlying cause of dyslipidemia and how severe it is.  Doctors may prescribe one or more lipid-modifying medications for people with very high total cholesterol levels of at least 200 milligrams per deciliter of blood.  High cholesterol is usually treated with statins, which interfere with the production of cholesterol in the liver.  If statins fail to lower LDL and triglyceride levels, a doctor may recommend additional medications, including:  Some lifestyle changes and supplements can help to encourage healthy blood lipid levels.  Natural treatments include:  People with minor dyslipidemia usually have no symptoms. They can often manage or resolve the condition by making lifestyle adjustments.  People with dyslipidemia should contact a doctor if they experience symptoms relating to the heart or circulation, including:  People who have severe dyslipidemia, especially those with other medical conditions, may need to manage their blood lipid levels with medication, in addition to making lifestyle changes.    
 Anderson, T. J., Grégoire, J., Pearson, G. J., Barry, A. R., Couture, P., Dawes, M., ... Ward, R. (2016). 2016 Canadian Cardiovascular Society guidelines for the management of dyslipidemia for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in the adult.  Canadian Journal of Cardiology ,  32 (11),1263–1282.  Anderson, T. J., Grégoire, J., Pearson, G. J., Barry, A. R., Couture, P., Dawes, M., ... Ward, R. (2016). 2016 Canadian Cardiovascular Society guidelines for the management of dyslipidemia for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in the adult.  Canadian Journal of Cardiology ,  32 (11),1263–1282.  HDL (good), LDL (bad) cholesterol and triglycerides. (2018, May 3).  Signs, symptoms, and complications. (n.d.).  Rader, D. J., &amp; Kastelein, J. J. P. (2014, March 3). Lomitapide and mipomersen: Two first-in-class drugs for reducing low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia.  Circulation ,  129 (9),1022–1032.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Dyslipidemia: Everything you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321844.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, May 17). "Dyslipidemia: Everything you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  