 Essential oils cannot cure this condition, but evidence suggests that they can relieve major symptoms of  rheumatoid arthritis  (RA) and osteoarthritis, especially  inflammation , swelling, stiffness, and pain.  Read on, to learn which oils most effectively reduce symptoms of RA, how to use them, and which carrier oils to choose. We also discuss the risks associated with using essential oils.  Essential oils are made from the liquid essence of plants. This essence is made up of the compounds that give a plant its taste and smell.  Using pressure or steam, the oils are usually extracted from the plant's bark, leaves, or roots.  Few large-scale studies involving humans have determined the effects of aromatherapy on RA exclusively. However, essential oils and aromatherapy are considered safe to use for RA, alongside conventional treatments.  Below are seven of the best essential oils for RA symptoms, with scientific evidence that shows their effectiveness:  Several compounds in eucalyptus have been shown to reduce inflammation, swelling, and pain.  A  2013  study involved people who underwent total  knee replacement surgery . Those who inhaled preparations of eucalyptus essential oil at 30-minute intervals for 3 days in a row noticed a reduction in pain, and they also had lower levels of  blood pressure .  Most research recommends either inhaling eucalyptus oil directly or adding a few drops to a warm bath.  A person can purchase eucalyptus essential oil in health stores or online.  Practitioners of traditional medicine have used resin and essential oils of frankincense ( Boswellia serrata Linn ) for thousands of years to treat a wide variety of ailments, including chronic pain and inflammation.  According to the  Arthritis Foundation , the acids in frankincense have anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties. Boswellic acids may also help to reduce autoimmune responses and prevent  cartilage damage .  People with RA may wish to use frankincense capsules that contain at least 60 percent boswellic acid and take 300–400 milligrams (mg) daily.  Lavender has long been used to reduce pain,  anxiety , and  depression . It may be inhaled, applied topically, or added to a warm bath.  A  2016  study tested the effects of a 5-percent mixture of lavender essential oil diluted in sweet almond oil on osteoarthritis of the knee.  Participants who massaged 5 milliliters (mL) of the mixture onto their swollen joints nine times over the course of 3 weeks reported reduced pain after the first week. However, more research is needed.  Lavender essential oil can be purchased in health stores and online.  Evening primrose, black currant, and borage oils are all known to be rich in gamma-linolenic acid (GLA), a type of omega-6 fatty acid.  When GLA is consumed, the body converts it into a powerful anti-inflammatory. It can help to reduce RA symptoms, such as tenderness, joint pain, and stiffness.  Evening primrose oil also contains gamma-linolenic acid and beta-amyrin, which are also anti-inflammatory compounds.  The  Arthritis Foundation  recommends that people with RA take between 540 mg and 2.8 grams of evening primrose oil in divided doses daily for at least 6 months.  Borage oils should be taken with caution and in moderation to prevent liver damage. The plant contains potentially dangerous compounds called pyrrolizidine alkaloids.   Ginger  has long been recommended for people with chronic inflammation and pain. It can be added to meals or taken in supplements.  Chemicals in ginger transform into a powerful group of anti-inflammatory compounds called gingerols once digested.  The essential oil of ginger may contain other compounds that ease symptoms of RA. A  2016  study found that female rats who were administered the essential oil had reduced rates of chronic joint inflammation.  The active ingredients in turmeric or curcumin may have anti-inflammatory properties. It has been shown to help improve circulation.  A review published in  2016  reports that turmeric extract appears to reduce symptoms of  arthritis , though more research is needed.  A  2010  study funded in part by the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, an American government agency, found that turmeric essential oils reduced joint inflammation in rats. Research is underway to determine the effects on people.  Basil contains a wide variety of potentially therapeutic compounds.  The essential oil contains 1.8-cineole, which has anti-inflammatory effects. It also contains linalool, a compound that has been shown to reduce swelling in mice and rats.  A  2013  study found that rats with induced arthritis had reduced joint swelling after being administered 150–300 mg/kilogram of basil essential oil extract daily.  They also had less  edema  and a lower risk of cartilage damage. Edema refers to a buildup of fluid and is associated with inflammation.  Different essential oils can be mixed to produce enhanced or more varied effects.  A  2016  study found that people with RA who received 30 minutes of aromatherapy massage to their arthritic knees on a regular basis experienced diminished short-term pain after 2 weeks. They also reported a reduction in  fatigue  after the fourth week.  The mixture used in the massage included lavender, juniper, ylang-ylang, and rosemary essential oils in a ratio of 3:3:2:2. The essential oils were diluted evenly into 100 mL of  coconut oil .  Essential oils are usually inhaled or massaged into the skin.  A person can:  Essential oils must be mixed with carrier oils before being applied to the skin. Some carrier oils include:  Speak with a doctor before using essential oils to reduce symptoms of RA. While these oils have been used medicinally for thousands of years, some can be dangerous when misused. They can also have dangerous interactions with RA medications.  A person should never replace prescribed medication for RA with complementary therapies. The disease-modifying antirheumatic medications used to treat RA have been shown to reduce inflammation in the fluid that lines the joints.  Without proper treatment, RA can lead to serious, permanent complications, such as bone and cartilage damage.  A majority of the essentials oils used to treat chronic inflammation and pain are not known to cause adverse reactions. However, potential risks include:  Essential oils have not been shown to slow the progression of RA. But early research suggests that compounds in certain oils may reduce major symptoms, such as pain, stiffness, inflammation, and anxiety.  Though most essential oils are safe, speak with a doctor before trying them and do not stop using regular RA medications.  If you want to buy any of the essential oils listed in this article, then they are available in stores and online.   Shop for eucalyptus essential oil.    Shop for frankincense essential oil.    Shop for lavender essential oil.    Shop for evening primrose essential oil.    Shop for ginger essential oil.    Shop for turmeric essential oil.    Shop for basil essential oil.   We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Aromatherapy and essential oils. (2018, February 23).  Aromatherapy and essential oils. (2018, February 23).  Daily, J. W., Yang, M., &amp; Park, S. (2016, August 1). Efficacy of turmeric extracts and curcumin for alleviating the symptoms of joint arthritis: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials.  Journal of Medicinal Food ,  19 (8), 717–729.  Evening primrose. (n.d.).  Funk, J. L., Frye, J. B., Oyarzo, J. N., Chen, J., Zhang, H., &amp; Timmermann, B. N. (2016, July). Anti-inflammatory effects of the essential oils of ginger ( Zingiber officinale  Roscoe) in experimental rheumatoid arthritis.  PharmaNutrition ,  4 (3), 123–131.  Indian frankincense. (n.d.).  Jun, Y. S., Kang, P., Min, S. S., Lee, J.-M., Kim, H.-K., &amp; Seol, G. H. (2013, June 7). Effect of eucalyptus oil inhalation on pain and inflammatory responses after total knee replacement: A randomized clinical trial.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2013 .  Metin, Z. G., &amp; Ozdemir, L. (2016, April 15). The effects of aromatherapy massage and reflexology on pain and fatigue in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: A randomized controlled trial.  Pain Management Nursing ,  17 (2), 140–149.  Nasiri, A., Mahmodi, M. A., &amp; Nobakht, Z. (2016, November). Effect of aromatherapy massage with lavender essential oil on pain in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee: A randomized controlled clinical trial.  Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice ,  25 , 75–80.  Rheumatoid arthritis:  In depth . (2016, May 4).  Yamada, A. N.,  Grespan , R., Yamada, Á. T., Silva, E. L., Silva-Filho, S. E., Damião, M. J., ... Cuman, R. K. N. (2013). Anti-inflammatory activity of  Ocimum americanum  L. essential oil in experimental model of zymosan-induced arthritis.  The American Journal of Chinese Medicine ,  41 (4), 913–926.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Which essential oils can help with rheumatoid arthritis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321853.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, May 18). "Which essential oils can help with rheumatoid arthritis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  