 A person can have a cold nose for several reasons besides. Often, it is not a cause for worry. But, in some cases, it may be a sign of an underlying health condition.  There are various reasons why someone might have a cold nose. They include:  The body conserves heat and energy by reducing blood flow to the extremities in cold temperatures or weather. Instead, the blood is directed toward the vital organs to keep them warm and to allow them to function properly.  The reduced blood flow to the hands, feet, ears, and nose causes them to feel cooler than, for example, the stomach or chest, as a result.  The nose is likely to feel cold first when temperatures dip because it is composed mainly of cartilage tissue and does not have a lot of insulating fat.  An underactive thyroid, or  hypothyroidism , is a condition where the thyroid gland does not produce enough of the hormones that control the way the body uses energy.  Metabolism slows to conserve heat and energy without this hormone. Other symptoms of  hypothyroidism , aside from sensitivity to cold, include:  An autoimmune disorder called Hashimoto's disease damages the thyroid gland and is the most common cause of hypothyroidism.  Other causes of hypothyroidism include:   Raynaud's disease  causes excessive narrowing of blood vessels, which results in little or no blood flow in the extremities.  It is usually triggered by exposure to cold or even  stress . The disorder usually affects the fingers and toes, but it can also occur in the nose and ears.  The skin may turn white and then blue, briefly, during an attack. The affected areas may turn red and be accompanied by throbbing, tingling or numbness once the blood flow returns.  It is not clear what causes  Raynaud's disease . But diseases such as  lupus  or  rheumatoid arthritis  can cause a more severe form of the condition called Raynaud's phenomenon.  Being in cold temperatures, for example, during outdoor sports, can result in a cold nose.  When prolonged exposure causes the body to lose heat faster than it can generate it, the result is  hypothermia . This occurs when the body's heat is lower than the normal body temperature of 98.6°F or 37°C.  Early symptoms include:  A cold nose could signal the early stages of frostnip or  frostbite  after prolonged exposure to extremely cold temperatures, such as freezing water or wind.  Symptoms of  frostbite  include:  Frostbite commonly affects extremities such as the nose, ears, cheeks, fingers, or toes.   Hypothermia , frostnip, and frostbite are potentially dangerous conditions, and it is important to seek medical help immediately if they occur.  A cold nose could also be a sign of working too hard.  One study found a  direct link  between facial temperature and stress from a challenging workload.  The scientists who studied the neurological functions of 14 volunteers, found that the more mental pressures they faced, the colder their noses became.  The nose temperature dropped by an average of 1°C (33.8°F) as the mental tasks became more challenging. The research suggested this could be the result of blood flow from the face being diverted to the cerebral cortex.  People who have a cold nose when the weather turns chilly can keep warm by doing the following:  All these methods help keep the body warm and the blood flowing to the extremities, including the nose.  People who think their cold nose could be caused by hypothyroidism should see a doctor. A physical examination and blood tests can determine if they have the disorder. Treatment involves taking thyroid hormone medication.  There is no cure for Raynaud's disease and Raynaud's phenomenon. Adopting simple lifestyle changes can, however, help avoid triggering an attack.  These changes include:  Some medicines, such as  beta-blockers  and certain  migraine  drugs, can cause attacks. People should consult a doctor if this is the case.  People who show symptoms of hypothermia, frostnip or frostbite should seek medical treatment immediately.  If someone shows visible signs of hypothermia, they should be immediately moved into a warm room or shelter. Any clothing that is wet should be taken off, and the individual should be kept dry and wrapped in a warm blanket.  They should be given a warm beverage to help increase their body temperature, but this must not include any alcohol.  People who show signs of frostnip or frostbite should not be allowed to walk, as this may damage the tissue of their feet or toes if these are affected.  Their cold bodies should not be rubbed or massaged, and heating pads or heat lamps should not be used either. They can be helped to immerse the affected areas of their body in warm, but not hot, water.  According to a 2012  survey , 65 percent of Americans cited work as a main source of stress.  Those who think their cold nose is caused by work-related stress can take steps to manage these pressures.  These steps include:  A cold nose should not be a cause for worry in many instances. It is normal for a nose to feel cold during chilly weather. It may simply mean someone needs to wrap up more when the temperatures drop.  A constantly cold nose could, however, be a sign of an underlying health condition, even in warm weather. It is recommended to see a doctor if the symptoms continue and cause pain and discomfort.  People should avoid smoking as this narrows the arteries and makes clots more likely to form, which can cause circulation problems, a  heart attack , or  stroke .    
 Cold stress — cold-related illnesses. (2016, July 11).  Cold stress — cold-related illnesses. (2016, July 11).  Coping with stress at work. (n.d.).  Fudge, J. (2016, February 8). Exercise in the cold. Preventing and managing hypothermia and frostbite injury [Abstract].  Sports Health: A Multidisciplinary Approach ,  8 (2), 133–139.  Hypothyroidism (Underactive thyroid). (2016, August).  Marinescu, A. C., Sharples, S., Ritchie, A. C., López, T. S., McDowell, M., &amp; Morvan, H. P. (2017, September 30). Physiological parameter response to variation of mental workload.  Human Factors ,  60 (1), 31–56.  Nagpal, B. M., &amp; Sharma, R. (2011, July 21). Cold injuries: The chill within.  Medical Journal Armed Forces India ,  60 (2), 165–171.  Raynaud’s. (n.d.).  Underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism). (2018, April 27).  University of Nottingham. (2018, January 16). How the temperature of your nose shows how much strain you are under [Press release].  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Ponsford, Soccy. "What does it mean when you have a cold nose?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321810.php&gt;    APA  Ponsford, S. (2018, May 15). "What does it mean when you have a cold nose?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  