 In this article, learn about the differences between  cysts  and tumors. We explore the most common types and describe the conditions that cause them.  A cyst is a sac of tissue that is filled with another substance, such as air or fluid. Tumors are solid masses of tissue.  Cysts can form anywhere on the body, including on the bones and soft tissues.  Most cysts are noncancerous, although there are some exceptions. Cysts can feel tender to the touch, and a person may be able to move one easily.  Tumors can also grow almost anywhere in the body. They tend to grow quickly and are usually firm to the touch.  It is possible to have cysts and tumors in the same organ.  Some of the many types of cyst include:  There are many other, less common types of cysts.  Tumors may be either benign (noncancerous) or malignant (cancerous). Benign tumors usually grow in one place and do not spread.  Malignant tumors develop in one area of the body, then spread to others. Both benign and malignant tumors vary in size.  Some  tumor  types include:  Tumors can grow so large that they push into organs, causing pain and other symptoms. A surgeon will usually remove large tumors.  All cancerous tumors are usually removed unless they are impossible to reach or located so close to a vital organ that surgical removal may cause harm.  A doctor can use several diagnostic methods to distinguish between a tumor and a cyst. They will start by taking a medical history, then ask when symptoms began and when they are most prominent.  The timing of symptoms is important. For example, cysts may become more noticeable around menstruation, due to hormonal fluctuations.  A doctor will also examine the cyst or tumor, if possible. They will consider its location, color, how it feels, and whether any material is draining from it.  A doctor may use an  ultrasound  to examine a cyst or tumor located deep within the body. Ultrasound imaging can often show whether a lump is hollow, fluid-filled, or a collection of cells.  In some cases, a doctor may request a biopsy, which involves removing the lump or cells from it. The biopsy will be sent to a laboratory for testing.  While not all cysts and tumors require treatment, a person should have a lump examined if it appears to be growing quickly.  Other potentially dangerous symptoms include:  Tumors and cysts can be a cause for concern, although some are harmless. Cysts are often filled with air or with another type of cell, forming a fluid. Tumors are masses of one type of cell.  Anyone concerned by a lump or growth should see a doctor. They can perform tests, diagnose the lump, and determine whether a person needs treatment.    
 Cysts. (n.d.).  Cysts. (n.d.).  Regezi, J. A., Sciubba, J. J., &amp; Jordan, R. C. K. (2016, February 25).  Oral Pathology: Clinical Pathological Correlations, 7th Edition . Elsevier Health Sciences: Kidlington, UK.  What does the doctor look for on a mammogram? (2017, October 9).  What is a breast cyst? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What is the difference between a cyst and a tumor?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321881.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, May 22). "What is the difference between a cyst and a tumor?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  