 In this article, we look at the symptoms and causes of necrotizing  pancreatitis , as well as how doctors treat it.  Necrotizing pancreatitis occurs when pancreatic tissue dies due to  inflammation . When a person has necrotizing pancreatitis, bacteria may spread into the dead tissue and cause an infection.  The pancreas is an organ behind the stomach that makes enzymes to help digest food. When the pancreas is healthy, these enzymes pass through a duct into the small intestine.  If the pancreas becomes inflamed, these enzymes may leak into the pancreas and damage the tissues. This is called pancreatitis.  If the damage is severe, blood and oxygen may not be able to reach some parts of the pancreas, leading to tissue death.  The primary symptom of necrotizing pancreatitis is abdominal pain. A person may feel abdominal pain in several places, including:  Pain may be severe and can last for several days. Other symptoms that may accompany pain include:  Necrotizing pancreatitis may lead to a bacterial infection and  sepsis  if left untreated.  Sepsis is a condition where a person's body reacts adversely to bacteria in their bloodstream, possibly causing the body to go into shock.  Shock may be life-threatening, as it reduces the blood flow to major organs. This may damage them temporarily or permanently. Without treatment, a person may die from sepsis.  Necrotizing pancreatitis may also cause a pancreatic abscess.  Necrotizing pancreatitis is a complication of  acute pancreatitis . It may happen when acute pancreatitis is untreated, or treatment is ineffective.  Pancreatitis is inflammation of the pancreas. The most common causes of pancreatitis are drinking too much alcohol or having  gallstones . Gallstones are small stones, often made of  cholesterol , that form in the gallbladder.  The two main types of pancreatitis are:  In Europe and North America,  50 percent  of acute pancreatitis cases are caused by gallstones, and  25 percent  are caused by alcohol.  Pancreatitis may also be caused by:  When a person has pancreatitis, digestive enzymes leak into the pancreas. This causes tissue damage and prevents blood and oxygen from reaching those tissues. Left untreated, parts of the pancreas may die.  Nearby bacteria may then infect the dead pancreatic tissue. Infection is what causes some of the more severe symptoms of necrotizing pancreatitis.  To diagnosis necrotizing pancreatitis, a doctor may examine a person's abdomen and ask questions about their symptoms. They may also do blood tests to look for:  They may also use the following tests to look at the pancreas:  If these tests show that a part of the pancreas has died, the doctor may take a biopsy to test for infection.  Doctors treat necrotizing pancreatitis in two stages. Firstly, they treat the pancreatitis. Doctors then treat the part of the pancreas that has died separately.  Treatments for pancreatitis include:  Nasogastric feeding is when a person is fed liquid food through a tube in their nose. Feeding a person in this way gives the pancreas a rest from producing digestive enzymes.  The second stage of treatment for necrotizing pancreatitis targets the dead part of the pancreas.  Doctors may need to remove dead tissue. If the tissue has become infected, a doctor will also prescribe  antibiotics .  To remove dead pancreatic tissue, a doctor may insert a thin tube called a catheter into a person's abdomen. They will remove the dead tissue through this tube. If this does not work, open surgery may be required.  According to a  2014 study , the best time to perform surgery is 3 or 4 weeks after the onset of the condition. However, if a person is very unwell, surgery to remove the dead or infected tissue may need to happen sooner.  If a person develops sepsis from an infection caused by necrotizing pancreatitis, this may be life-threatening. To treat sepsis, a doctor will give a person:  Treating the early signs of infection is the best way to prevent sepsis.  It is not always possible to prevent pancreatitis and its complications. However, they are less likely to occur if a person has a healthy pancreas.  The following may help support the health of a person's pancreas:  If a person has any symptoms of pancreatitis, they should speak to their doctor. Early treatment is the best way to reduce the risk of necrotizing pancreatitis or other complications.  It is essential to recognize the symptoms of necrotizing pancreatitis and speak to a doctor immediately. Getting the right diagnosis and treatment is the best way to reduce complications.  Without treatment, necrotizing pancreatitis may lead to an infection or sepsis. This can lead to life-threatening organ damage.  Necrotizing pancreatitis is very treatable. Treatments target the pancreatitis itself and then the dead or infected tissue. With timely, proper treatment, a person who has had necrotizing pancreatitis should make a full recovery.  Making lifestyle changes to improve pancreatic health is the best way to avoid further problems.    
 Feng, Y-C., Wang, M., Zhu, F., &amp; Qin, R-Y. (2014, November 21). Study on acute recent stage pancreatitis.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  20 (43), 16138–16145.  Feng, Y-C., Wang, M., Zhu, F., &amp; Qin, R-Y. (2014, November 21). Study on acute recent stage pancreatitis.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  20 (43), 16138–16145.  Johnson, C. D., Besselink, M. G., &amp; Carter, R. (2014, August 16) Acute pancreatitis.  BMJ ,  349 , 26–31.  Kylänpää, L., Rakonczay, Z., &amp; O'Reilly, D. A. (2012, December 12). The clinical course of acute pancreatitis and the inflammatory mediators that drive it.  International Journal of Inflammation .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What is necrotizing pancreatitis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321804.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, May 14). "What is necrotizing pancreatitis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  