 In this article, we look at the causes of burning sensations, when to see a doctor, and what treatments are available.  The location of the sensation can give a good indication of its cause. For example, a burning feeling in the muscles may be the result of an injury, while a burning sensation on the skin is likely the result of having come into contact with an allergen or an irritant, such as poison ivy.  Below are some of the most common locations of burning sensations and possible underlying causes:   While urinating   Feeling pain or a burning sensation while urinating is often a sign of a  urinary tract infection  (UTI). UTIs are much  more common  in women, and other symptoms can include a  fever  and a strong, continual urge to urinate.  Infections can affect the bladder, kidneys, or urethra. If left untreated, an infection can spread to other areas of the body. It can also harm the kidneys, and anyone who suspects that they have a UTI should see a doctor. UTIs are usually treated with  antibiotics .  The following can also cause a burning sensation during urination:   Skin   Throughout the day, the skin comes into contact with a range of possible irritants. The following sources of irritation can lead to a burning sensation:  An intense burning sensation on the skin can also be caused by  cellulitis . Cellulitis is a bacterial infection of the deepest layers of skin. It is treated with antibiotics.  Cellulitis can spread quickly, so it is important to receive treatment right away. See a doctor if a burning sensation is accompanied by:   Hands and feet   A burning sensation in the hands and feet is often caused by one of the skin issues mentioned in the previous section.  However, burning in the fingers or toes could be a symptom of nerve damage. The medical community refers to this as peripheral  neuropathy .  Up to  50 percent  of people with  diabetes  may have peripheral neuropathy. A person with diabetes should speak with a doctor if they experience any of the following in the hands or feet:  Some other medical problems that may cause peripheral neuropathy include:   Raynaud's phenomenon  can also cause a burning sensation in the hands and feet. It causes the small arteries in these extremities to spasm and close when exposed to the cold. Consequently, the fingers and toes receive less blood. They can turn white, and a person may feel a burning or stinging sensation, as well as numbness.  This condition can similarly affect the nose, lips, and ears. Symptoms disappear when a person warms themselves, increasing blood flow.   Muscles   A person may feel a burning sensation in certain muscles when lifting weights or doing other strenuous exercises. This is typically due to the release of lactic acid.  A person may also feel this when they try a new exercise or start exercising more often. The soreness and burning sensation may be delayed. These symptoms are usually mild and tend to go away after a few days.  An intense burning sensation may indicate a muscle injury, such as a sprain or strain. If this feeling does not get better over time or spreads to several muscles, a person may have a chronic condition, such as  fibromyalgia .  Other causes of a burning sensation in the muscles include:   Mouth or throat   A burning sensation in the throat is often the result of an infection, such as  strep throat . A person with strep throat may feel worse pain when talking, and the area may feel raw and scratchy. Strep throat is often accompanied by fever, chills, and other cold- or flu-like symptoms.  Strep throat is  common  in children, but relatively uncommon in adults.   Acid reflux  can also cause a burning sensation in the throat. The sensation may be intermittent, but it tends to follow an acidic meal. People with acid reflux may also experience a feeling of burning in the chest, belching, and stomach discomfort.  Burning sensations in the mouth and gums are often the result of irritation caused by:  Canker sores can also cause this feeling. They are small, red or white sores that often appear on the lips or tongue. They can be quite painful but typically go away on their own after several days.   Genitals   A burning sensation in or around the genitals can result from skin irritation, such as that caused by getting soap in the vagina.  Tiny wounds caused by shaving or sexual intercourse can also lead to a temporary feeling of burning.  Infections are often responsible for a burning sensation in the genitals. Yeast infections and  bacterial vaginosis  commonly lead to a feeling of burning, itchiness, and unusual discharge, for example, and bacterial vaginosis can also cause a fishy vaginal odor.  Genital burning can also result from a wide range of STIs.  It is usually safe to wait for a few days and see whether the sensation goes away. See a doctor if the feeling of burning persists.  Contact a doctor within 24 hours if any of the following symptoms occur:  Also, see a doctor if a burning sensation:  Treatment will depend on the cause. For example, many STIs and other infections can be eliminated with antibiotics.  When no cure exists, treatment will involve managing symptoms. Fibromyalgia, for instance, remains poorly understood and difficult to treat. A doctor will develop a plan to alleviate pain and other symptoms.  Work a doctor to find a treatment that works, and report any negative reactions to medication. If symptoms do not improve, ask about other treatment options.  A burning sensation is often a temporary annoyance that disappears on its own. Rashes typically clear up in a few days, and canker sores rarely require medical treatment. Speak with a doctor if symptoms grow worse or last longer than expected.  Anyone who suspects that they have an infection, such as cellulitis or a UTI, should see a doctor as soon as possible. These can spread and become more severe if left untreated.    
 Acid reflux (GER &amp; GERD) in adults. (n.d.).  Acid reflux (GER &amp; GERD) in adults. (n.d.).  ACSM information on delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS). (n.d.).  Bacterial vaginosis (BV). (2016, December 9).  Biundo, J. J. (2017, February). Fibromyalgia.  Canker sores. (2007, December 31).  Dhar, A. D. (2017, August). Cellulitis.  Diabetic neuropathy. (n.d.).  Imam, T. H. (2016, May). Bacterial urinary tract infections (UTIs).  Roth, S. M. (2006, January 23). Why does lactic acid build up in muscles? And why does it cause soreness?  Shah, A. P. (n.d.). Urination, pain or burning with.  Tingling, crawling, burning or prickling in the skin. What is going on here? (2013, April 3).  Worried your sore throat may be strep? (2018, January 31).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What can cause a burning sensation?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321885.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, May 22). "What can cause a burning sensation?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  