 A cold compress can aid in treating:  Different types of compress will help with different injuries. For example, a bag of ice may be too cold to place comfortably on the eye area, while a cool cloth may do nothing for a serious injury.  Read on, to learn more about the benefits of cold compresses, and which types should be used for different ailments.  Several cold compresses can be purchased at a local pharmacy and other retailers. For example, there are specially designed bags that a person can fill with ice at home to make a quick cold compress.  There are also chemical packs that, when broken, freeze similarly to ice. They can be easily included in a first aid kit.  Cold compresses are also easy to make at home, and ice is often a key ingredient. It is a good idea to keep extra ice or even bags of frozen vegetables in the freezer for use in an emergency.  Ice is most effective in the immediate aftermath of an injury. A person should apply and remove the ice compress at intervals for as long as necessary. If symptoms do not improve, contact a doctor.  To make an ice-based compress:  Alternatively, a person can freeze a wet washcloth or towel. To do this:  A person should also consider using the RICE method. This involves resting the injured area, keeping it elevated, and applying a cool compress.  A cold compress does not need to include ice to relieve headaches, in most cases. Instead, a cold, damp towel can be wrapped around the whole head or the site of pain.  An individual can create a cool compress by:  If the feeling of the damp fabric is unpleasant, place the towel in a bag.  The same type of compress can help to reduce fevers. Try placing the compress on the head, neck, or chest, and seek medical attention if the fever does not go down.  A cold or cool compress can help to reduce symptoms of a variety of conditions, including:  Avoid applying compresses containing ice to the eye area or to babies. Otherwise, both children and adults can benefit from the effects.  A cold compress can help to lower the temperature in a certain part of the body while reducing pain and swelling.  Applying ice to an injury restricts blood flow to the area, which can result in:  Cold compresses are usually safe. However, some ailments, such as  arthritis , respond better to heat. In general, injuries that persist for long periods tend to benefit more from warm compresses.  To limit the risks of a cold compress:  Cold compresses are easy to make and use at home.  In a first aid kit, a person may want to include a chemical pack that mimics the effects of ice. Several types of ready-made compresses are available to purchase  online .  When self-care shows few results or when injuries are severe, seek medical attention.    
 Kattan, A. E., Al Shomer, F., Alhujayri, A. K., Addar, A., &amp; Aljerian, A. (2016, November 2). Current knowledge of burn injury first aid practices and applied traditional remedies: A nationwide survey.  Burns &amp; Trauma ,  4 (1), 37.  Kattan, A. E., Al Shomer, F., Alhujayri, A. K., Addar, A., &amp; Aljerian, A. (2016, November 2). Current knowledge of burn injury first aid practices and applied traditional remedies: A nationwide survey.  Burns &amp; Trauma ,  4 (1), 37.  Should you use ice or heat for pain? (2014, August 11).  van den Bekerom, M. P. J., Struijs, P. A. A., Blankevoort, L., Welling, L., van Dijk, C. N., &amp; Kerkhoffs, G. M. M. J. (2012, August). What is the evidence for rest, ice, compression, and elevation therapy in the treatment of ankle sprains in adults?  Journal of Athletic Training ,  47 (4), 435–443.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "How to make and use a cold compress."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321950.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, May 29). "How to make and use a cold compress."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  