 Nipple problems can lead to discomfort from time to time in any individual, but most causes are not serious. Some symptoms, however, could indicate an underlying health condition.  This article explores the symptoms, causes, and treatments for common nipple problems.  Symptoms of nipple problems may include:  There can be several causes of nipple problems. These include the following:  Ectasia is a non-cancerous breast condition in which the milk ducts become wider.  For some people, ectasia may lead to a blockage in the milk duct. This can cause fluid to pool and leak into the surrounding tissue. A blocked milk duct can lead to:  A milk duct infection can cause pain in the breast and a thick, sticky fluid to discharge from the nipple. It may also lead to scar tissue forming. Sometimes, this can result in the nipple being drawn inward or becoming inverted.  Intraductal papilloma is a small, harmless wart-like lump. The lump grows inside the milk duct and is usually close to the nipple. The condition is not cancerous.  Intraductal papilloma may cause blood or a sticky fluid to discharge from the nipple.  Galactorrhea is a milky discharge from one or both nipples that is not related to breast-feeding.  It is a relatively common problem that affects up to  25 percent  of women. Less commonly, anyone, including infants, can develop galactorrhea.  An increase in levels of prolactin, the hormone that stimulates milk production, is often the cause of galactorrhea . Possible reasons for this include:  Low  testosterone  levels may cause galactorrhea in some men.  Lactational mastitis is a condition that can develop in women who are breast-feeding. It causes the breast to become red, painful, and swollen.  Lactational mastitis happens due to poor milk drainage and can result from an injury to the nipple. It leads to swelling of the breast tissue and compression of the milk duct.  The condition can involve an infection, and an abscess may develop behind the nipple. This may cause nipple discharge, which can be difficult to detect, as there is also normal milk production occurring.  Breast abscesses may affect up to  11 percent  of lactating mothers.  Paget disease of the breast is a rare form of  breast cancer . Most commonly, it affects women, but it can also develop in men.  This form of  cancer  may affect the nipple and skin or areola around the nipple. If a person has the condition, they may also have one or more tumors inside the breast.  Symptoms of Paget disease of the breast can include:  Other possible causes of nipple problems include:  People should consult a doctor if they have:  Diagnosis of nipple problems is done in several ways.  Firstly, the doctor will ask about a person's symptoms, any medicine they may be taking, and if they are pregnant or breast-feeding. Next, they may examine a person's breasts.  The doctor should then have an idea of what the problem could be. Depending on what they think the cause could be, the doctor will then conduct one of the following tests:  If none of these tests are conclusive, the doctor may conduct a CT or  MRI scan  to examine the breast further.  There are a number of different treatments available for nipple conditions, depending on the cause.  Treating ectasia symptoms can be done with a warm compress placed on the area. This helps to soothe pain and reduce inflammation.  A course of  antibiotics  may be needed to treat an infection. In more severe cases, surgery may be required to remove the affected milk duct.  Removing the affected milk duct is the method used to treat intraductal papilloma.  Treatments for galactorrhea depend on the underlying cause. If the cause is medication, a doctor may recommend stopping the treatment. They may recommend a suitable alternative medication.  A doctor can also prescribe a medication to reduce prolactin production to treat galactorrhea.  Treatment for lactational mastitis may be antibiotics, which can clear the infection. A doctor will prescribe a type of antibiotic that will not harm the child through the mother's breast milk.  An abscess can be drained using  ultrasound  to locate it or through an incision.  Paget disease of the breast may require a  mastectomy , which is a surgical operation to the remove the affected breast. An alternative to a mastectomy is removal of the nipple followed by  radiation therapy .  Some nipple problems are preventable. The following can help to promote nipple health:  Most nipple problems are not serious and are easily treated. To be safe, people who notice any breast changes should see their doctor so that the correct diagnosis can be made.  Paget disease of the breast is more severe but still treatable. People who notice any symptoms of this condition should see their doctor straightaway.  Starting treatment as soon as possible gives a person the best opportunity to recover fully.    
 Kataria, K., Srivastava, A., &amp; Dhar, A. (2013, December 12). Management of lactational mastitis and breast abscesses: Review of current knowledge and practice.  Indian Journal of Surgery ,  75 (6), 430–435.  Kataria, K., Srivastava, A., &amp; Dhar, A. (2013, December 12). Management of lactational mastitis and breast abscesses: Review of current knowledge and practice.  Indian Journal of Surgery ,  75 (6), 430–435.  Paget disease of the breast. (2012, April 10).  Peña, K. S., &amp; Rosenfeld, J. A. (2001, May 1). Evaluation and treatment of galactorrhea.  American Family Physician ,  63 (9), 1763–1771.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Common nipple problems and their causes."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321927.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, May 26). "Common nipple problems and their causes."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  