 Prednisone is rarely the only  asthma  treatment someone will have. Instead, it is often used along with other medicines, such as inhalers.  In this article, we examine how prednisone helps with treatment of asthma, along with the side effects that it can cause. We also look at the alternative treatment options that are available.  Doctors often prescribe prednisone for acute asthma exacerbations. This is the type of asthma attack where a person cannot breathe well or at all. Acute asthma exacerbations often require emergency medical attention.  When a person has a significant asthma attack, they often experience airway  inflammation  afterward. The airways become puffy and irritated. The effect is more like breathing through a straw than breathing through a wide airway.  A doctor prescribes corticosteroids to reduce the body's inflammatory response after the asthma attack.  Prednisone is a laboratory-made medication, but it works much like the body's steroid hormones. Some people call prednisone "prednisolone," which is the name of the compound the body converts prednisone to so it can be used by the cells.  When a person takes prednisone, the body thinks it is a steroid hormone. These hormones enter the body's cells and create chemical reactions that tell the body to stop making inflammatory compounds.  As a result, a person is ideally able to breathe more easily because their airways are less narrow. They also create less mucus, making it easier to breathe.  Prednisone is a short-acting steroid, with a half-life of  between 18 and 36 hours . Doctors may prescribe prednisone instead of other steroids because it does not last as long in the body. The medicine lasts long enough to help a person overcome their acute asthma symptoms.  An initial dosage of prednisone will be between  5 and 60 milligrams  per day. Doctors can then change the dosage until they find one that has a satisfactory effect.  According to older research, if corticosteroids are given in an emergency department setting within 1 hour of a person arriving, they may be  less likely  to require hospitalization.  When taken in the short term, a person is less likely to experience side effects. Short-term side effects of using prednisone for asthma include:  Taking oral steroids such as prednisone can also increase a person's blood sugar. If someone has  diabetes , this reaction should be taken into account.  People who use steroids for short periods of time do not usually experience any of the  long-term side effects  associated with taking oral steroids. The side effects of long-term use of oral steroids can include:  Doctors rarely prescribe steroids as a long-term asthma treatment, however.  If a doctor does prescribe long-term steroids, a person should never suddenly stop taking them. Doing so can cause symptoms, including dizziness, thirst, and vomiting. Instead, they may need to reduce the dosages slowly before stopping completely.  Usually, doctors do not prescribe prednisone alone for the treatment of asthma. Instead, they often prescribe prednisone alongside other medicines.  One example is beta-2 agonists, such as albuterol, which can reduce airway constriction that occurs in an asthma attack.  Another example is ipratropium, a medication that is administered with a nebulizer or inhaler. Ipratropium causes smooth muscle or airway relaxation to help a person breathe more easily.  Doctors can also administer intravenous steroids if an individual cannot take oral steroids. Examples include intravenous hydrocortisone and methylprednisolone.  In addition to medications, people can help manage their asthma by avoiding triggers that can include:  A doctor may also recommend individual asthma treatments based on a person's overall health.  When a person has asthma, the goal is to help control their attacks so that they are infrequent or do not occur at all. Signs that indicate someone should see a doctor about managing their asthma include:  Many different medications are available to treat asthma. Doctors may need to try different combinations of these medicines to work out what will be most effective for a person.  Prednisone is a short-term medication option to help children and adults who have experienced acute asthma exacerbations. These medications can reduce inflammation by lowering the body's immune response to an asthma attack.  While long-term steroid use can be concerning, short-term use does not typically cause unwanted side effects.  Ideally, a person can adjust their medications and asthma treatment plan after a significant asthma attack to reduce the likelihood of one happening again.    
 Label: Prednisone – prednisone tablet. (2017, January 23).  Label: Prednisone – prednisone tablet. (2017, January 23).  Ledford, D. K. (2015, April 27). Prednisone dose for asthma exacerbation related to IgE concentration.  Normansell, R., Kew, K. M., &amp; Mansour, G. (2016, May 13). Different oral corticosteroid regimens for for acute asthma.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  2016 (5).  Rowe, B. H., Spooner, C., Ducharme, F., Bretzlaff, J., &amp; Bota, G. (2001, January 22). Early emergency department treatment of acute asthma with systemic corticosteroids.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  2001 (1).  Shefrin, A. E., &amp; Goldman, R. D. (2009, July). Use of dexamethasone and prednisone in acute asthma exacerbations in pediatric patients.  Canadian Family Physician ,  55 (7), 704–706.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How does prednisone treat an asthma flare-up?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321924.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, May 25). "How does prednisone treat an asthma flare-up?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  