 Hyperlordosis creates a characteristic C-shaped curve in the lower back, or lumbar region, where the spine curves inward just above the buttocks. It often occurs as a result of poor posture or a lack of exercise.  In this article, we take a look at hyperlordosis and explain its symptoms and treatment. We also provide a list of exercises that may help to relieve symptoms.  Hyperlordosis can cause muscle tightening and stiffness in the lower back. It can also damage the spine and soft tissues in the lumbar region.  A person with hyperlordosis may experience the following symptoms:  Many factors may cause or contribute to hyperlordosis, including:  Poor posture is one of the most common causes of hyperlordosis.  When the body is in a seated position, muscles in the lumbar region can tighten too much as they try to stabilize and support the spinal column. This gradually pulls the spine out of alignment, causing increased curving of the spine.  People with jobs that require them to sit for extended periods may have a higher risk of getting hyperlordosis.   Obesity  results in the presence of excess fat in the abdomen and buttocks. This puts extra strain on the lower back, which may cause the lumbar spine to bend.  In addition to increasing the risk of obesity, a lack of exercise can weaken the core muscles that sit around the trunk and pelvis. Weak muscles are less able to support the spinal column, allowing the spine to curve excessively.  In some cases, hyperlordosis may be the result of other underlying spinal problems, such as kyphosis, spondylolisthesis, and discitis.  It can be difficult to diagnose hyperlordosis as there is a huge variation in natural lower spine curvature (lumbar lordosis) throughout the population.  An X-ray may help to measure the curvature of the spine, but a doctor will request a magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) or computed tomography (CT) scan if they think an abnormality in the soft tissue is responsible for the hyperlordosis.  A doctor may begin by prescribing pain relief and anti-inflammatory medication to relieve the painful symptoms of hyperlordosis.  Longer-term treatment will depend on the cause of the condition. If the hyperlordosis relates to a structural issue with the spine, referral to a physical therapist or back specialist may be necessary.  Where obesity may be a contributing factor, the doctor is likely to devise a weight-loss plan. This may include  physical therapy  exercises that stretch and strengthen core muscles to improve posture.  A  2018 study  investigated the effect of certain exercises on lower spine curvature, back muscle strength, and chronic lower back pain.  The people taking part in the study did a regular 60-minute workout, consisting of eight lumbar stabilization exercises that aimed to strengthen back muscles and increase spine flexibility. They did this workout 3 days a week for 12 weeks.  After 12 weeks, there was a reduction in lower back pain, as well as increased lumbar muscle strength and flexibility. However, there was no significant change in the curvature of the spine.  The workout included the following lumbar stabilization exercises:   Situps    Superman exercise    Quadruped arm and leg raise    Squat    Lower body or reverse plank    Upper body or forearm plank    Side plank    Hip bridge   When working out, it is essential to spend at least 10 minutes warming up and then cooling down.  The results of a  2017 study  show a relationship between abnormal spine curvature and osteoarthritis, or degenerative joint disease (DJD). This is a disease in which the cartilage between the joints breaks down.  It is not clear from the study which of the two conditions causes the other. However, the authors speculate that both hyperlordosis and hypolordosis (where the spine is straighter than it should be) place extra strain on joints, which can cause DJD.  It is best to see a doctor if back pain worsens. Keeping a diary to monitor the severity of the back pain and how it impacts on daily activities may assist the diagnosis.  People should also seek medical advice if they experience any of the following, as these symptoms may indicate an alternative or additional underlying problem:  In most cases, hyperlordosis is due to specific lifestyle factors. Often, maintaining a healthy weight and exercising regularly can improve issues with posture and lower back pain.  If exercise does not alleviate the symptoms of hyperlordosis, it is best to seek medical advice.  Other conditions of the spine can cause or aggravate hyperlordosis, although this is less common. A doctor will carry out a spine examination before making a diagnosis and creating a tailored treatment plan.    
 Ko, K-J., Ha, G-C., Yook, Y-S., &amp; Kang, S-J. (2018). Effects of 12-week lumbar stabilization exercise and sling exercise on lumbosacral region angle, lumbar muscle strength, and pain scale of patients with chronic low back pain.  Journal of Physical Therapy Science ,  30 (1), 18–22.  Ko, K-J., Ha, G-C., Yook, Y-S., &amp; Kang, S-J. (2018). Effects of 12-week lumbar stabilization exercise and sling exercise on lumbosacral region angle, lumbar muscle strength, and pain scale of patients with chronic low back pain.  Journal of Physical Therapy Science ,  30 (1), 18–22.  Lordosis. (n.d.).  Low back pain fact sheet. (2017, May 10).  Murray, K. J., Le Grande, M. R., de Mues, A. O., &amp; Azari, M. F. (2017, August 1). Characterisation of the correlation between standing lordosis and degenerative joint disease in the lower lumbar spine in women and men: A radiographic study.  BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders ,  18 (1), 330.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lillis, Charlotte. "What to know about hyperlordosis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321959.php&gt;    APA  Lillis, C. (2018, May 29). "What to know about hyperlordosis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  