 Some studies suggest that balsamic vinegar has additional health benefits, ranging from improving a person's complexion to lowering  cholesterol  and aiding weight loss.  In this article, we look at the potential health benefits of balsamic vinegar and the scientific research that may give them weight.  The health benefits of balsamic vinegar may include the following:  Balsamic vinegar contains antimicrobial compounds, acetic acid, and  antioxidants . These components may help improve a person's complexion over time.  Other clear vinegars have been topically applied to the skin to help clear up  acne . Balsamic vinegar can cause stains, however, so should not be applied directly to the skin.  Balsamic vinegar helps regulate blood sugar when eaten as part of a meal.   One review  that examined the scientific effects of vinegar found that balsamic vinegar has an antiglycemic impact when consumed, meaning a person's blood sugar will spike less drastically after a meal.  The review indicated that vinegar could help create a blood sugar plateau for a period of up to 5 hours following a meal.  Acetic acid is the active compound in balsamic vinegar. This acid contains strains of probiotics that aid digestion.  The probiotics found in acetic acid can help promote good gut health and digestion while supporting overall immune function.  Balsamic vinegar may help lower cholesterol. The antioxidants in balsamic vinegar help block toxic cells in the body that can raise cholesterol levels.  According to one  study , involving rabbits with high cholesterol, it is possible that consuming balsamic vinegar can help lower or maintain already low cholesterol levels.  The probiotics in balsamic vinegar can also help make a person feel full for longer.  Some  research  indicates that people may consume fewer  calories  throughout the day when they add vinegar to their morning meal.  Balsamic vinegar has been used for many years to help treat wounds. It is suggested that balsamic vinegar has antifungal, antiviral, and antibacterial properties. These claims have not been well studied, however.  One study, although again involving rats, determined that balsamic vinegar may help lower  blood pressure . This  research  suggested that regularly adding balsamic vinegar to foods could help reduce  high blood pressure  over time.  This may be true if a person replaces fatty foods, such as butter and oil, with vinegar, thus lowering the total amount of fats they consume.  Some people use balsamic vinegar to help treat congestion. To do this, a person can add a few drops of vinegar to steaming water and breathe in the vapor.  People can try using balsamic vinegar to help reduce  acid reflux  or  heartburn .  This remedy may not work for everyone, so it is a good idea to try it in small amounts and wait several hours to see whether it makes symptoms better or worse.  Balsamic vinegar is derived from grapes.  Studies  have found that grapes may help prevent cardiac disease by preventing platelets from building up in blood vessels.  Balsamic vinegar also contains polyphenols.  Researchers  are exploring how polyphenols aid in blood circulation, but the evidence is inconclusive so far.  There are few risks to using balsamic vinegar, as it is generally safe to consume unless a person has an allergy. Possible risks include:  A person should limit their intake to about 2 tablespoons or less, as drinking too much can cause an upset stomach and other issues.  People should pay careful attention to the label of the balsamic vinegar they buy. Genuine balsamic may be expensive but does not contain added sugars. Other brands may contain additional sugars to help match the taste of genuine balsamic vinegar.  Balsamic vinegar is usually safe to add to foods. It contains very few calories, is low in sugar, and is fat-free.  In addition, there are several potential health benefits associated with balsamic vinegar. Though more research is still needed to understand these benefits, a person can feel good about making balsamic vinegar a part of a healthful diet.  People can find balsamic vinegar in most grocery stores or health food stores, as well as  online .  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Habauzit, V., &amp; Morand, C. (2012, March). Evidence for a protective effect of polyphenols-containing foods on cardiovascular health: An update for clinicians.  Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease ,  3 (2), 87–106.  Habauzit, V., &amp; Morand, C. (2012, March). Evidence for a protective effect of polyphenols-containing foods on cardiovascular health: An update for clinicians.  Therapeutic Advances in Chronic Disease ,  3 (2), 87–106.  Ho, C. W., Lazim, A. M., Fazry, S., Zaki, U. K. H. H., &amp; Lim, S. J. (2017, April 15). Varieties, production, composition and health benefits of vinegars: A review [Abstract].  Food Chemistry ,  221 , 1621–1630.  Johnston, C. S., &amp; Gaas, C. A. (2006, May 30). Vinegar: Medicinal uses and antiglycemic effect.  Medscape General Medicine ,  8 (2), 61.  Keevil, J. G., Osman, H. E., Reed, J. D., &amp; Folts, J. D. (2000, January). Grape juice, but not orange juice or grapefruit juice, inhibits human platelet aggregation.  The Journal of Nutrition ,  130 (1), 53–56.  Kondo, S., Tayama, K., Tsukamoto, Y., Ikeda, K., &amp; Yamori, Y. (2014, May 22). Antihypertensive effects of acetic acid and vinegar on spontaneously hypertensive rats [Abstract].  Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry ,  65 (12), 2690–2694.  Ndung'u, K., Hibdon, S., Véron, A., &amp; Flegal, A. R. (2011, June 15). Lead isotopes reveal different sources of lead in balsamic and other vinegars.  Science of the Total Environment ,  409 (14), 2754–2760.  Setorki, M., Asgary, S., Eidi, A., rohani, A. H., &amp; KHazaei, M. (2010, January 28). Acute effects of vinegar intake on some biochemical risk factors of atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic rabbits.  Lipids in Health and Disease ,  9 (1), 10.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What are the health benefits of balsamic vinegar?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321906.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, May 24). "What are the health benefits of balsamic vinegar?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  