 A less common problem is when a person eats too much fiber too quickly, which can cause digestive problems. It is important to consume the right amount of fiber each day, spread throughout the day.  High-fiber foods are an essential part of a healthful weight loss diet, and meeting the daily recommended intake of fiber can provide many health benefits.  Read on for the official U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) dietary guidelines, fiber recommendations for weight loss, and tips and a meal plan to help you meet your daily recommended fiber intake.  Fiber is the  carbohydrate  component of plant-based foods that is not digested or absorbed as it moves through the intestine.  The optimal amount of daily fiber intake varies depending on a person's age and sex. The current  Dietary Guidelines for Americans  recommend the following approximate daily intake:  Intakes of fiber are modified for certain groups as energy requirements vary at different life stages. For example, it is recommended that children consume less than adults, with the following lower and upper bounds representing females and males respectively:  Most Americans are not getting enough dietary fiber. A study in 2008 found that the average daily intake was only  16 g  per day.  On the other hand, eating too much fiber can cause bloating, gas, and  constipation . These adverse effects may appear after eating  70 g  of fiber in a day. Excessive fiber intake is uncommon in the United States while consuming too little fiber is considered a "public health concern" by the U. S. Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA).  As well as eating a healthful amount of fiber, it is also essential to ensure that the daily diet is balanced with a variety of nutrients and  vitamins .  The following meal plan ensures that a person can hit or slightly exceed their recommended daily intake of fiber while eating balanced meals:  A person can use the  USDA Food Composition Databases  to find out the fiber composition of a wide variety of foods.  People who want to lose weight are often encouraged to eat fiber-rich foods because they tend to be low in  calories , high in nutrients, and make a person feel full for longer. By adding bulk and slowing digestion, fiber stops a person feeling hungry and minimizes cravings, which is useful when trying to lose weight.  Estimates say that only  5 percent  of Americans meet their daily fiber requirements. Eating more dietary fiber, including fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and legumes is an essential part of maintaining a healthy weight.   Research  shows, however, that merely increasing fiber, mainly through eating more plant-based foods, is not enough on its own for weight loss.  When trying to lose weight, start by aiming to reach the recommended daily allowance by basing meals around fiber-rich foods and including regular exercise.  Be careful with the promise of high fiber dietary supplements promoting weight loss. There is very little  evidence  to support the claims.  When increasing the amount of fiber in the diet, it is best to start slowly, increasing it gradually to allow the digestive system time to get used to it.  Consuming too much fiber, especially very quickly or over a short space of time, is not recommended.  Eating more than  70g per day  is not advised and can lead to adverse effects. Consequences of consuming too much fiber include:  There are two types of fiber: insoluble and soluble.  Insoluble fiber, referred to as cellulose, does not dissolve in water but increases the movement of waste products through the digestive tract, helping to prevent constipation.  Soluble fiber includes pectin and beta-glucans. It dissolves in water to form a gel in the large intestine.  Fiber-rich foods  typically contain  both soluble and insoluble fiber. Healthful sources of fiber include:  Prebiotics occur naturally in foods such as leeks, asparagus, garlic,  onions , wheat, oats, and soybeans.  Fiber is an essential part of a healthful, balanced diet and has many benefits, including:  Fiber  also contains  the prebiotics fructo-oligosaccharides (FOS) and inulin. Prebiotics have a beneficial effect as they encourage the growth and action of probiotics, the beneficial bacteria that live in the gut, and the production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFA).  Fiber intake is best met through eating a range of foods as part of a healthful, balanced diet. Eating more plant-based meals, swapping to wholegrains and snacking on fruit throughout the day will help to reach the recommended daily allowance.  Those not currently eating a lot of fiber should increase the amount gradually over the course of several weeks to help keep any gas and discomfort to a minimum.  Drink plenty of water throughout the day, and always chew food slowly and thoroughly. It takes time for the gastrointestinal system and gut to adjust to changes, including an increase in fiber intake, but the ultimate changes are all for the better.    
 Dahl, W. J. &amp; Stewart, M. L. (2015, November). Position of the Academy of Nutrition and dietetics: Health implications of dietary fiber.  Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,  115 (11), 161–1870.  Dahl, W. J. &amp; Stewart, M. L. (2015, November). Position of the Academy of Nutrition and dietetics: Health implications of dietary fiber.  Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,  115 (11), 161–1870.  Dietary fiber. (n.d.).  Dietary fiber. (2018, March 1).  Dietary fibre. (2018, January).  Dietary guidelines for Americans 2015-2020 (eighth edition). (2015, December).  Fiber–How (n.d.).  Kaiser, K. A., Brown, A. W., Bohan Brown, M. M., Shikany, J. M., Mattes, R. D., &amp; Allison, D. B. (2014, August). Increased fruit and vegetable intake has no discernible effect on weight loss: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  100 (2), 567–576.  Keithley, J. K., Swanson, B., Mikolaitis, S. L., DeMeo, M., Zeller, J. M., Fogg, L., &amp; Adamji, J. (2013, December 30). Safety and efficacy of glucomannan for weight loss in overweight and moderately obese adults.  Journal of Obesity ,  2013 , 1–7.  King, D. E., Mainous, A. G., &amp; Lambourne, C. A. (2012, May). Trends in dietary fiber intake in the United States, 1999–2008 [Abstract].  Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,  112 (5), 642–648.  Shah, M., Chandalia, M., Adams-Huet, B., Brinkley, L. J., Sakhaee, K., Grundy, S. M., &amp; Garg, A. (2009, June). Effect of a high-fiber diet compared with a moderate-fiber diet on calcium and other mineral balances in subjects with type 2 diabetes.  Diabetes Care ,  32 (6), 990–995.  Slavin, J. (2013, April 22). Fiber and prebiotics: Mechanisms and health benefits.  Nutrients ,  5 (4), 1417–1435.  USDA Food Composition Databases. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lewin, Jo. "How much fiber should I eat per day?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321993.php&gt;    APA  Lewin, J. (2018, May 31). "How much fiber should I eat per day?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  