 In most cases, a rash is a temporary symptom that is usually treatable with over-the-counter (OTC) medications and home remedies.  However, some rashes, such as long-lasting, returning, or severe rashes, may be a sign of underlying health conditions that require medical attention and treatment.  In this article, we examine different types of armpit rash and explain the treatment options for each one.  There are many different causes of armpit rash. The most common ones are listed below:  When skin rubs hard against itself or clothing for too long, irritation is likely to occur. Areas of the body where the skin folds over itself or rubs against itself frequently, such as the armpit, are especially prone to chafing.  Chafing rashes are usually:  Many people experience underarm chafing while exercising or wearing clothing that does not fit them properly.  Many people also experience chafing during the spring and summer months because they sweat more in the heat and moist skin is quicker to irritate.  Heat can mix with sweat on the skin and cause an irritation rash commonly called  heat rash .  In most cases, heat rash causes itchy patches of bumps that are:  Many people develop heat rash in their armpits during the warmer months or while in hot climates because the armpits contain lots of sweat glands.  Contact dermatitis occurs when the skin or body comes into contact with an allergen or irritant, sparking an immune response. This allergic reaction usually develops within a few hours of exposure to allergens or irritants.  Contact dermatitis rashes are usually:  There are many different causes of contact dermatitis. Some of the most common include:  Many people develop patches of tiny, red, painful bumps after shaving the underarms. These bumps are usually present in and around the hair follicles.   Eczema  is a non-contagious, chronic condition characterized by skin  inflammation . It occurs most commonly in areas of the body where there are folds in the skin.  Around  30 percent  of the American population, mostly young children and adolescents, have eczema.  Eczema patches are usually:  Eczema rashes tend to last for more than a week. An armpit rash may occur alongside similar patches on other parts of the body, such as the elbows, back of the knees, and neck.  People with eczema may experience flare-ups during certain times of the year or when they are ill or experiencing  stress .  Seborrheic dermatitis is a type of eczema that develops around oil-producing glands. It causes symptoms that are different to those of eczema.  Seborrheic dermatitis rashes are usually:  The skin may also develop white or yellow flakes.  A type of yeast called  Candida  commonly causes fungal infections.  Candida  usually triggers a rash that is:   Ringworm  is a prevalent type of fungal infection that causes a red or silver ring-like rash.  Ringworm rashes may also be:  Most rashes that occur as a result of allergic reactions or general skin irritation respond well to home care. People with these types of rash can try the following remedies:  Some natural therapies and supplements may also help reduce or treat most armpit rashes, but it is worth noting that there is little scientific evidence supporting their use.   Alternative home remedies  for treating armpit rashes include:  Several of the conditions that cause armpit rashes require treatment using OTC medications.  OTC remedies for allergic reactions and other skin irritations include:  Armpit rashes that appear as a result of chronic skin conditions often require medical treatment. However, in most cases, a doctor will recommend trying a mixture of OTC and at-home remedies before prescription medications.  Prescription treatment options for people with eczema include:  People may choose to use only personal care and cleaning products that have the National Eczema Association's  Seal of Acceptance .  Treatment options for people with seborrheic dermatitis include:  Understanding what causes armpit rashes may help to minimize their severity.  General tips for preventing underarm rashes include:  With proper care, most armpit rashes do not cause any complications.  Without this care, however, scarring and infection may develop. Scarring from armpit rashes usually occurs when people scratch their rash too much or allow an infection to develop.  Chronic or severe rashes, or those that do not go away with basic treatment, tend to come with a broader range of complications.  For example, there is a long list of allergic conditions that relate to eczema, including  asthma  and allergic contact dermatitis. Also, severe or untreated fungal and bacterial infections can lead to life-threatening complications, including  sepsis  and organ failure.  People with a severe or chronic rash should always talk to a doctor as soon as possible to determine its cause and potential treatment options.  People with rashes that appear without an apparent cause or do not go away with primary treatment should also speak with a doctor.  Certain types of rashes are the result of serious medical conditions that require emergency treatment, such as severe infection or allergic reactions. These rashes are quite rare though.  Seek emergency medical care for rashes that:    
 12 summer skin problems you can prevent. (n.d.).  12 summer skin problems you can prevent. (n.d.).  Complementary and alternative treatments. (n.d.).  Eczema (atopic dermatitis). (2017, April 19).  Eczema treatment. (n.d.).  Oakley, A. (2017, October). Seborrheic dermatitis.  Prescription topical treatment. (n.d.).  Rash 101 in adults: When to seek treatment. (n.d.).  Ringworm. (n.d.).  SOA criteria. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What causes an underarm rash?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321907.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, May 24). "What causes an underarm rash?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  