 The pain caused by Eagle syndrome is a type of nerve pain, which means it is caused by unusual nerve signals, not damage to the painful area.  The pain is typically a dull and throbbing ache that may include a feeling that something is stuck in the throat. Some people also experience  tinnitus  and neck pain.  According to the Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center (GARD), about  4 percent  of the population has an unusually long styloid process. However, only between 4 and 10 percent of these people — around 1 in 62,000 people — have any symptoms. GARD also note that Eagle syndrome is more common in women than in men, with about three times as many women as men having symptoms.  In this article, we examine the symptoms of Eagle syndrome along with the possible causes. We also look at how the condition can be treated with surgery and managed without it.  Many people have an unusually-shaped styloid process but no symptoms. When symptoms do appear, they often include:  Some people experience other symptoms, such as unusual sensations in the head or the neck.  In most people, an elongated styloid process bone is the culprit in Eagle syndrome. Some people develop a long styloid process after a throat injury or surgery. In others, this is merely an anatomical difference or a change related to age. An elongated styloid process may put pressure on the throat and compress nearby nerves or blood vessels, causing pain.  Other causes of Eagle syndrome include:  Surgery to shorten the styloid process is the  primary treatment  for Eagle syndrome. This procedure, called a styloidectomy, can be done  through the mouth or neck .  Surgery through the mouth  requires  removal of the tonsils , and it can be more difficult for the surgeon to access the styloid process. There is also a slightly increased risk of damage to surrounding blood vessels.  Surgery through the neck offers better access to the styloid process but will produce a scar. It can also damage surrounding parts of the body and nerves of the face.  Some doctors now offer endoscopic surgery, which uses a tube with a camera attached to access the styloid process.  A  2017 study  that examined this process found that 107 of 133 people who had the surgery experienced complete relief of symptoms, with an additional 20 getting partial relief. A total of 122 were satisfied with the appearance of the small cut afterward. These findings suggest that this surgery may be a good option for reducing symptoms.  No surgery is risk-free, and not all styloidectomies work. Some people may choose to find other strategies to manage their symptoms or do not get relief from surgery.  Some strategies that may help with pain management include:  Eagle syndrome is a type of nerve pain, meaning that there is not an injury to the painful area. As a result, massage, exercise, and other strategies that target the painful area are unlikely to help.  A doctor may suspect Eagle syndrome based on the symptoms that a person presents. However, it is essential that doctors rule out other possible causes of pain in this area of the body, such as:  A doctor may ask about symptoms, take a complete medical history, and perform a physical examination. Imaging studies, such as X-rays, can help a doctor view the styloid process and surrounding structures.  In some cases, a doctor may be able to feel an unusually long styloid process pushing into the throat.  About  80 percent  of people who seek treatment for Eagle syndrome get relief, regardless of the treatment they receive.  For people who undergo surgery, the outlook may be even better. According to one  study , around 95 percent of people receiving endoscopic surgery for Eagle syndrome said that their symptoms were either wholly or partially relieved.  For people who choose not to undergo surgery or for whom surgery does not work, Eagle syndrome may be a chronic condition. With medical management, symptoms can improve but are unlikely to disappear completely.  Eagle syndrome is not a progressive illness and will not cause other medical conditions. However, some people find that the pain gets worse with time, or that it spreads to other areas of the body.  Living with chronic pain can also cause  depression ,  anxiety , and relationship problems. People who do not get full pain relief may benefit from support groups, therapy, and other forms of psychological support.  Eagle syndrome can be frustrating, making it painful to talk, eat, or even turn the head.  A person with this condition may worry that something is seriously wrong and delay medical treatment out of fear. However, Eagle syndrome is highly treatable, with excellent outcomes for most people who seek treatment.  Anyone who experiences symptoms associated with Eagle syndrome should see a doctor who specializes in pain conditions, or ask a dentist or primary care physician for a referral.    
 Chen, R., Liang, F., Han, P., Cai, Q., Yu, S., &amp; Huang, X. (2017, July). Endoscope-assisted resection of elongated styloid process through a retroauricular incision: A novel surgical approach to Eagle syndrome [Abstract].  Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery ,  75 (7), 1442–1448.  Chen, R., Liang, F., Han, P., Cai, Q., Yu, S., &amp; Huang, X. (2017, July). Endoscope-assisted resection of elongated styloid process through a retroauricular incision: A novel surgical approach to Eagle syndrome [Abstract].  Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery ,  75 (7), 1442–1448.  Eagle syndrome. (2017, April 18).  Elmas, F., &amp; Shrestha, B. L. (2017, September 28). Eagle's syndrome.  New England Journal of Medicine ,  377 (13), e18.  Gallaway, E., Bayoumi, S., Hammond, D., &amp; Halsnad, M. (2017, August 1). Case report: An atypical presentation of Eagle syndrome.  Journal of Surgical Case Reports ,  2017 (8).  Moon, C.-S., Lee, B.-S., Kwon, Y.-D., Choi, B.-J., Lee, J.-W., Lee, H.-W., … Ohe, J.-Y. (2014, February 25). Eagle's syndrome: A case report.  Journal of the Korean Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons ,  40 (1), 43–47.  Politi, M., Toro, C., &amp; Tenani, G. (2009). A rare cause for cervical pain: Eagle's syndrome.  International Journal of Dentistry ,  2009 , 1–3.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What is Eagle syndrome?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321946.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, May 29). "What is Eagle syndrome?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  