 In a complete dislocation, the humerus is knocked totally out of the socket.  The shoulder is the most mobile joint in the body. It contains a number of bones, ligaments, and muscles that work together to keep it stable. Because the shoulder is so mobile, it is very susceptible to dislocation.  A shoulder subluxation is often the result of trauma, injury, or a  stroke  that weakens the arm muscles.  In this article, we discuss the symptoms and treatments of a shoulder subluxation. We also describe the recovery process and exercises that can help.  A subluxation can be more difficult to identify than a complete dislocation. However, in some cases, the partially dislocated humerus is visible under the skin.  A person may be able to feel the ball of the humerus moving in and out of the shoulder socket, which is usually uncomfortable and can be painful.  Symptoms of a shoulder subluxation can include:  Also, a person may also notice a clicking or catching sensation in the shoulder while performing daily activities, especially those that involve reaching overhead.  Because the shoulder moves in several directions, it can dislocate forward, backward, or downward. This is also true for subluxations.  When a dislocation is partial, the shoulder capsule can be stretched or torn, which may complicate the dislocation.  Typically, only a forceful blow or fall can cause the humerus to pop out of place. Extreme rotation can also pull the arm from its socket.  Once a shoulder is dislocated, the joint can become unstable and prone to future dislocations or subluxations.  A shoulder subluxation is often caused by:  Younger men and other highly physically active groups have the greatest risk of a subluxation.  Treatment aims to reposition the humerus back into the socket and ensure that it stays in place.  A doctor can diagnose a shoulder subluxation using an  ultrasound . A correct diagnosis is key in determining the best course of treatment.  Treatment can include the following:  The strengthening exercises below may help to increase the stability of the shoulder joint. However, a physical therapist can prescribe a home exercise regimen tailored to each person's needs.  The following exercises may help to increase shoulder stability:  Speak with a physical therapist or doctor before attempting any exercises at home. Appropriate exercises vary, depending on the injury. Certain exercises can make some people's symptoms worse.  Beyond exercises, a physical therapist may recommend the following:  When an injured person has a subluxation with no major nerve or tissue damage, the shoulder joint should improve quickly. However, if a person becomes active too soon, they are likely to experience a future dislocation.  Following surgery for a dislocated shoulder, a doctor will often recommend that a person wears a sling for several weeks. Gradually introducing  physical therapy  can help an individual to regain strength and range of motion. It is best to avoid intense movements of the shoulder to prevent complications.  The shoulder contains strong connective tissue, muscles, and ligaments that work to keep the humerus centered in its socket. These structures can become overstretched or injured, which may complicate a subluxation or dislocation.  Some complications of a shoulder subluxation include:  A shoulder subluxation shares some symptoms with similar injuries. Misdiagnosis is common.  A subluxation may be mistaken for the following:   Biceps tendinopathy   This refers to  inflammation  of the biceps tendon. Due to the position of the tendon, biceps tendinopathy is a common cause of shoulder pain.   Collarbone injuries    Fracture  or injury to the clavicle, commonly called the collarbone, may lead to pain in the shoulder and trouble moving the joint.   Rotator cuff injury   Injuries to the rotator cuff tendon are often responsible for shoulder pain in people of all ages. Minor injuries may heal on their own, while severe injuries tend to require surgery.   Shoulder dislocation   A dislocation involves a complete separation of the upper arm bone from the shoulder socket. Symptoms are similar to those of a subluxation, and only a medical professional may be able to distinguish the two.   Swimmer's shoulder   Shoulder pain in competitive swimmers is often called swimmer's shoulder. Because swimming requires a high level of shoulder flexibility and range of motion, swimmers are often likely to have hypermobility of the joint and an increased risk of injury.  When a person seeks medical attention promptly and receives a correct diagnosis, a shoulder subluxation is treatable.  When no surgery is recommended,  several months  may pass before a person can tell how well the treatment is working.  Recovery time varies, depending on the extent of the subluxation and whether or not a person has undergone surgery.  In the aftermath of a subluxation, a person should avoid strenuous activity, to prevent a recurrence.    
 Arya, K. N., Pandian, S., Vikas, &amp; Puri, V. (2018). Rehabilitation methods for reducing shoulder subluxation in post-stroke hemiparesis: A systematic review.  Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation ,  25 (1), 68–81.  Arya, K. N., Pandian, S., Vikas, &amp; Puri, V. (2018). Rehabilitation methods for reducing shoulder subluxation in post-stroke hemiparesis: A systematic review.  Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation ,  25 (1), 68–81.  Chronic shoulder instability. (2013, December).  Rehabilitation after shoulder dislocation. (2013, April).  Shoulder subluxation. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Brosek, Shannon. "What to know about shoulder subluxation."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321902.php&gt;    APA  Brosek, S. (2018, May 24). "What to know about shoulder subluxation."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  