 Researchers know relatively little about how eating large amounts of monoglycerides affects the body. However, as food additives, monoglycerides are considered safe.  In this article, we take a close look at monoglycerides, including their function, which foods contain them, whether they are safe, and who should avoid them.  Monoglycerides are a type of glyceride. They are made up of glycerol and one fatty acid chain.  Triglycerides are very similar, except they have three fatty acid chains. Triglycerides convert temporarily into monoglycerides and diglycerides during digestion.  Monoglycerides are found naturally in almost all foods in very small amounts. They are a type of fat, meaning that they can be either saturated or unsaturated.  Some monoglycerides and diglycerides are also extracted from plant or animal fats and oils and used as food additives.  Monoglycerides and diglycerides are emulsifiers, meaning that they stop water and oil from separating. This makes them a useful addition to many processed foods.  According to a 2017, approximately  70 percent  of the emulsifiers used by the food industry in the United States are monoglycerides and diglycerides.  Manufacturers add emulsifiers to packaged and processed food to:  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (USDA), also allows monoglycerides and diglycerides to be added to commercially sold foods to help:  Tiny amounts of monoglycerides are in any food that contains plant or animal fats or oils.  Small amount of monoglycerides are also found in a wide variety of packaged and prepared foods products, including:  The  FDA  classifies monoglycerides as 'generally recognized as safe' or GRAS, as food additives and ingredients, meaning that they do not pose an immediate health risk.  Currently, food producers mostly use monoglycerides and diglycerides in small amounts, so it is hard to say how eating large amounts of these types of fat will impact human health.  Monoglycerides contain small amounts of trans fats. Trans fats occur naturally in many types of meat and dairy and, to a lesser extent, in plant- or nut-based oils.  Trans fats in small quantities are not a cause for concern. However, eating significant amounts of trans fats has been linked to an increased risk of  coronary heart disease  and  stroke .  But, because monoglycerides are a type of fat, eating a lot of foods high in them may not be healthy. Also, many of the foods that include added emulsifiers also contain a lot of saturated and trans fat, such as baked goods and fried foods.  During the manufacturing process, monoglyceride and diglyceride mixtures can also become contaminated with very small quantities of toxins, such as:  The following people may wish to avoid foods with added monoglycerides:  According to the available research, eating small amounts of monoglycerides and diglycerides does not seem to cause serious health complications, and the FDA approves their use.  People do not typically eat large quantities of monoglycerides, so it is hard to say the real impact this type of fat has on human health.  Because it is a type of fat, a diet rich in monoglycerides is very likely to be associated with the same long-term risks as triglycerides and trans fats, including heart and circulation conditions.    
 CFR — Code of Federal Regulations Title 21. (2017, August 14).  CFR — Code of Federal Regulations Title 21. (2017, August 14).  Glycerides (mono and di). (2015, January 27).  Rarokar, N. R., Menghani, S., Kerzare, D., &amp; Khedekar, P. B. (2017, July 25). Progress in synthesis of monoglycerides for use in food and pharmaceuticals.  Journal of Experimental Food Chemistry ,  3 (3), 1–6.  Younes, M., Aggett, P., Aguilar, F., Crebelli, R., Dusemund, B., Filipič, M., ... Lambré. C. (2017, November 10). Re‐evaluation of mono‐and di‐glycerides of fatty acids (E 471) as food additives.  EFSA Journal ,  15 (11), e05045.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What are monoglycerides and are they safe?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321912.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, May 25). "What are monoglycerides and are they safe?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  