 Benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) is a common condition in older people. The prostate grows bigger and impedes the flow of urine. It causes urinary tract and bladder symptoms that gradually get worse over time.  Saw palmetto, or  Serenoa repens , is a plant that people use as a natural remedy. Native Americans used to take the herb to enhance fertility and treat urinary tract issues. According to  The New England Journal of Medicine , over  2 million men  in the United States use the herb to treat BPH and other prostate issues. However, there is limited research to support its efficacy.  Read on to learn more about taking saw palmetto for BPH.  Saw palmetto seems to slow down the production of a particular enzyme called 5-alpha reductase, this enzyme converts  testosterone  into dihydrotestosterone ( DHT ) in the prostate gland.  Although DHT plays a vital role in the development of the prostate, it can also  lead to  prostate issues such as BPH.  Many people believe that taking saw palmetto will reduce their BPH symptoms by blocking DHT production.  However, there is a lack of evidence to confirm that saw palmetto benefits prostate health.  Although some early research suggested that saw palmetto could benefit people with BPH symptoms, later studies contradicted these findings.  A  study  published in 2011 followed the progress of 306 men with moderate BPH symptoms over 72 weeks as they took either saw palmetto fruit extracts or a  placebo . The results showed that there was no significant difference in the results between the two groups.  Even when the participants took a triple dose of saw palmetto instead of the standard dose of 320 milligrams (mg) common in earlier research, the participants experienced no significant benefits.  These findings support  2006 research , which found no improvement in BPH symptoms after 12 months of saw palmetto use.  A  2012 Cochrane review  of 32 randomized controlled trials involving 5,666 men further disputes the efficacy of saw palmetto in treating symptoms of BPH. The review states that saw palmetto does not improve excessive night-time urination (nocturia), peak urine flow, or other urinary symptoms when compared with a placebo.  People often use saw palmetto to treat other health conditions, such as:  The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH)  state  that there is no scientific evidence to suggest that saw palmetto is effective for any health condition, despite its popularity as an herbal remedy.  There are more effective treatments for these problems. It is always best to speak to a doctor before taking any herbal medication or supplement.  Saw palmetto causes relatively few side effects. It may occasionally lead to mild symptoms such as digestive upset,  bad breath , or  headaches .  Even when people take high doses of up to 960 mg,  studies show  that saw palmetto does not typically trigger severe reactions.  However, there are rare cases of people associating saw palmetto with their liver problems so anyone who has or had liver disease should avoid taking it.  The herb is also  unlikely  to interact with medications, but there are no studies to prove it is safe. Therefore, individuals who are taking any other medications and wish to try saw palmetto should check with their doctor first. There is some risk of saw palmetto interacting with  aspirin  or blood-clotting drugs.  Finally, studies to date have focused on males using saw palmetto. There is not much information available on the effects or safety of the herb in females or children.  People with BPH may wish to try medical treatments, especially when their symptoms are severe or natural remedies do not work.  Factors that will affect the choice of medical treatment include the person's age, the size of their prostate, and the severity of their symptoms.  Treatment options include:  Several medications are available to treat BPH when symptoms are mild or moderate, including:  Sometimes, a doctor may recommend taking a combination of 5-alpha reductase inhibitors and alpha-blockers.  Surgical treatments may be necessary if medications do not work or if symptoms are severe. There are many types of surgery that can treat BPH, and the choice of procedure will depend on the person's health and symptoms.  It is possible to use minimally invasive surgeries and procedures for:  Another option is open surgery, which will involve making an incision in the lower abdomen to remove prostate tissue. As this procedure carries some risk, it is generally reserved for those with very large prostates or with bladder damage.  Laser therapy involves using a strong beam of light radiation to remove excess prostate tissue. This procedure usually provides immediate relief from symptoms and is less risky than open surgery.  Lifestyle changes and home remedies can alleviate the symptoms of an enlarged prostate. People with BPH can try:  Individuals who notice changes in their urinary habits should see a doctor, even if the symptoms do not cause discomfort. Any changes can suggest an underlying medical condition that may require prompt treatment. It is best to talk to a doctor before taking any herb or medication.  Untreated urinary issues can lead to complications such as an obstruction in the urinary tract, which prevents urination. People who cannot pass any urine need emergency medical treatment.  Most people will see an improvement in BPH symptoms following treatment. To prevent symptoms from returning or worsening, a doctor may recommend taking medication on a long-term basis. Sometimes, repeat treatments  may be necessary  to control symptoms.  Many men will also feel better when they make lifestyle changes, such as eating healthily, exercising, and training the bladder.    
 Avins, A.L., Lee, J.Y., Meyers, C.M., &amp; Barry, M.J. (2013, April). Safety and toxicity of saw palmetto in the complementary and alternative medicine for urological symptoms (CAMUS) trial.  Journal of Urology ,  189 (4), 1415–1420.  Avins, A.L., Lee, J.Y., Meyers, C.M., &amp; Barry, M.J. (2013, April). Safety and toxicity of saw palmetto in the complementary and alternative medicine for urological symptoms (CAMUS) trial.  Journal of Urology ,  189 (4), 1415–1420.  Barry, M. J., Meleth, S., Lee, J. Y., Kreder, K. J., Avins, A. L., Nickel, J. C., ... McVary, K. T. (2011, September 28). Effect of increasing doses of saw palmetto extract on lower urinary tract symptoms: A randomized trial.  JAMA ,  306 (12), 1344–1351. Retrieve from  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3326341/   Bent, S., Kane, C., Shinohara, K., Neuhaus, J., Hudes, E. S., Goldberg, H., &amp; Avins, A. L. (2006, February 9). Saw palmetto for benign prostatic hyperplasia.  New England Journal of Medicine ,  354 , 557–566.  Carson, C., &amp; Rittmaster, R. (2003, April). The role of dihydrotestosterone in benign prostatic hyperplasia [Abstract].  Urology ,  61 (4 Supp 1), 2–7.  Saw palmetto. (2016, September).  Tacklind, J., MacDonald, R., Rutks, I., Stanke, J. U., &amp; Wilt, T. J. (2012, December 12). Serenoa reopens for benign prostatic hyperplasia [Abstract]. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,  12 .  What happens after treatment? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Can saw palmetto reduce enlarged prostate?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321911.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, May 24). "Can saw palmetto reduce enlarged prostate?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  