 According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), above-average temperatures or unusually humid weather kills  more than 600  people in the United States each year.  As temperatures rise, it is important to know how to avoid heat-related illnesses. Learn about the symptoms and treatments of heatstroke and heat exhaustion below.  These conditions both result from overexposure to extremely hot weather. However, only heatstroke can cause damage to the body's systems.  Heatstroke, also called sunstroke, is the most serious heat-related illness. It occurs when the body's temperature is 104ºF or higher, and it is a life-threatening medical emergency.  If not treated immediately, heatstroke can damage multiple organs and systems, including the:  Heat exhaustion is less serious than heatstroke. Anyone who suspects that they have heat exhaustion should immediately rest and rehydrate. If symptoms do not improve, seek medical attention to prevent heatstroke.  Symptoms of heat exhaustion and heatstroke may develop quickly or over several days. They can cause significant distress, and muscle cramping often occurs first.  Heat exhaustion can lead to:  Heatstroke may begin with symptoms of heat exhaustion. It can be life-threatening, and symptoms may rapidly worsen, to include:  There are  two types  of heatstroke: exertional and non-exertional.  Non-exertional heatstroke occurs in those who cannot adapt well to increasingly hot temperatures. Older adults, people with chronic illnesses, and infants are often affected.  A person typically experiences this type of heatstroke when they are indoors without air conditioning, and they may not be engaging in any physical activity. It can take several days of high temperatures for non-exertional heatstroke to occur, and it is common during extreme heat waves.  Exertional heatstroke occurs in people whose bodies can no longer adapt to rising temperatures while exercising or working. This condition can develop within a few hours, and it usually affects people who are spending time outdoors.  Spending time in closed cars puts small children and pets at high risk of heatstroke. The CDC estimate that when the temperature outdoors is 80ºF, the temperature inside a closed car rises to  109ºF within 20 minutes . The hotter it is outside, the faster the temperature rises inside a vehicle.  Anyone experiencing any symptoms of heatstroke should seek emergency medical attention.  If a person suspects that they have heat exhaustion, they should try to reverse the condition by moving into a cooler environment, resting, staying hydrated, and changing into cooler clothes.  If symptoms get worse or do not improve  within 1 hour , seek immediate medical care.  A doctor will likely be able to diagnose a heat-related illness based on symptoms. They may also perform tests to check for potential complications.  For example, a doctor may test for:  Anyone who suspects that they have heat exhaustion should immediately take steps to cool down. These can include:  If a person vomits or feels nauseous, seek medical attention.  If a person exhibits any symptom of heatstroke, contact emergency services immediately. To treat it, a doctor may:  Certain factors can make a person more likely to experience heat exhaustion or heatstroke. These include:  When temperatures rise, it is important to know how to prevent heat-related illnesses. The goal is to keep the body cool.  The following strategies can help:  No one should remain alone in a parked car in extremely hot weather. Doing so could be especially dangerous for children and people aged 65 and older.  With appropriate, timely treatment, a person can fully recover from heat-related illnesses.  Recognizing symptoms of heat exhaustion and taking steps to cool down can prevent the condition from developing into heatstroke.  If left untreated, heatstroke can result in serious complications or death. When a person receives the right treatment early enough, they can fully recover from heatstroke.  Even on the hottest days, these illnesses can usually be prevented by planning and taking precautions.    
 About extreme heat. (2017, June 19).  About extreme heat. (2017, June 19).  Extreme heat. (2018, May 21).  Heat exhaustion and heatstroke. (2017, February 14).  Heat-related illnesses (heat cramps, heat exhaustion, heat stroke). (n. d.).  Infographic: Beat the heat. (2017, July 20).  Miyake, Y. (2013, May–June). Pathophysiology of heat illness: Thermoregulation, risk factors, and indicators of aggravation.  The Japan Medical Association Journal ,  56 (3), 167–173.  Mozzini, C., Xotta, G., Garbin, U., Pasini, A. M. F., &amp; Cominacini, L. (2017, October 4). Non-exertional heatstroke: A case report and review of the literature.  The American Journal of Case Reports ,  18 , 1058–1065.  The difference between heat exhaustion and heatstroke. (n.d.).  Warning signs and symptoms of heat-related illness. (2017, November 3).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is the difference between heatstroke and heat exhaustion?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321972.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, May 30). "What is the difference between heatstroke and heat exhaustion?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  