 The spleen is under the rib cage on the left side of the body. It is part of the lymphatic system and plays a part in helping the body fight off disease. This role means it can also be considered part of the immune system.  The spleen performs the following functions for the body:  It is also possible to live without a spleen, although it is a very important organ.  Doctors may remove the spleen due to injury or illnesses, including  cancer . When this happens, someone's life is not substantially changed, but they may become more susceptible to infection and need to take precautions.  Cancer that first starts in the spleen is a rare occurrence.  Researchers believe it happens in less than  2 percent of all lymphomas and 1 percent  of all non-Hodgkin  lymphomas .  A form of cancer that does develop in the spleen is called splenic marginal zone lymphoma or SMZL, which is considered a kind of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.  Since most cancers affecting the spleen are cancers that spread from another place, understanding the causes of spleen cancer means looking at what causes these other diseases.  Most cancers that start in the spleen are a kind of lymphoma or  leukemia . Most of the time, it is not possible to find a specific cause of lymphoma, according to  Lymphoma Action .  Researchers have, nonetheless, identified factors that may increase the risk of developing lymphoma, including:  Several studies have  identified a link  between chronic infection with the  hepatitis C  virus, and the risk of developing a specific kind of cancer known as B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, which can lead to spleen cancer.  Researchers have also identified possible links between spleen cancer and environmental hazards, such as thorium dioxide or monomer vinyl chloride.  People with spleen cancer can have a variety of symptoms or none at all in some cases. Roughly  25 percent of people with SMZL  do not show symptoms.  The most common symptoms of spleen cancer are:  It is essential, however, to remember that an enlarged spleen does not necessarily mean that an individual has spleen cancer.  Spleen cancer is very often due to lymphomas and non-Hodgkin lymphoma in particular, so it is helpful to be aware of signs of this disease.  Signs include:  People with any of the symptoms listed above should see a doctor for checks and treatment if it is necessary.  Keep in mind that some thing other than cancer many cause these symptoms. For example, an infection can lead to swollen lymph nodes.  Since there is no screening test for spleen cancer, and the disease can develop without symptoms, it is always wise to have a doctor check any signs that are concerning.  Doctors use a variety of tools to diagnose spleen cancer. The most direct and conclusive method is surgical removal and testing of a sample of the spleen tissue. This is also the most invasive, and doctors prefer to use other approaches first.  Alternatives include:  Doctors will be looking for clues to help them diagnose and possibly treat spleen cancer while interviewing the individual about:  Common treatments for spleen cancer include:  Historically, splenectomy was often the first treatment used, and  studies have shown that most people  who had this surgery did not need any further treatment for 5 years.  However, treatment with a human-made antibody called rituximab has been shown to be almost as effective as surgery at reducing symptoms in people with SMZL. Also, it may be easier to use than surgery.  Individuals without symptoms do not necessarily need to receive treatment, but they are urged to see their doctor every 6 months for blood tests and evaluation. This approach is sometimes called "watchful waiting."  Doctors have linked chronic hepatitis C infections to spleen cancer and other forms of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. So, taking action to avoid Hepatitis C can help people reduce their risk of this disease.  Hepatitis C is carried in the blood, so it is essential to:  Infection with  HIV  and HTLV-1 may also increase the risk of developing non-Hodgkin lymphoma and spleen cancer. Following safe sex guidelines and the same preventive measures used against Hepatitis C can be effective against carrying these viruses.  Eating a lot of high-fat foods, and the resulting excess weight gain, have both been linked to a greater risk of developing non-Hodgkin lymphoma.  Adopting a healthful, low-fat diet and maintaining a suitable weight are positive self-care practices that can reduce the risk of developing many other serious and chronic diseases too.  The outlook for people with spleen cancer depends on:  SMZL is described by scientists as "indolent," which means it usually grows slowly, and has a positive influence on overall outlook. About  30 percent  of the time, however, individuals develop a more aggressive form of the disease.  For a more personalized outlook, people should see their doctor, as soon as symptoms present themselves.    
 Can non-Hodgkin lymphoma be prevented? (2016, May 31).  Can non-Hodgkin lymphoma be prevented? (2016, May 31).  Causes of lymphoma. (n.d.).  Dos Santos, T.S., Tavares, R. S., &amp; de Farias, D. L. C. (2017, April–June). Splenic marginal zone lymphoma: A literature review of diagnostic and therapeutic challenges.  Revista Brasileira de Hematologia e Hemoterapia ,  39 (2), 146–154.  Fotiadis, C., Georgopoulos, I., Stoidis, C., &amp; Patapis, P. (2009, June). Primary tumors of the spleen.  International Journal of Biomedical Science ,  5 (2), 85–91.  How can I prevent getting Hepatitis C? (2016, October).  Iannitto, E., &amp; Tripodo, C. (2011, March 3). How I diagnose and treat splenic lymphomas.  Blood ,  117 (9), 2585–2587.  Ingle, S. B., &amp; Hinge (Ingle), C. R. (2016, December 16). Primary splenic lymphoma: Current diagnostic trends.  World Journal of Clinical Cases ,  4 (12), 385–389.  Jacob, H. S. (n.d.). Overview of the spleen.  Kaza, R. K., Azar, S., Al-Hawary, M. M., &amp; Francis, I. R. (2010, August 13). Primary and secondary neoplasms of the spleen.  Cancer Imaging ,  10 (1), 173–182.  Signs and symptoms of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. (2016, May 31).  Spleen cancer. (n.d.).  Tasleem, S., &amp; Sood, G. K. (2015, June 28). Hepatitis C associated B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma: Clinical features and the role of antiviral therapy.  Journal of Clinical and Translational Hepatology ,  3 (2), 134–139.  What does the spleen do? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "What are the symptoms of cancer of the spleen?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321951.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, May 29). "What are the symptoms of cancer of the spleen?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  