 A  vitamin D  deficiency can affect both physical and  mental health , but many people have low levels of  vitamin  D without realizing. The physical symptoms of a deficiency may include muscle pain in the joints, including  rheumatoid arthritis  (RA) pain, which often occurs in the knees, legs, and hips.  In this article, we look at the evidence for a link between vitamin D and joint pain. We discuss how people can obtain vitamin D and what their daily intake should be.  Vitamin D is a nutrient that helps regulate the amount of  calcium  in the body. This vitamin is crucial for bone health.  A deficiency of vitamin D causes bones to soften and become weak. This is called osteomalacia in adults and  rickets  in children. Vitamin D can also help prevent  osteoporosis , which is another condition that weakens bones.  In addition, the vitamin may affect the immune system and could help to manage autoimmune conditions such as RA,  Type 1 diabetes , and  multiple sclerosis  (MS).  Symptoms of vitamin D deficiency vary from person to person. Typical symptoms include:  Vitamin D is vital for bone and muscle function and may have anti-inflammatory effects. As a result, many people believe that vitamin D plays a role in relieving joint pain, particularly where  inflammation  is the cause.  Some research links vitamin D deficiency to RA, which is a chronic inflammatory condition that affects the joints.  However, a large-scale Cochrane study from  2015  concluded that the current evidence is not strong enough to establish a definite link between vitamin D deficiency and chronic pain conditions such as RA. Therefore, researchers need to provide more evidence.  The body can either create vitamin D through exposure to sunlight or obtain vitamin D from the diet. Key sources of vitamin D include:  When exposing bare skin to the sun, the body can make vitamin D from ultraviolet B (UVB) light.  Although sunlight is an excellent source of the vitamin, it is essential to avoid hot, midday sun to prevent burning. Overexposure can cause skin damage and increase the risk of  skin cancer .  When spending time in the sun is more difficult, such as during the winter months, it is much harder to get a sufficient amount of vitamin D from sunlight, so it may be necessary to obtain this vitamin from dietary sources instead.   The National Institutes of Health (NIH)  recommend that adults have 15 micrograms (mcg) of vitamin D per day.  The foods below are some of the few that are rich in vitamin D, so the diet should include some of these each day if possible:  Some people, such as vegetarians or older adults, may struggle to get enough vitamin D, especially in the winter.  The NIH  suggest  that supplements may be useful for:  It is possible to obtain vitamin D supplements from drugstores or  online .  Too much vitamin D can cause toxicity, so it is best to talk with a doctor or healthcare professional before taking any new supplements and to adhere to the dosage they recommend.  Joint pain is often a sign of inflammation. While there is still a lack of understanding around the role of food in mediating joint pain, people should not overlook the impact of diet and specific nutrients.  Other nutrients that might help relieve joint pain include:  In a recent review from  2018 , researchers suggested that following a  Mediterranean diet  may help manage pain and improve physical health.  Additionally, a diet rich in  antioxidants  from brightly colored fruit, vegetables, nuts, and seeds can boost overall health and reduce the risk of disease.  Vitamin D deficiency is common, but exposure to natural sunlight and eating foods rich in vitamin D can help prevent the condition.  Vitamin D deficiency seems to be prevalent in patients with RA, and lower vitamin D levels may also contribute to the severity of joint pain. However, there needs to be more research in this area.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Amin, S., Gabriel, S. E., Achenbach, S. J., Atkinson, E. J., &amp; Melton, L. J. (2013, October). Are young women and men with rheumatoid arthritis at risk for fragility fractures? A population-based study.  Journal of Rheumatology ,  40 (10), 1669–1676.  Amin, S., Gabriel, S. E., Achenbach, S. J., Atkinson, E. J., &amp; Melton, L. J. (2013, October). Are young women and men with rheumatoid arthritis at risk for fragility fractures? A population-based study.  Journal of Rheumatology ,  40 (10), 1669–1676.  Forsyth, C., Kouvari, M., D'Cunha, N. M., Georgousopoulou, E. N., Panagiotakos, D. B., Mellor, D. D., …Naumovski, N. (2018, May). The effects of the Mediterranean diet on rheumatoid arthritis prevention and treatment: A systematic review of human prospective studies [Abstract].  Rheumatology International ,  38 (5), 737–747.  Helde-Frankling, M., &amp; Björkhem-Bergman, L. (2017, October 18). Vitamin D in pain management.  International Journal of Molecular Sciences ,  18 (10), 2170.  Hong, Q., Xu, J., Xu, S., Lian, L., Zhang, M., &amp; Ding, C. (2014, November 1). Associations between serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D and disease activity, inflammatory cytokines and bone loss in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.  Rheumatology ,  53 (11), 1994–2001.  Kostoglou-Athanassiou, I., Athanassiou, P., Lyraki, A., Raftakis, I., &amp; Antoniadis, C. (2012, December). Vitamin D and rheumatoid arthritis.  Therapeutic Advances in Endocrinology and Metabolism ,  3 (6), 181–187.  Laslett, L. L., Quinn, S., Burgess, J. R., Parameswaran, V., Winzenberg, T. M., Jones, G., &amp; Ding, C. (2014). Moderate vitamin D deficiency is associated with changes in knee and hip pain in older adults: A 5-year longitudinal study [Abstract].  Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases ,  73 (4), 697–703.  Lee, Y. H., &amp; Bae, S-C. (2016, January 14). Vitamin D level in rheumatoid arthritis and its correlation with the disease activity: A meta-analysis.  Clinical and Experimental Rheumatology ,  34 , 827–833.  Penckofer, S., Kouba, J., Byrn, M., &amp; Ferrans, C. E. (2010, June). Vitamin D and depression: Where is all the sunshine?  Issues in Mental Health Nursing ,  31 (6), 385–393.  Straube, S., Derry, S., Straube, C. &amp; Moore, R. (2015, May 6). Vitamin D for the treatment of chronic painful conditions in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 5. Art. No.: CD007771.  Tedeschi, S. K., Bathon, J. M., Giles, J. T., Lin, T-C., Yoshida, K., &amp; Solomon, D. H. (2017, May 23). Relationship between fish consumption and disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis.  Arthritis Care &amp; Research ,  70 (3), 327–332.  Vilela de Oliveira, G., L., Leite, A. Z., Higuchi, B. S., Gonzaga, M. I., &amp; Mariano, V. S. (2017, May 24). Intestinal dysbiosis and probiotic applications in autoimmune diseases.  Immunology ,  152 , 1–12.  Vitamin D. (2018, March 2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lewin, Jo. "Can vitamin D relieve joint pain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321923.php&gt;    APA  Lewin, J. (2018, May 26). "Can vitamin D relieve joint pain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  