 Persistent  diarrhea  can also interrupt sleep and affect the quality of life. Treatment depends on the severity of the symptom and its underlying cause.  Diarrhea is defined as loose, watery stools. It may be acute and last for a few days, or it can be chronic and continue for  4 or more weeks . In this article, we discuss the possible causes of nocturnal diarrhea and how to treat them.  Nocturnal diarrhea symptoms commonly includes the following:  Symptoms range from mild to severe, and they will also typically be present during the day. People with mild diarrhea often experience symptoms for just a few days, and these can usually be managed with home remedies.  Serious cases of diarrhea can cause additional symptoms, such as:  Diarrhea that occurs several times a day for a month or longer is classed as chronic.  Long-term nocturnal diarrhea may also lead to sleep problems, which can affect mood and energy levels.  Diarrhea may be caused by:  If any of these factors are responsible, nocturnal diarrhea typically clears up once the infection is treated or the trigger is eliminated.  However, chronic nocturnal diarrhea is likely to have a more serious underlying cause, such as:  Secretory diarrhea occurs when the intestine cannot properly absorb electrolytes. This is a  common cause  of both acute and chronic diarrhea.  Secretory diarrhea can result from:  IBS is a functional disorder, which means that the digestive tract seems to be regular but does not function correctly.  Symptoms include:  Most people with IBS do not experience nocturnal diarrhea or severe symptoms. Typically, watery stools occur during the daytime, often after eating.  Nocturnal diarrhea is  considered  an "alarm symptom" in people with IBS. This means that it requires prompt medical attention.  Other alarm symptoms include:  IBD refers to several chronic conditions that cause  inflammation  of the gastrointestinal tract. Up to  1.6 million  people in the United States experience IBD.  IBD causes inflammation, unlike IBS. It also leads to changes in the gut that can increase the risk of  bowel cancer .  Some people with IBD experience nocturnal and daytime diarrhea. Other symptoms include:  The exact cause of IBD is unknown, though risk factors include having a family history of bowel conditions, being a smoker, and taking certain medications.  Most people with IBD are diagnosed before the age of 30.  Microscopic colitis causes inflammation of the large intestine and leads to persistent diarrhea. The inflammation associated with this condition can only be observed using a microscope.  Older adults are more commonly affected by microscopic colitis, but anyone who continues to experience nocturnal diarrhea, even when fasting, should be tested for this condition.  Other symptoms include:  The cause of microscopic colitis is unknown, but taking nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for  6 months  or longer may increase the risk of developing it.   Diabetes  affects the way the body uses glucose, which is sugar in the blood. Unless treated, it causes high levels to build up in the blood, which can lead to several complications.  Individuals with poorly controlled diabetes and insulin-dependency are at risk for nocturnal diarrhea. It may also affect those with nerve damage caused by diabetes, which is known as  diabetic neuropathy .  Diabetes symptoms include:  The cause of diabetes varies and depends on the type.  Type 1 diabetes  is linked to an overactive immune system, while type 2 occurs when the cells become resistant to  insulin , a hormone.  Gestational diabetes affects some people during pregnancy.  Mild diarrhea can clear up on its own within a few days. During this time, the focus of treatment is to alleviate symptoms and keep a person hydrated.  Severe or chronic diarrhea should be reported to a doctor, who will investigate the underlying cause and formulate a treatment plan.  Some treatment options may include:  Underlying conditions that contribute to nocturnal diarrhea will also require treatment.  IBD cannot be cured, so treatment aims to reduce symptoms and achieve and maintain periods of remission.  Medications for IBD include anti-inflammatory drugs, immune suppressors, and therapies that target inflammation.  In some cases, surgery is needed to widen a narrow bowel or remove damaged parts of the digestive tract.  Discontinuing medications that cause problems and making dietary adjustments can treat persistent or severe cases of microscopic colitis.  If these approaches do not work, anti-inflammatory drugs and medicines that block bile acids can be used.  In rare cases, a surgeon will need to remove part or all of the colon.  Mild diarrhea is a common experience. It may be possible to reduce the frequency and severity of diarrhea episodes by trying the following:  Type 1 diabetes is treated with insulin injections or an insulin pump. A person must also check blood sugar levels frequently and monitor their intake of  carbohydrates .   Type 2 diabetes  can be managed with lifestyle changes, blood sugar monitoring, and medications.  Untreated diarrhea can lead to complications, including  dehydration .  Dehydration can cause:  When an underlying disorder is responsible for nocturnal diarrhea, additional complications can arise. For example, untreated diabetes may lead to vision loss or nerve damage.  Nocturnal diarrhea may clear up in a few days or become chronic. The outlook typically depends on the underlying cause.  A person should see a doctor right away if they also have any of the following:  If symptoms persist for more than a few days, it is important to see a doctor for a diagnosis.    
 Facts about inflammatory bowel diseases. (2011, May 1).  Facts about inflammatory bowel diseases. (2011, May 1).  Juckett, G., &amp; Trivedi, R. (2011, November 15). Evaluation of chronic diarrhea.  American Family Physician ,  84 (10), 1119–1126.  Lamont, J. T. (2018, April). Patient education: Chronic diarrhea in adults (Beyond the basics).  Schiller, L. R. (1999, October). Secretory diarrhea.  Current Gastroenterology Reports ,  1 (5), 389–397.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What causes diarrhea in the middle of the night?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321936.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, May 26). "What causes diarrhea in the middle of the night?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  