 The plant has long leaves that are similar to those of seagrasses. While an estimated 55 species of lemongrass exist, only the East Indian and West Indian varieties are suitable for use in cooking.  Several researchers are interested in the health and medicinal benefits of drinking lemongrass tea. In this article, we take a look at some of the health benefits this tea may offer, and consider the evidence supporting the claims.  Many people believe that lemongrass tea offers multiple health benefits, but researchers have not yet conducted enough large-scale studies to prove these benefits.  Doctors do know that the tea can help fight against free radicals, thus reducing the incidence of  inflammation  in the body. Lemongrass contains the inflammation-fighting compounds chlorogenic acid, isoorientin, and swertiajaponin.  Inflammation is a factor in many adverse health conditions, including pain and  heart disease . As such, lemongrass tea could be a beneficial drink for people to incorporate into their diet.  Below are seven additional health benefits that may result from drinking lemongrass tea.  Many people find sipping hot tea to be relaxing, but lemongrass tea may offer further anxiety-reducing properties.  According to the  Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center , smelling lemongrass may help people with  anxiety . Although some people already inhale lemongrass essential oil to relieve  stress  and anxiety, researchers still need more evidence to be able to confirm this benefit.  According to an  article  in the  Journal of Advanced Pharmaceutical Technology &amp; Research , consuming lemongrass extracts appears to lower  cholesterol  in animals.  The study notes that the reaction is dose-dependent. This means that larger quantities of lemongrass might lower cholesterol further.  According to the  Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center , study results suggest that lemongrass may have some infection-preventing capabilities.  For example, the herb seems to reduce the incidence of thrush, a fungal infection that commonly affects people with weakened immune systems, such as those with  HIV .  In many countries where the lemongrass plant is native to the area, people will take the lemongrass stalks and chew on them as a way to improve dental health and keep the mouth feeling clean.  The  Food Chemistry  journal published a  study  confirming these findings. The authors looked at 12 herbs and found that lemongrass herbal extracts were one of the most potent inhibitors of bacterial growth in lab samples. They used bacteria that can cause cavities in the mouth, including  Streptococcus sanguinis .  According to  one study , lemongrass may be able to block pain. This means that drinking lemongrass tea could potentially help to prevent a person from sensing pain.  The results of a  2015 study  suggest that drinking lemongrass tea infusions daily for 30 days can increase hemoglobin concentration, packed cell volume, and red blood cell count in the body.  The researchers took blood tests from 105 human subjects at the start, and then at 10 and 30 days into the study. They concluded that drinking lemongrass tea boosts the formation of red blood cells.  While they did not identify precisely how lemongrass does this, they did suggest that the tea's  antioxidant  properties could play a role.  Drinking lemongrass tea can have diuretic effects, which means that it stimulates the kidneys to release more urine than usual.  According to a  small-scale study  in the  Journal of Renal Nutrition , drinking lemongrass tea increases urine output more than other beverages.  This diuretic effect on the body can be beneficial in cases where  water retention  leads to bloating. This is a common symptom of premenstrual syndrome (PMS).  It is possible to make lemongrass tea at home. After purchasing the stalks at a grocery store or herbalist, people can take the following steps to brew their tea:  Adding ice cubes will create a cold lemongrass tea.  The tea should have a fresh, citrusy taste. A person should start with one cup of lemongrass tea per day, then add more to their diet over the next days if they wish to.  Alternatively, most grocery and health food stores sell lemongrass tea. It is also  available to purchase online .  Lemongrass tea can be a delicious beverage that also offers health benefits.  While most of the studies to date on lemongrass tea are small-scale or lab-based, results show that lemongrass tea can help to improve oral health, lower cholesterol, and relieve bloating.  In addition to drinking lemongrass as a tea, people can add the herb into dishes such as soups and stir fries.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.   Article last updated by Phil Riches on Wed 24 October 2018.  Visit our  Nutrition / Diet  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Nutrition / Diet.   
 Ekpenyong, C. E., Daniel, N. E., &amp; Antai, A. B. (2015, January). Effect of lemongrass tea consumption on estimated glomerular filtration rate and creatinine clearance rate [Abstract].  Journal of Renal Nutrition ,  25 (1), 57–66.  Ekpenyong, C. E., Daniel, N. E., &amp; Antai, A. B. (2015, January). Effect of lemongrass tea consumption on estimated glomerular filtration rate and creatinine clearance rate [Abstract].  Journal of Renal Nutrition ,  25 (1), 57–66.  Ekpenyong, C.E., Daniel, N. E., &amp; Antai, A. B. (2015, January 6). Bioactive natural constituents from lemongrass tea and erythropoiesis boosting effects: Potential use in prevention and treatment of anemia [Abstract].  Journal of Medicinal Food ,  18 (1).  Lemongrass. (2015, November 9).  Shah, G., Shri, R., Panchal, V., Sharma, N., Singh, B., &amp; Mann, A. S. (2011, January–March). Scientific basis for the therapeutic use of  Cymbopogon citratus , stapf (lemon grass).  Journal of Advanced Pharmaceutical Technology &amp; Research ,  2 (1), 3–8.  Tsai, T-H., Tsai, T-H., Chien, Y-C., Lee, C-W., &amp; Tsai, P-J. (2008, October 15).  In vitro  antimicrobial activities against cariogenic streptococci and their antioxidant capacities: A comparative study of green tea versus different herbs [Abstract].  Food Chemistry .  110 (4), 859–864.  Warner, K. (2017, May 28). Fact sheet: Lemongrass.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What are the health benefits of lemongrass tea?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Oct. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321969.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, October 24). "What are the health benefits of lemongrass tea?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  