 Transaminases play key roles in the liver. They help the organ's cells to function, break down substances, and remove toxins from the body.  When a person has elevated levels of these liver enzymes, there may be no apparent cause, and levels often return to a normal range without treatment.  However, transaminitis can be associated with serious conditions. It is important to explore why levels are high and diagnose any underlying issue.  According to the  American Academy of Family Physicians , the following factors can lead to elevated levels of transaminases:  Transaminitis is less commonly caused by:  This condition develops when there is too much fat in the liver cells, and up to  30 percent  of adults in the United States may have it.  Risk factors include  obesity  and high  cholesterol , but the exact cause is unknown. There are often no symptoms when the disease is at an early stage, but some people experience  fatigue  or mild pain in the upper-right area of the abdomen.  Continual damage can eventually lead to scarring, or  cirrhosis , which significantly impacts the liver's function.  The following strategies can prevent or help to combat fatty nonalcoholic liver disease:  Damage caused by excessive consumption of alcohol leads to this condition, which is also called alcohol-related liver disease.  In early stages, there are typically no symptoms. In later stages, symptoms include:   A study  published in 2010 included 256 participants with mild transaminitis. Alcohol consumption was reportedly the cause of fatty liver disease in 10 percent of cases.  It is essential to give an accurate report of alcohol consumption. Otherwise, it can be difficult for a doctor to distinguish between these types of liver disease with a biopsy or other simple diagnostic tools.  Treatment for alcohol-related liver disease involves abstaining from alcohol and making lifestyle changes similar to those recommended for people with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.  When alcohol-related liver disease is severe, a person may require medication or a transplant.  Hepatitis refers to a type of liver  inflammation . It is commonly caused by a viral infection, usually  hepatitis B  or  hepatitis C .  The following are symptoms of both types of infection:  Both types of infection can last for a few weeks or develop into serious lifelong conditions. Only about  6–10 percent  of adults and older children infected with hepatitis B develop a chronic condition. However, most people develop chronic hepatitis C once infected.  Treatment for short-term hepatitis infection involves:  Chronic infections are monitored and treated with antiviral medications. Untreated viral hepatitis can cause early, permanent liver damage.  This disease causes too much iron to build up in the body. It is stored in organs such as the liver, heart, and pancreas, where it can contribute to problems such as liver disease and  diabetes  mellitus.  Hemochromatosis may be hereditary, or it can develop as a result of other conditions, including types of  anemia  and chronic liver diseases.  People with this disease tend to start experiencing symptoms between the ages of  40 and 60 . Symptoms include:  Treatment involves regularly drawing blood to reduce the levels of iron, which circulates in the bloodstream. This process is called phlebotomy.  Medications, supplements, and herbs can impact the health of the liver because it processes these products.  Several medicines are known to cause transaminitis. They include:  Herbal preparations containing the following ingredients may also lead to transaminitis:  Also, high doses of  vitamin  A can damage the liver.  If medications or supplements are leading to elevated levels of transaminases, a doctor may recommend reducing the dosage or switching treatments.  Some people may need regular blood tests while taking medications to ensure that they are not interfering with the liver or its enzyme levels.  Rarely, the following conditions can lead to transaminitis:  This genetic disorder damages the liver and lungs. The degree of damage can vary from raised levels of transaminases to liver failure.  Approximately  15 percent  of adults with this disorder develop scarring of the liver. They also have a higher risk of developing a form of  liver cancer  called hepatocellular  carcinoma .  Symptoms associated with alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency include:  This disorder also causes lung-related symptoms, which typically appear between the ages of  20 and 50 . They include shortness of breath, wheezing, a rapid heartbeat, and fatigue.  An alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency can be diagnosed with a blood test or genetic testing. There is no cure, so treatment is aimed at managing symptoms.  This occurs when the immune system attacks the liver's cells, but the cause is not fully understood.  Symptoms of autoimmune hepatitis include:  Autoimmune hepatitis can cause scarring of the liver if left untreated, and it can eventually lead to liver failure. Treatments include immune-suppressing medications or a liver transplant.  This rare inherited disorder causes  copper  to collect in organs such as the liver and brain. It can become life-threatening if levels of copper are too high.  Symptoms include:  Wilson's disease can be diagnosed using:  The condition can be managed with medications that remove excess amounts of copper and prevent further buildups.  Several conditions that seem unrelated to the liver can cause transaminitis. Often there are no liver-related symptoms.  These conditions include:  To diagnose transaminitis, a doctor will take a full medical history and perform a physical examination. They may also order blood tests, and a person will need to fast before these.  The blood tests will determine levels of:  If levels are normal, a doctor will recommend lifestyle changes and ask the person to attend regular checkups until levels of transaminases go down.  Sometimes, further testing is required. These tests may involve  ultrasound  imaging, or they may check for levels of blood antibodies.  If levels of transaminases remain high for  6 months , the doctor may order a biopsy.  To prevent transaminitis:  A temporary increase in liver enzymes is not unusual. Often, this situation can be resolved by making lifestyle changes.  The outlook depends on the cause of transaminitis. When a viral infection or chronic infection is responsible for raised levels of transaminases, it is important to work with a doctor to reduce levels and prevent further damage to the liver.  Receiving a diagnosis and treatment early will help to keep symptoms manageable and reduce the risk of complications.    
 Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. (2018, May 29).  Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. (2018, May 29).  Hemochromatosis. (2018, February 15).  Oh, R. C., &amp; Hustead, T. R. (2011, November 1). Causes and evaluation of mildly elevated liver transaminase levels.  American Family Physician ,  84 (9), 1003–1008.  Söderberg, C., Stål, P., Askling, J., Glaumann, H., Lindberg, G., Marmur, J., &amp; Hultcrantz, R. (2010, February). Decreased survival of subjects with elevated liver function tests during a 28‐year follow‐up [Abstract].  Hepatology ,  51 (2), 595–602.  What is viral hepatitis? (2018, April 19).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What does elevated transaminase mean?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321975.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, May 30). "What does elevated transaminase mean?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  