 According to some estimates, between  3 and 8 percent  of women of reproductive age have  premenstrual dysphoric disorder  (PMDD). The actual number may be higher, though, because doctors may have misdiagnosed some people.  PMDD has many of the same symptoms as premenstrual syndrome (PMS), but they tend to be much more intense and may make it hard for some people to function in everyday life.  Below are the 12 best natural treatment options for PMDD.  The following remedies may be effective alternatives to medications for PMDD:   Stress  can make PMDD worse.  To reduce stress and ease other symptoms of PMDD, including  anxiety  and  depression , practice daily meditation.  Meditation involves focusing on the breath to stay grounded in the present moment.  Regular meditation can help individuals relax and get relief from both physical and emotional symptoms.  To start meditating:  Aim to meditate for at least 10 minutes each morning and evening.  Aromatherapy uses fragrant plant oils to provide physical and psychological benefits. Evidence showing the benefits of aromatherapy is mixed, but many people claim it helps them deal with stress, pain, and sleep problems.  Some of the most popular oils for PMDD include:  Add the diluted oils to bathwater, place a few drops in an oil diffuser, dilute in a carrier oil and use as a massage oil, or inhale the scent directly from the bottle.  There is a selection of  chamomile ,  clary sage ,  geranium ,  lavender ,  neroli , and  rose  essential oils available for purchase online.  Warm baths are relaxing and can encourage sleep. The warm water also alleviates menstrual cramps. Enjoy a 20-minute soak before bed to address PMDD symptoms.  Use soothing scents and play relaxing music to enhance the effects of a nighttime bath.  Research suggests that regular exercise is beneficial for premenstrual symptoms. One  study  showed that regular exercise for PMS decreased pain and increased mood.  For best results, engage in a mix of aerobic activities and strength training each week. The  Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans  recommends that all adults aim for at least:  Some menstrual products can worsen PMDD symptoms in some people.  Tampons may cause more cramping and lower abdominal pain. Scented pads and pantyliners might irritate those with sensitive skin.  It might help to experiment with different menstrual products.  Try changing to organic cotton pads and pantyliners, for example, or use menstrual cups.  There is a selection of menstrual cups available for  purchase online .  A  2016 study  suggests that 12 weeks of  yoga  may:  The results of this study were based on classes designed specifically for women with PMS, but regular yoga classes should also help those with PMS and PMDD.  Other research supports yoga and exercise in general in being beneficial to reducing symptoms.  Lack of sleep can contribute to low mood,  fatigue , and increased sensitivity to pain. To reduce PMDD symptoms:  See a doctor for treatment. If disorders such as  insomnia  or sleep apnea are interfering with sleep  People can manage PMS symptoms with a healthful diet. It is likely that PMDD symptoms, such as anxiety and bloating, will also improve through dietary changes.  Eat regular meals and snacks throughout the day to keep blood sugar levels on an even keel. Drinking plenty of water will also help reduce bloating.  If it is not possible to get the recommended levels of  vitamins , minerals, and other nutrients from food, it can help to take dietary supplements.  People with premenstrual symptoms may benefit from taking supplements of:  Individuals should always talk to their doctor before using supplements for PMDD or other disorders, especially if they are taking other medications or have another health condition.  There is a selection of  calcium ,  magnesium ,  vitamin E , and  vitamin B6  supplements available for purchase online.  People have used herbal remedies for centuries to treat a variety of ailments, including hormone-related conditions.  Some people report benefitting from their use, although there is no scientific evidence to suggest that herbs effectively treat PMDD or PMS.  Herbal supplements commonly taken include:  Herbal remedies can cause adverse reactions and may interact with other medications.  For example, taking St. John's wort with certain  antidepressants   can result  in a life-threatening increase in  serotonin  levels. Serotonin is a chemical in the brain that helps control many bodily functions, including mood.  Only take herbal medicines in consultation with a doctor or qualified natural health practitioner. Choose products carefully and by reputation of the manufacturer. Some herbs are drugs and can interact with medications prescribed by the doctor.  There is a selection of  chasteberry ,  evening primrose oil ,  gingko , and  St. John's wort  herbal supplements available for purchase online.   Acupuncture  involves inserting thin needles into specific parts of the body. It is thought to increase blood flow and  promote  the body's innate self-healing process.   An analysis  of randomized controlled trials on acupuncture for PMS reports that the therapy shows promise for symptom relief. More high-quality studies are needed to confirm this.  Acupuncture is, nonetheless, a low-risk treatment option that may provide benefits for some people with PMS. Acupuncture is recognized as an effective approach to treating many conditions according to the  World Health Organization .   Cognitive behavioral therapy  (CBT) is a form of talk therapy that helps people identify and change unhelpful styles of thinking and behavior. It may help people with PMDD more effectively cope with:  Sometimes, lifestyle changes and natural remedies do not provide sufficient relief from PMDD or PMS.  Medical treatments may be necessary if premenstrual symptoms impact the following areas.  PMDD can interfere with a person's quality of life and ability to function. PMDD is treatable through lifestyle changes, natural remedies, or medications.  Some people may need a combination of all three options. Once a person has found the right treatment or combination of treatments, they will probably enjoy an improvement in symptoms.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Appendix 1: Physical activity guidelines for Americans. (2008).  Appendix 1: Physical activity guidelines for Americans. (2008).  Bayles, B., &amp; Usatine, R. (2009, December 15). Evening primrose oil.  American Family Physician ,  80 (12), 1405–1408.  Chmielnicki, B. (2003). Evidence based acupuncture. WHO official position.  Dadkhah, H., Ebrahimi, E., &amp; Fathizadeh, N. (2016, March-April). Evaluating the effects of vitamin D and vitamin E supplement on premenstrual syndrome: A randomized, double-blind, controlled trial.  Iranian Journal of Nursing and Midwifery Research ,  21 (2), 159–164.  Ebrahimi, E., Motlagh, S. K., Nemati, S., &amp; Tavakoli, Z. (2012, November 22). Effects of magnesium and vitamin B6 on the severity of premenstrual syndrome symptoms.  Journal of Caring Sciences ,  1 (4), 183–189.  How acupuncture can relieve pain and improve sleep, digestion and emotional well-being. (n.d.).  Hunter, M. S., Ussher, J. M., Browne, S. J., Cariss, M., Jelley, R., &amp; Katz, M. (2002, September). A randomized comparison of psychological (cognitive behavior therapy), medical (fluoxetine) and combined treatment for women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder [Abstract].  Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  23 (3), 193–199.  Kim, S. Y., Park, H. J., Lee, H., &amp; Lee, H. (2011, July). Acupuncture for premenstrual syndrome: A systematic review and meta‐analysis of randomised controlled trials [Abstract].  BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics &amp; Gynaecology ,  118 (8), 899–915.  Management of premenstrual syndrome. (2016, November).  BJOG ,  2016 , 1–33.  Ozgoli, G., Selselei, E. A., Mojab, F., &amp; Majd, H. A. (2009, August). A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of Ginkgo biloba L. in treatment of premenstrual syndrome [Abstract].  The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine ,  15 (8), 845–851.  Roemheld-Hamm, B. (2005, September 1). Chasteberry.  American Family Physician ,  72 (5), 821–824.  Shobeiri, F., Araste, F. E., Ebrahimi, R., Jenabi, E., &amp; Nazari, M. (2017, January 15). Effect of calcium on premenstrual syndrome: A double-blind randomized clinical trial.  Obstetrics and Gynecology Science ,  60 (1), 100–105.  St. John's wort and depression: In depth. (2018, January 4).  The ideal temperature for sleep. (n.d.).  Tsai, S.-Y. (2016, July). Effect of yoga exercise on premenstrual symptoms among female employees in Taiwan.  International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health ,  13 (7), 721.  Tsai, S.-Y., Kuo, F.-C., Kuo, H.-C., &amp; Liao, L.-L. (2018). The prevalence of self-reported premenstrual symptoms and evaluation of regular exercise with premenstrual symptoms among female employees in Taiwan [Abstract].  Women &amp; Health ,  58 (3), 247–259.  Women &amp; PMDD. (2017, April 5).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What can I take for PMDD?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321965.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, May 30). "What can I take for PMDD?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  