 In this article, we look at what bleeding into the skin is and what can cause it. We also cover diagnosis, treatment, and when to see a doctor.  If a blood vessel ruptures, the blood inside can leak into nearby tissues and spaces. This is known as hemorrhaging.  When hemorrhaging occurs directly below the skin, the blood can escape into the surrounding skin and cause it to discolor. Typically, this skin discoloration is a mixed shade of red, blue, black, or purple.  The number and type of blood vessels that rupture will affect the size and appearance of the skin discoloration, as well as the extent of the bleeding.  Breaking only a few small blood vessels, or capillaries, tends to cause petechial lesions. These are small red dots less than 2 mm in width that appear on the surface of the skin.  If more than a few capillaries rupture in the same area, they can cause purpura. People with this condition have larger patches of reddish-purple discoloration, which are generally between 2 mm and 1 cm in width.  When large numbers of capillaries break close together, blood can pool under the surface of the skin to form an ecchymosis. This is a bluish-purple or black bruise that can vary in size.  Most bruises present in a reddish color, but take on a darker black-blue shade within a few hours. As bruises heal, they tend to appear purple for some time before fading to a greenish-yellow color. Bruised areas of skin are usually quite tender and may be slightly swollen.  Bruises vary in their healing time from a few days to several weeks, depending on how severe they are. A moderate bruise typically takes around two weeks to fade away entirely. Bruises in the lower legs can sometimes take longer to heal.  Bruising is more likely to occur in places where the blood can pool more efficiently, such as under the eyes or around the breasts.  Bruising that occurs deep in the body tissues or cavities is a hematoma, which is a more severe condition.  Most people experience some bleeding under the skin and bruising during their lifetime. Common causes include:  Bleeding into the skin can also occur as a side-effect of:  Several health conditions and medications can also interfere with the body's ability to form blood clots. This can lead to excessive or spontaneous bleeding and bruising.  Conditions likely to increase the risk of bleeding and bruising include:  Common medications that can increase the risk of bleeding and bruising include:  Other factors that also increase the risk of bleeding into the skin and bruising include:  Doctors will usually carry out a physical exam when diagnosing bleeding into the skin and the resulting lesions.  The doctor may also review the person's medical history, asking questions about:  If a doctor sees someone with a lot of bruises or frequent bruising, they may also need to ask them some questions to rule out the possibility of physical abuse and violence.  If the doctor is unsure of the cause or thinks there could be an underlying medical condition, they might order some diagnostic tests. Possible tests include:  There is no specific way to treat minor skin bleeding and bruising. However, some home remedies may help reduce the pain and swelling and promote healing.  Common home remedies for minor bleeding into the skin and bruising include:  Doctors do not recommend using NSAIDs to manage conditions relating to bleeding or bruising because they can worsen the bleeding.  For more severe cases of bleeding into the skin and bruising, or those resulting from an underlying medical condition, a doctor will put together a tailored treatment plan. Very large hematomas may need surgical removal.  Minor bleeding into the skin or bruising that happens from time to time is rarely cause for concern.  However, anyone who experiences bleeding into the skin with no apparent cause or bruising that lasts longer than two weeks should speak to a doctor. Individuals taking blood-thinning medications who experience frequent or severe bleeding or bruising should also seek medical attention.  It is also best to visit a doctor if any of the following symptoms accompany the bruising:  For unexplainable bruising that is sudden or severe, it is best to seek immediate medical care.    
 Bruises. (2013, March).  Bruises. (2013, March).  Bruises. (2017, March 27).  King, M. (2017, February 1). The management of bruising following nonsurgical cosmetic treatment.  The Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology ,  10 (2), E1–E4.  Vadera, S., &amp; Oakely, A. (2017, September). Bleeding and bruising.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What causes bleeding into the skin?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321996.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, May 31). "What causes bleeding into the skin?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  