 Currently, in the United States, vegetarianism and veganism are steadily becoming  more popular .  Touted as a more healthful option, many people are working to reduce their meat intake.  In the past few decades, numerous studies have demonstrated that restricting meat impacts the body in a number of positive ways.  For instance, a plant-based diet has been shown to reduce the risk of  obesity ,  type 2 diabetes , and  metabolic syndrome . Vegetarianism and veganism may even protect against  certain cancers .  A recent review, now published in the journal   Progress in Cardiovascular Disease  , focused on the benefits of a plant-based diet on cardiovascular health, specifically.  The researchers — from the  Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine  in Washington D.C. — scrutinized reams of recent, relevant studies.  Collating information from a host of clinical trials and observational studies, they found that a plant-based diet was consistently linked with improved measures of heart health.  They concluded, for individuals following a plant-based diet, that:  Also, total  cholesterol  and low-density lipoprotein, or "bad," cholesterol levels are much lower in vegetarians compared with non-vegetarians. Moreover, a plant-based diet was shown to be associated with weight loss.   " A plant-based diet has the power to not only prevent  heart disease  but also manage and sometimes even reverse it — something no drug has ever done."  Study author Dr. Hana Kahleova, Ph.D.  Dr. Kahleova also notes that more healthful diets and lifestyles lower the risk of  heart attack  by 81–94 percent, while drugs can only lower this risk by 20–30 percent.  There seem to be many reasons why a plant-based diet is more healthful for the heart than a meat-heavy one. It seems that plants impart some benefits, while meat increases certain risks.  For instance, plants are rich in fiber and phytonutrients, which are known to reduce  inflammation  and oxidative  stress . Also, animal products are often high in fat, cholesterol,  heme iron , and environmental pollutants.  However, this is a complex interaction, and there may be many more factors involved that are, as yet, unknown.  Heart disease is responsible for the deaths of more than  600,000  U.S. individuals each year, and it remains the  leading cause  of death, globally. However, these findings show that if society could be gently nudged toward plant-based diets and away from excessive meat consumption, humanity's heart health could be substantially improved.  As Dr. Kahleova notes, with more than a dash of positivity, "Heart disease is the world's leading cause of death. This study proves it doesn't have to be."  