 Many people enjoy the feeling of alertness and energy that a caffeine supplement provides. Caffeine is, however, not without risk. Too much caffeine can have dangerous side effects.  Although they have different forms, caffeine and caffeine anhydrous are chemically the same.  Caffeine occurs naturally in plants such as  coffee  beans, tea, and cacao, which is the source of cocoa for chocolate.  Through specific laboratory processes, which include filtering out the water and other chemical components, the caffeine from these plants will form caffeine anhydrous.  This  dehydration  process means caffeine anhydrous is more concentrated and, therefore, more potent than regular caffeine.  Caffeine and caffeine anhydrous will both have positive and adverse effects on the body. These effects include:   The positives of caffeine anhydrous include :   The negatives include :   The positives of caffeine include :   The negatives include :  The side effect profile and risk factors for caffeine and caffeine anhydrous are similar.  The FDA cite that healthy adults can consume up to  400 mg of caffeine  per day in any form without adverse side effects.  That is equivalent to about 4 or 5 cups of regular strength coffee.  If a person consumes more caffeine than this, side effects can occur.  The severity of the side effects will depend on the person's tolerance to caffeine, which will vary according to body size, average consumption levels, medications, and even genetics.  Common side effects of heavy caffeine use include:   The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  warn against highly concentrated caffeine in powder and liquid forms.  The difference between safe and toxic amounts is minimal, and the product is difficult to measure using standard kitchen tools. One teaspoon of pure powdered caffeine, for example, contains the same amount of caffeine as  28 cups of coffee .  Therefore, people must be careful when it comes to the amount of caffeine they ingest. The following people in particular need to take care.  It is best that people who are pregnant avoid caffeine anhydrous as they should be limiting their consumption of caffeine to less than  200 milligrams (mg) daily  during pregnancy.  It is possible that higher daily doses of caffeine may increase the risk of miscarriage and impaired fetal growth. However, more research is needed to confirm this.  Recommendations state that those who are breast-feeding should also limit their caffeine consumption to  200 mg daily . Newborns and premature infants are especially sensitive to the effects of caffeine.  The  American Academy of Pediatrics  state that children and teenagers do not need to consume any energy drinks containing caffeine and other stimulants. Energy drinks are often high in  calories  so they can also increase the risk of becoming overweight or obese.  Energy drink companies encourage teenagers to use their products to gain more energy, improve concentration, or advance athletic performance. Parents should talk to their children about the risks of caffeine supplements.  Caffeine anhydrous has the potential to interact with certain medications and herbal supplements so people taking any of these should check with a doctor before starting a caffeine supplement.  Excessive caffeine intake can lead to intoxication. The symptoms of too much caffeine include:  Although these side effects are severe, caffeine toxicity is very unlikely with moderate consumption of caffeine in food and beverages.  Toxicity is more likely with anhydrous caffeine though, particularly when it is in a pure powdered form as this is difficult to measure accurately.  It is also possible to have withdrawal symptoms from caffeine, even within a day of the last dose.  Typical symptoms of withdrawal can include:  Gradually decreasing caffeine intake can help lessen these symptoms.  Caffeine is a naturally occurring substance that has some beneficial effects, including an increased feeling of energy and better athletic performance.  Caffeine anhydrous makes it possible to take in higher amounts of caffeine without having to drink large quantities of tea or coffee. However, the risk of consuming too much means that it is best for people to avoid using purer forms of caffeine, such as caffeine anhydrous, at home.  The use of potent forms of caffeine, such as caffeine anhydrous, carries many risks, so it is essential to only use products from a reputable manufacturer who regulates their production.  Why should I avoid caffeine?   You should check with your healthcare provider whether you should limit or avoid caffeine intake due to underlying health conditions, such as migraines, anxiety, heart disease, irregular heart rhythms, high blood pressure, or insomnia. 
 Also, pregnant and breastfeeding women should significantly limit caffeine intake, and caffeine intake is not recommended for children or teenagers. Also, many medications interact with caffeine, so speak to your healthcare provider about caffeine before beginning a new medication or supplement.   You should check with your healthcare provider whether you should limit or avoid caffeine intake due to underlying health conditions, such as migraines, anxiety, heart disease, irregular heart rhythms, high blood pressure, or insomnia.  Also, pregnant and breastfeeding women should significantly limit caffeine intake, and caffeine intake is not recommended for children or teenagers. Also, many medications interact with caffeine, so speak to your healthcare provider about caffeine before beginning a new medication or supplement.    
 Breastfeeding your baby. (2016, November).  Breastfeeding your baby. (2016, November).  Caffeine and kids: FDA takes a closer look. (2018, April 1).  Caffeine: What's the difference between caffeine and caffeine anhydrous? (2014, May 19).  Clinical Report — Sports drinks and energy drinks for children and adolescents: Are they appropriate? (2011).  Grgic, J., Trexler, E. T., Lazinica, B., &amp; Pedisic, Z. (2018, March 5). Effects of caffeine intake on muscle strength and power: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  15 (11).  Jabbar, S.B., &amp; Hanly, M.G. (2013, December). Fatal caffeine overdose: A case report and review of literature [Abstract].  The American Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology ,  34 (4), 321–324.  Moderate caffeine consumption during pregnancy. (2010, August).  Pure and highly concentrated caffeine. (2018, April 13).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Brosek, Shannon. "What does caffeine anhydrous do for the body?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321947.php&gt;    APA  Brosek, S. (2018, May 29). "What does caffeine anhydrous do for the body?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  