 Narcissism is not a symptom of bipolar, and most people with bipolar are not narcissistic. However, some people with bipolar may display narcissistic traits as a result of their other symptoms.  In this article, we take a look at the relationship between  bipolar disorder  and narcissism, including symptoms and treatment.  Bipolar disorders are mood disorders that cause a person to cycle between extremely high moods, called mania, and in some cases,  depression . A person may have bipolar I disorder or  bipolar II disorder .  A related condition, called cyclothymic disorder, involves cycling between less intense manic and depressive episodes.  Narcissism is a personality trait that involves feelings of self-importance, grandiosity, and a need for validation. Narcissism can be a behavior that occurs in otherwise psychologically healthy people.  A person whose personality is characterized by narcissistic tendencies may have  narcissistic personality disorder  (NPD).  NPD is part of a group of  personality disorders  called cluster B disorders. These conditions are characterized by dramatic, emotional, or unpredictable thinking and behavior.  The  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5  ( DSM-5 ) does not list narcissism as a symptom of bipolar disorder. However, when a person with bipolar experiences an episode of mania, they may display some narcissistic behaviors, such as high levels of confidence, feelings of self-importance, elevated energy levels, and grandiose self-perceptions.  Because bipolar and NPD have some similar symptoms, the two conditions can be confused. This can result in people with bipolar being diagnosed with NPD and vice versa.  During periods of depression, a person with a bipolar disorder might also display narcissistic characteristics. For example, a person might neglect caring duties, avoid social contact, or appear insensitive to the needs of others.  This might seem to be narcissistic, but it is more likely that the person is so overwhelmed by their own negative emotions that they may not notice others people's feelings.  To diagnose someone with a personality disorder such as NPD, a doctor must be sure that another condition cannot better explain their symptoms. So, when narcissistic behavior is due to depression or mania, the   DSM-5   argues that it is not appropriate to make a diagnosis of NPD.  The symptoms of bipolar disorders and NPD are different in the following ways:   Bipolar disorders   People with bipolar disorders experience intense mood swings that last for a period of time. Mania must last at least 7 days or less if the symptoms are so severe that hospitalization is required. To receive a diagnosis for the major depressive episode, a person must exhibit the symptoms of depression for at least 2 weeks.  A person with bipolar I disorder may only have manic symptoms.  These mood swings that people with bipolar experience occur independently of other life circumstances that can cause high and low moods. Also, these fluctuations are more pronounced than the mood swings most people experience.  Symptoms of bipolar disorders include:   Narcissistic personality disorder   To be diagnosed with narcissistic personality disorder, a person must display narcissism that significantly interferes with their relationships or functioning.  Symptoms of NPD include:  Bipolar is a chronic condition. There is no cure, but it is treatable. Most people with bipolar can learn how to manage their symptoms to lead a happy, healthy life.  Doctors may recommend the following treatments for bipolar disorders:  An accurate diagnosis is critical for managing bipolar, especially when it co-occurs with narcissistic personality traits. People who think they have a mental health condition should work with a skilled clinician and should not self-diagnose or self-medicate.  Narcissistic personality disorder and bipolar disorders can be frustrating both for the people they affect and for those who love them.  What looks like narcissism in a person with bipolar might be something else. Likewise, people with narcissistic personality disorder might be incorrectly diagnosed with bipolar.  Narcissistic traits that can come with bipolar disorders are not a choice. It does not mean someone is a bad person. Bipolar disorders are treatable medical conditions.  Using narcissism to label a person as bad can be harmful, may undermine the problematic reality many people with mental health problems face, and can even deter treatment. A  2014 report  argues that stigma is a significant barrier to people accessing quality mental health care.  Quality treatment requires an accurate diagnosis. With proper treatment and a strong relationship with a skilled provider, people with narcissism and bipolar can heal, have good relationships with others, and live happy lives.    
 Bipolar disorder. (2015, November).  Bipolar disorder. (2015, November).  Brain stimulation therapies. (2016, June).  Caligor, E., Levy, K. N., &amp; Yeomans, F. E. (2015, April 30). Narcissistic personality disorder: Diagnostic and clinical challenges.  American Journal of Psychiatry ,  172 (5), 415–422.  Corrigan, P. W., Druss, B. G., &amp; Perlick, D. A. (2014, September 3). The impact of mental illness stigma on seeking and participating in mental health care [Abstract].  Psychological Science in the Public Interest ,  15 (2), 37–70.  DSM-IV and DSM-5 criteria for the personality disorders [PDF]. (2012).  Severus, E., &amp; Bauer, M. (2013, August 13). Diagnosing bipolar disorders in DSM-5.  International Journal of Bipolar Disorders ,  1 (1), 14.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Is there a link between bipolar and narcissism?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321985.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, May 30). "Is there a link between bipolar and narcissism?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  