 COPD, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, is caused primarily by exposure to cigarette smoke. The condition affects approximately  30 million people  in the United States.  Read on to learn more about vaping and COPD, and discover how to  quit smoking  without using  e-cigarettes .  E-cigarettes are relatively new and the research on their effects, especially the potential long-term effects, is limited.  Vaping products usually contain nicotine, a highly addictive drug, although they do not involve tobacco smoke inhalation. Some vaping products may also contain:  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  require  warnings on vaping products that contain nicotine and tobacco from 2018 onward.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  suggest  that vaping is less harmful than smoking conventional cigarettes. But the CDC advise against e-cigarette use by young people, those who are pregnant, or adults who do not currently use tobacco.  There is only limited research that has looked at vaping and COPD.  A small  study  published in 2016, reports that nicotine-containing vaping products trigger lung  inflammation  and lung tissue damage. COPD development is associated with these effects. Both cultured human lung cells and mice used in the study showed dependency on nicotine over the course of the research.  A 2017  study , published in the  American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine , also reports negative findings. The study included 44 participants, a mixture of conventional cigarette smokers, e-cigarette users, and non-smokers.  Researchers discovered proteins in the airways of e-cigarette smokers that are known to contribute to COPD. All smokers in the study showed markers of oxidative  stress  associated with lung disease.   Research  published in January 2018 found that mice exposed to e-cigarette vapor displayed DNA damage in the lungs, bladder, and heart. This damage may increase their risk of  cancer ,  heart disease , and lung problems.  The researchers added that it was possible that e-cigarette smoke may contribute to similar damage in humans.  More research is needed on the health risks of vaping, especially in relation to COPD and other lung diseases.  It may be best to adhere to the advice of the  Lung Institute  until then, which does not recommend vaping for anyone, especially for people with COPD or other lung diseases.  The institute say that once a person develops a lung disease, such as COPD,  emphysema , or interstitial lung disease, they should not inhale anything other than clean air.  COPD symptoms may not appear until the lungs have experienced significant damage.  Symptoms typically get worse over time, especially if people continue to smoke.  Symptoms include:  Symptoms in later stages include:  Breathing problems eventually make everyday tasks more difficult. They can be disabling in some cases.  COPD occurs when the tubes in the lungs lose their elasticity. This loss causes some air to remain in the lungs after exhaling.  Certain factors increase the likelihood of developing COPD, including:  Long-term exposure to tobacco smoke causes the majority of COPD cases. The risk increases with the number of cigarettes smoked, and the length of time a person has smoked.  People with  asthma  who smoke are at even greater risk. Non-smokers may also be more susceptible to COPD if they are exposed to secondhand smoke over an extended period.  Living in areas of high pollution or working somewhere with dust or chemical fumes also increase the risk of COPD development. These air pollutants are lung irritants that cause inflammation and breathing difficulties.  Older adults are more likely to have COPD because symptoms typically develop over several years.  Some genetic disorders, including alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency, may cause COPD even in non-smokers. These disorders are rare, however.  In the developing world, burning fuel for cooking and heating can contribute to COPD, especially when homes are not adequately ventilated. This is less of a risk in developed countries.  Those who have COPD symptoms or think they may have should see a doctor.  A doctor may perform a physical examination and tests to check lung function. The lung function tests can confirm or eliminate a diagnosis of COPD.  Tests used for COPD diagnosis include:  Also known as a pulmonary function test, spirometry detects even early cases of COPD. It involves exhaling forcefully into a tube connected to a spirometer. The device measures how much and how quickly air is exhaled.  An X-ray or  CT scan  may detect irregularities in the chest that could be signs of COPD.  A type of blood test called an arterial blood gas test measures the amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood. Results can indicate the severity of the COPD.  Smokers should quit using tobacco products to reduce their risk of COPD development and many other health risks.  Those already diagnosed with COPD can reduce their symptoms and prevent further lung damage if they quit smoking.  Nicotine and smoking are addictive and quitting can be challenging. Only  4 to 7 percent  of smokers successfully quit "cold  turkey ." Other people need to plan how they will quit.  The National Institute on Drug Abuse  advise  that vaping has not been sufficiently evaluated as a tool to help people quit smoking.  The following tips may, therefore, be a safer alternative for those who wish to give up cigarettes for good:  For help staying focused, people can consider contacting the American Lung Association's  Lung HelpLine and Tobacco QuitLine  or a local support group.  Smoking cigarettes is the leading cause of COPD. There is not enough research to definitively say if vaping products also contribute to COPD development as they are relatively new.  Initial research, however, suggests a link between vaping and COPD and the Lung Institute recommend that people with COPD avoid vaping.  Individuals who are concerned about smoking or COPD should see their doctor for advice and a medical assessment. There are many support organizations available to those who wish to quit smoking.    
 Electronic cigarettes. (2018, May 16).  Electronic cigarettes. (2018, May 16).  Electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes). (2018, March). Rerieved from  https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/electronic-cigarettes-e-cigarettes   Garcia-Arcos, I., Geraghty, P., Baumlin, N., Campos, M., Dabo, A. J., Jundi, B., ... Foronjy, R. (2016, August 24). Chronic electronic cigarette exposure in mice induces features of COPD in a nicotine-dependent manner.  Thorax ,  71 (12), 1119–1129.  Is it okay to vape with COPD? (2018, February 6).  Lung HelpLine &amp; Tobacco QuitLine. (n.d.).  Reidel, B., Radicioni, G., Clapp, P. W., Ford, A. A., Abdelwahab, S., Rebuli, M. E., ... Kesimer, M. (2018, February 15). E-cigarette use causes a unique innate immune response in the lung, involving increased neutrophilic activation and altered mucin secretion [Abstract].  American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine ,  197 (4), 492–501.  Vaporizers, e-cigarettes, and other electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS). (2018, May 7).  What are electronic cigarettes? (2018, March).  What is COPD? (n.d.).  What to expect. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Can vaping cause lung problems?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321960.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, May 29). "Can vaping cause lung problems?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  