 Brown discharge before a period is typically a vaginal discharge that contains blood. Brown discharge that occurs when a period is not due may cause worry. However, brown discharge before a period is not typically a cause for concern.  This article explores the various causes of brown discharge before a period. It discusses what this may mean if a person is pregnant, not pregnant, or approaching  menopause .  The article also looks at other more serious causes of brown discharge, and when to see a doctor.  Vaginal discharge often occurs on an almost daily basis. Typically, vaginal discharge is thin and clear or white. Sometimes, it may be other colors. When vaginal discharge is brown, it likely contains small amounts of old blood. Old blood that has taken longer to come out of the uterus may be brown.  Brown discharge can occur for a variety of reasons, including.  When there is no pregnancy, brown discharge may be caused by:  Pink or brown discharge or spotting before a period may be an early sign of pregnancy. Not every pregnant person will experience this symptom, but some do.  This discharge is caused by implantation bleeding that can happen when the fertilized egg burrows into the uterus lining. Implantation bleeding can occur 1 to 2 weeks after the egg has been fertilized.  Anyone who experiences implantation bleeding following unprotected sex should take a pregnancy test.  Anyone who is pregnant and experiences dark brown discharge should speak to a doctor. However, brown discharge during pregnancy is not usually a cause for concern. In rare cases, it may indicate an ectopic pregnancy or miscarriage.  For those people in their 40s or 50s, brown discharge before a period may be a sign of perimenopause.  Perimenopause is the transition period before menopause when periods stop. Other symptoms may include:  There are some other more serious causes of brown discharge. These may occur at any age regardless of whether there is a pregnancy. They are likely to be accompanied by other symptoms.  More serious causes include:   Pelvic inflammatory disease  (PID) is an infection of the cervix and uterus that can cause brown discharge. Other symptoms may include:  Anyone who thinks they might have PID should speak to their doctor. If the doctor diagnoses PID, they may prescribe  antibiotics  to treat it.  Brown discharge before a period may indicate a  sexually transmitted disease  (STD), such as  gonorrhea  or  chlamydia . Other symptoms may include:  Not all people with STDs experience symptoms, which is why it is essential for all sexually-active people to be tested regularly for STDs.  Most STDs are easy to treat, although some are more serious and require more involved treatment. Treatment may include a course of antibiotics.  Bad-smelling brown discharge can occur if a foreign object gets left in the vagina accidentally. Objects that can cause this might include:  Anyone who notices a brown discharge with an odor should see their doctor, as they may have a retained object or vaginal infection.  PCOS is a hormonal imbalance. It may cause a brown discharge from irregular, light bleeding. Other symptoms can include:  PCOS is not uncommon. According to the National Institutes of Health (NIH), between 8 and 20 percent of reproductive-age women worldwide have PCOS.  Those who suspect that they may have PCOS should speak to their doctor. There is a range of treatments available.  To determine the most suitable treatment, the doctor may ask a person about:  Some treatments for PCOS may make it harder to get pregnant. A doctor can advise on the most suitable treatment for those who do want to get pregnant.  Brown discharge may be a symptom of  cervical cancer , but this is extremely rare.  According to the National Cancer Institute, cervical cancer only affects around 0.6 percent of women during their lifetime.  In the unlikely event that the cause of brown discharge is cervical cancer, other symptoms may include:  Anyone who suspects that they may have cervical cancer should speak to a doctor.  The first test a doctor will carry out for cervical cancer is a  Pap test . This can detect abnormal cells in the cervix.  If a doctor detects abnormal cells, they might examine the cervix using a magnifying instrument. They may then take a tissue sample for testing in a laboratory.  For those who do have cervical cancer, a doctor will carry out some imaging tests to determine its stage. Treatment options include surgery,  radiotherapy , or  chemotherapy .  Brown discharge is unlikely to be a cause for concern and usually does not require a trip to the doctor.  However, a person should speak to their doctor if they have brown discharge that:  Sometimes, brown discharge may indicate a more serious condition. If this is the case, it may be accompanied by other symptoms, as explored above. Anyone experiencing these symptoms should see their doctor.    
 Bleeding during pregnancy. (2016, July).  Bleeding during pregnancy. (2016, July).  Cancer stat facts: Cervical cancer. (n.d.).  Holzer, R. A., Persons, R. K., &amp; Jamieson, B. (2011, August 1). Evaluation of ovarian cysts.  American Family Physician ,  84 (3).  How many people are affected or at risk for PCOS? (2017, January 31).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What causes brown discharge before a period?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321929.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, May 26). "What causes brown discharge before a period?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  