 An allergic reaction to carrots can be one element of oral allergy syndrome, which is also known as pollen-food allergy syndrome. A person with this syndrome is allergic to pollens in certain raw fruits, vegetables, and nuts. After eating a trigger food, they experience an itchy throat, mouth, or ears.  If a person has a severe allergy to carrots, their reaction may be serious, especially if they have come into contact with the raw vegetable.  Anyone with a  food allergy  should consult a doctor to determine the best course of action.  In this article, we examine the signs, symptoms, and diagnosis of a carrot allergy. We also look at the types of foods to avoid.  A person with this allergy may notice symptoms after eating raw carrot. Cooked carrots tend to cause more minor reactions, as the cooking process breaks down allergens.  Symptoms of a carrot allergy can range from mild to severe, but they are likely to be mild.  Typical symptoms include:  Occasionally, symptoms may be severe and require treatment. More severe symptoms can include:  In rare cases,  anaphylaxis  can occur. This life-threatening allergic reaction causes the body to go into shock and requires emergency medical attention.  When introducing a baby to any new food, it is important to watch for allergic reactions. If any symptoms develop, consult a doctor.  Carrot allergies are not among the  most common  in the United States. However, they are  fairly common  in Europe.  Anyone who suspects that they have an allergy should visit a doctor.  The doctor will likely begin by reviewing the person's symptoms and family history. They may then recommend allergy testing.  A skin prick test, also called a scratch test, may be used. It involves the doctor placing a tiny amount of the allergen, in this case carrot, on a person's forearm or back. They then prick or scratch the area, allowing the allergen to penetrate the skin.  If the test is positive, a person will develop small red bumps at the site.  The doctor may suggest that a person follow a special diet for  several days  and keep a food diary to record what they ate and how they felt. This information will help the doctor to determine whether the person has a food allergy.  Depending on the results, a doctor may then suggest a food challenge, in which a person eats a small amount of a suspected trigger food and any reactions are recorded.  Most people with a carrot allergy know to avoid carrots, both raw and cooked. However, carrots can be included in a surprisingly large range of products.  A person with a carrot allergy should carefully check the ingredients of:  Personal hygiene products can also include carrots. A person with an allergy should check the labels of lotions, face masks, and soaps.  The best treatment for a carrot allergy is to avoid coming into contact with the vegetable. Doctors may recommend using antihistamines to control or reduce symptoms of allergic reactions.  If a person with a carrot allergy develops symptoms of anaphylaxis, they need immediate medical treatment, which involves:  CPR may also be necessary. In this procedure, chest compressions help to pump blood through the heart.  A person is more likely to have a carrot allergy if they are allergic to some other foods and plants, such as  birch pollen , which contains proteins similar to those in carrots.  Being allergic to other plants in the parsley and carrot family may also increase a person's risk. These plants include:  People may be  more likely  to develop food allergies if they have a family history of these reactions. Those with seasonal allergies or  asthma  may also have a higher risk of food allergies.  Anyone who suspects that they have an allergy should see a doctor.  A person with a carrot allergy should seek emergency medical attention if they have any symptoms of anaphylaxis, including:  Most people with carrot allergies can prevent reactions by avoiding carrots and products that contain them.  Anyone with a food allergy should carefully read the labels of packaged foods and personal hygiene products.  When necessary, a doctor can recommend allergy medications that help to reduce symptoms.    
 Ballmer-Weber, B. K., Skamstrup Hansen, K., Sastre, J., Andersson, K., Bätscher, I., Östling, J., ... &amp; Vieths, S. (2012, June). Component-resolved in vitro diagnosis of carrot allergy in three different regions of Europe [Abstract].  Allergy ,  67 (6), 758–766.  Ballmer-Weber, B. K., Skamstrup Hansen, K., Sastre, J., Andersson, K., Bätscher, I., Östling, J., ... &amp; Vieths, S. (2012, June). Component-resolved in vitro diagnosis of carrot allergy in three different regions of Europe [Abstract].  Allergy ,  67 (6), 758–766.  Food allergy. (n.d.).  Food allergies and baby. (n.d.).  Food allergy testing. (n.d.).  Oral allergy syndrome. (n.d.).  Patel, B. Y., &amp; Volcheck, G. W. (2015, October). Food allergy: Common causes, diagnosis, and treatment.  Mayo Clinic Proceedings ,  90 (10), 1411–1419.  Skin prick tests. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Can carrots cause allergies?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321962.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, May 29). "Can carrots cause allergies?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  