 Chronic gastritis is one of the  most common  chronic conditions and can last for years or even a lifetime if left untreated. A wide range of different conditions and factors are known to cause or contribute to the development of chronic gastritis.  Resolving mild cases of gastritis can often be through the use of medication and lifestyle changes. However, for some people with severe chronic gastritis, a cure may not be possible, and the focus of treatment will be on managing the symptoms.  In this article, we look at the symptoms, causes, risk factors, and possible complications of chronic gastritis. We also cover when to see a doctor, diagnosis, treatment, and lifestyle and dietary changes.  People with minor cases of gastritis that are caused by the bacterium  Helicobacter pylori  may not always notice any symptoms.  However, most people with chronic gastritis experience a variety of symptoms, including:  Chronic gastritis refers to a group of conditions that cause chronic  inflammation  of the mucosal lining of the stomach.  There are many different causes of chronic gastritis, but most cases are related to one of the following:   H. pylori  bacterial infection is the  most common  cause of gastritis worldwide. Many people first become infected during childhood, but not everyone experiences symptoms.  While  H. pylori  infection can cause both acute and chronic gastritis, it is not often associated with erosive gastritis.  Researchers think  H. pylori  spreads through infected food, water, salvia and other bodily fluids.  Damage to the stomach lining can lead to chronic inflammation. Causes of this include:  In people with autoimmune gastritis, their immune system attacks the stomach lining for no apparent reason. Autoimmune gastritis is usually chronic but non-erosive.  In some people, autoimmune gastritis may be linked to chronic or severe  H. pylori  infection.  Less common causes of chronic gastritis include:  Possible risk factors for chronic gastritis include:  If properly treated, acute cases of gastritis are rarely associated with complications. However, people may experience serious health complications if they have severe or untreated chronic gastritis.  Erosive gastritis can cause  peptic ulcers . Once an ulcer has formed, they can progressively degrade the surrounding tissues, widening and enlarging themselves. Severe ulcers may eventually cause internal bleeding, which can be life-threatening if left untreated.  Other possible complications of chronic gastritis include:  People with symptoms of gastritis should see a doctor if the symptoms:  Internal bleeding requires immediate medical attention. Signs of internal bleeding can include:  Doctors use a wide range of tests and tools to diagnose chronic gastritis, including:  Treatment depends on the type, cause, and severity of gastritis.  Gastritis caused by  H. pylori  infections is usually treated with a combination of antacids and  antibiotics , even if the infection is not causing any symptoms.  People will often need to take supplements or make dietary adjustments to prevent complications if their chronic gastritis is causing nutritional deficiencies.  Most gastritis medications focus on reducing the amount of acid in the stomach.  Common acid-reducing medications include:  Regardless of the cause or severity of symptoms, making dietary and lifestyle adjustments may help treat gastritis or prevent it occurring.  Common dietary suggestions for people with chronic gastritis include:  Eating a healthy, balanced diet rich in  antioxidants , fiber, and probiotics may also help. You find these substances in foods such as:  Some people with chronic gastritis may also find benefit from eating foods with anti-bacterial properties, such as:  Common lifestyle changes recommended for people with chronic gastritis include:  Chronic gastritis can cause pain and discomfort and lead to serious complications if left untreated. People should see their doctor if they have symptoms of chronic gastritis.  Management of chronic gastritis involves treating any underlying conditions, taking medications to counteract stomach acid, and making lifestyle and dietary changes.    
 Gastritis. (2016, June 23).  Gastritis. (2016, June 23).  Gastritis. (2015, July).  Shmuely, H., Domniz, N., &amp; Yahav, J. (2016, May 6). Non-pharmacological treatment of  Helicobacter pylori .  World Journal of Gastrointestinal Pharmacology and Therapeutics ,  7 (2), 171–178.  Sipponen, P., &amp; Maaroos, H.-I. (2015, June 3). Chronic gastritis.  Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology ,  50 (6), 657–667.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What are the causes and symptoms of chronic gastritis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321988.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, May 31). "What are the causes and symptoms of chronic gastritis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  