 The  hiccups  happen when the baby's diaphragm contracts. This forces air out through closed vocal chords, creating the hiccupping sound.  A person may be concerned that hiccups are causing a newborn discomfort. In this article, we explore the factors that trigger hiccups in newborns, the best ways to stop and prevent them, and when to see a doctor.  Authors of a  study  from 2012 suggest that the  hiccup  reflex may serve to remove excess air from the stomach. However, the medical community is still unsure whether hiccups have a purpose. So, what happens in the body to cause them?  Hiccups happen when something causes the diaphragm to spasm, and the vocal cords quickly shut. Air is forced out through the closed vocal chords, creating the hiccupping sound.  The diaphragm is a large muscle that runs across the bottom of the rib cage. It moves up and down as a person breathes.  Hiccups in babies tend to occur for no apparent reason, but feeding can occasionally cause the diaphragm to spasm. They may happen when a baby:  These factors can cause the baby's stomach to expand. As it expands, it pushes against the diaphragm, triggering the spasms that lead to hiccups.  If hiccups happen frequently and cause distress, they may result from an underlying health condition, such as gastroesophageal reflux (GER). This occurs when partially digested food and stomach acid come back up through the food pipe. As these fluids pass the diaphragm, they may irritate it and trigger spasms.  Feeding or stomach issues may not always cause hiccups. The diaphragm may spasm for unknown reasons.  Hiccups do not normally harm a baby. While adults may find hiccups uncomfortable, they tend to cause less distress in babies.  It is usually fine to leave a baby to stop hiccupping. If they do not stop, it is a good idea to speak to a doctor.  When a person is concerned and does not want to let newborn hiccups run their course, they may find the following strategies helpful:  When the stomach fills with air, it may push on the diaphragm, causing spasms. Taking a break from feeding to burp the baby may reduce the amount of air in their stomach. This can prevent hiccups.  According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, it is a good idea to burp bottle-fed babies every time they consume  2 to 3 ounces .  If a baby is breast-fed, it is a good idea to burp the baby while switching between breasts.  Sucking on a pacifier may help to relax the diaphragm and stop hiccupping.  Gripe water is a mixture of herbs and water. It is traditionally used to treat  colic  and other stomach problems.  The herbs usually contained in gripe water include:  If stomach issues are responsible for hiccups, some people believe that gripe water may help. However, no scientific evidence currently supports this treatment.  Because the risks are low, a person may decide to give gripe water a try. Several brands are available for purchase  online .  Rubbing their back and rocking the baby back and forth can help them to relax. This may stop the spasms that cause hiccups.  Some well-known remedies for hiccups are entirely rooted in tradition and have no scientific basis. These include:  It is a bad idea to try these, and many other home remedies, on a baby. These supposed remedies can distress a baby and may even be dangerous. They are unlikely to stop the hiccups.  Hiccups are often not preventable, but following the strategies below may help:  Hiccups are not normally a cause for concern in babies under 12 months old.  Speak with a doctor if hiccups are frequent or they seem to distress the baby because this can indicate an underlying health condition.  GER may cause frequent, uncomfortable hiccups. A baby may have GER if they also:  Anyone who suspects that a baby may have GER should speak with a doctor. The condition is easy to treat.  Newborn hiccups are not usually a cause for concern. Most babies have hiccups in their first year. Many of the likely causes relate to feeding.  Following feeding best practices may reduce hiccupping, and some home remedies may also help.  If hiccupping is frequent, or if it causes distress or other symptoms, speak with a doctor. It is also a good idea to contact a doctor if hiccups frequently occur after a baby turns one year old.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Burping, hiccups, and spitting up. (2009, November 2).  Burping, hiccups, and spitting up. (2009, November 2).  Definition &amp; facts for GER &amp; GERD in infants. (2015, April).  Howes, D. (2012, June). Hiccups: A new explanation for the mysterious reflex.  Bioessays ,  34 (6), 451–453.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  , Lana Burgess. "How to stop hiccups in newborns."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321932.php&gt;    APA  , L. (2018, May 26). "How to stop hiccups in newborns."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  