 Most of the saturated fat in our diet comes from animal products, including red meat, eggs, and dairy. These foods also all contain  cholesterol .  Many people believe that eating lots of cholesterol will directly increase the level of cholesterol in their blood. However, the USDA Dietary Guidelines from  2015  say there is little evidence for a link between dietary cholesterol and cholesterol levels in the blood.  Read on to learn more about the link between butter and blood cholesterol levels. We also suggest some butter substitutes and explain how to lower cholesterol.  One tablespoon of unsalted butter  contains  31 milligrams (mg) of cholesterol and 7.2 grams (g) of saturated fat.  The American Heart Association (AHA)  recommend  that anyone who is aiming to lower their LDL cholesterol should get no more than 5–6 percent of their total calorie intake from saturated fat. On a 2,000 calorie diet, this equates to 11–13 g of saturated fat per day. Therefore, two tablespoons of butter provide more saturated fat than most people should be consuming daily.  Eating lots of saturated fats can increase a person's LDL cholesterol level. As butter contains a lot of saturated fat, people with high cholesterol should be mindful of how much they consume each day.  However, a review of papers from  2014  suggests that people should focus on maintaining a favorable ratio between LDL and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels. The authors state that there may not be a strong link between a person's consumption of saturated fats and their risk of  heart disease  or  stroke .  Despite this, the  AHA  still recommend that people with high cholesterol monitor their consumption of butter. They suggest replacing it with healthy fat alternatives such as avocados and olive oil.  High cholesterol may not always produce noticeable symptoms. Therefore, some people may need a blood test to check their serum cholesterol levels. It is essential to monitor cholesterol in the blood as high levels can lead to a condition called  atherosclerosis .  Atherosclerosis can cause the following problems:  While many people use medication following a high cholesterol diagnosis, the following lifestyle changes can also help:  Oils that are high in unsaturated fat but low in saturated and trans fats are heart-healthy substitutes for butter. These include avocado, olive, and sunflower oils.  Some people use margarine in place of butter, but there is conflicting evidence regarding this replacement. Margarine uses vegetable oil, so it often contains less saturated fat than butter, which contains animal-based fat. However, hard margarine can also contain saturated and trans fats, so it is best to check the  nutrition  labels.  If a person has high cholesterol, they can ask their doctor about using stanol-based spreads or sterols, which may help reduce cholesterol levels.  It is possible to quickly compare the nutritional profiles of different butter alternatives using the  USDA Food Composition Databases . Looking at the nutritional information on food packaging can also help people make healthful choices. The aim should be to limit the intake of saturated and trans fats as much as possible.  Some people with high cholesterol may need medications, but doctors will usually always recommend these additional dietary changes initially:  Recent research counters the original belief that cholesterol in the diet strongly influences blood cholesterol. Being mindful of saturated and trans fat is essential though, as these may contribute to the rise in blood cholesterol. People with high cholesterol may have a higher risk of certain conditions and diseases such as atherosclerosis, stroke, and heart attack.  Butter is high in  calories  and fat, so people should eat it in moderation or replace it with healthy unsaturated fats. Eating a lot of butter may contribute to weight gain and could play a part in raising levels of LDL cholesterol.  A person can continue to enjoy butter in moderation as part of a healthy diet unless their doctor tells them otherwise.    
 Atherosclerosis. (2017, November 16).  Atherosclerosis. (2017, November 16).  Basic report: 01145, butter, without salt. (2018, April).  Cholesterol. (2018, January 23).  Chowdhury, R., Warnakula, S., Kunutsor, S., Crowe, F., Ward, H. A., Johnson, L., ... Di Angelantonio, E. (2014, March 18). Association of dietary, circulating, and supplement fatty acids with coronary risk: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  Annals of Internal Medicine ,  160 (6), 398–406.  Common misconceptions about cholesterol. (2018, January 29).  Scientific report of the 2015 Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee. (2015, February).  The skinny on fats. (2017, September 19).  USDA food composition databases. (n.d.).  Zeratsky, K. (2015, May 14). Which spread is better for my heart — butter or margarine?  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Is butter good or bad for cholesterol?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/321990.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, May 31). "Is butter good or bad for cholesterol?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  