  Calcium  plays an essential role in the body. It helps to build strong bones and teeth, while also supporting the muscles, nerves, and heart. However, too much calcium can lead to problems.  In this article, we explore the symptoms, causes, and complications of hypercalcemia. We also describe how it can be diagnosed and treated.  Calcium levels in the blood are mostly controlled by the parathyroid glands. These four tiny glands sit behind the thyroid.  When the body needs calcium, the parathyroid glands secrete a hormone. This hormone signals:  Overactive parathyroid glands or an underlying health condition can disrupt the balance of calcium.  If calcium levels become too high, a person may be diagnosed with hypercalcemia. This condition can impede bodily functions, and may specifically be associated with:  Extremely high levels of calcium in the blood can become life-threatening.  Mild hypercalcemia may not result in symptoms, while more serious hypercalcemia can cause:  A number of factors and underlying conditions can cause hypercalcemia. These include:  The parathyroid glands control calcium levels. If they work too hard, this can lead to hypercalcemia.  The parathyroid glands may become overactive when one is enlarged or when a noncancerous growth forms on one.  Having overactive parathyroid glands is called hyperparathyroidism. This may be the most  common cause  of hypercalcemia.  Hyperparathyroidism is usually diagnosed in people aged between  50 and 60 . It is also up to three times more common in women than men.   Vitamin  D triggers calcium absorption in the gut. Once absorbed, calcium travels into the bloodstream.  Only  10–20 percent  of the calcium in the diet is usually absorbed, while the rest is passed in stools. However, excessive amounts of vitamin D cause the body to absorb more calcium, leading to hypercalcemia.  In 2012, some researchers  suggested  that therapeutic high-dose vitamin D supplementation has the potential to cause hypercalcemia. These supplements can be used in the treatment of  multiple sclerosis  and other conditions.  The Food and Nutrition Board in the United States defines high doses of vitamin D as more than  4,000 international units (IU)  per day. The recommended daily dose for adults is 600–800 IU per day.  If a person has  cancer , this may cause hypercalcemia. Cancers that commonly lead to this condition include:  In 2013, it was estimated that each year hypercalcemia affects more than  2 percent  of all cancer patients in the U.S. Also, up to 30 percent of people with cancer will have high levels of calcium over the course of the disease.  If cancer spreads to the bone, this increases the risk of hypercalcemia.  Beyond cancer, the following conditions are known to cause high levels of calcium:  People who are unable to move around for long periods may also be at risk for hypercalcemia. When the bones have less work to do, they can weaken and release more calcium into the bloodstream.  People who are severely dehydrated have less water in their blood, which can increase the concentration of calcium in the bloodstream. However, this imbalance is usually corrected once a person becomes sufficiently hydrated.  In some cases, high levels of calcium can lead to severe hydration. It is important for doctors to identify which came first: the high levels of calcium or the dehydration.  Some medications can overstimulate the parathyroid gland, and this can lead to hypercalcemia. One example is lithium, which is sometimes used to treat  bipolar disorder .  Without proper treatment, hypercalcemia can be associated with:  Over time, the bones may release excessive amounts of calcium into the bloodstream. This makes the bones thinner, or less dense. As calcium continues to be released,  osteoporosis  can develop.  People with osteoporosis have an increased risk of:  People with hypercalcemia are at risk of developing calcium crystals in their kidneys. These crystals can become kidney stones, which are often very painful. They can also lead to kidney damage.  Over time, severe hypercalcemia can stop a person's kidneys from working correctly. The kidneys may become less effective at cleaning the blood, producing urine, and efficiently removing fluid from the body. This is called kidney failure.  If left untreated, severe hypercalcemia may impede the nervous system. Possible effects include:  Falling into a coma is serious and can be life-threatening.  The heart beats when electrical impulses move through it and cause it to contract. Calcium plays a role in regulating this process, and too much calcium can lead to an irregular heartbeat.  Anyone experiencing symptoms of hypercalcemia should speak with a doctor, who will order a blood test and make a diagnosis based on results.  A person with mild hypercalcemia may have no symptoms, and the condition may only be diagnosed after a routine blood test.  The test will check for blood calcium and parathyroid hormone levels. These can show how well the body's systems are functioning, such as those involving the blood and kidneys.  After diagnosing hypercalcemia, a doctor may perform further tests, such as:  People with mild hypercalcemia may not require treatment, and levels may return to normal over time. The doctor will monitor calcium levels and the health of the kidneys.  If calcium levels continue to rise or do not improve on their own, further testing will likely be recommended.  For people with more severe hypercalcemia, it is important to discover the cause. The doctor may offer treatments to help lower calcium levels and prevent complications. Possible treatments include intravenous fluids and medications such as calcitonin or bisphosphonates.  If overactive parathyroid glands, too much vitamin D, or another health condition is causing hypercalcemia, the doctor will also treat these underlying conditions.  A person with a noncancerous growth on a parathyroid gland may require surgery to remove it.  Certain lifestyle changes can help to keep calcium levels balanced and bones healthy. These include:  A person's outlook depends on the cause and severity of hypercalcemia.  Mild hypercalcemia may not require treatment. If the condition is more serious, a doctor may prescribe medications that lower levels of calcium and treat the underlying cause.  Anyone experiencing symptoms of hypercalcemia should speak with a doctor.    
 Gastanaga, V. M., Schwartzberg, L. S., Jain, R. K., Pirolli, M., Quach, D., Quigley, J. M., … Liede, A. (2016, August). Prevalence of hypercalcemia among cancer patients in the United States.  Cancer Medicine ,  5 (8), 2091–2100.  Gastanaga, V. M., Schwartzberg, L. S., Jain, R. K., Pirolli, M., Quach, D., Quigley, J. M., … Liede, A. (2016, August). Prevalence of hypercalcemia among cancer patients in the United States.  Cancer Medicine ,  5 (8), 2091–2100.  Goldner, W. (2016, May 1). Cancer-related hypercalcemia.  Journal of Oncology Practice,  12  (5), 426–432.  Karthikeyan, V. J., Khan, J. M., and Lip, G. Y. H. (2006). Hypercalcemia and the cardiovascular system.  Heart Metabolism ,  30 , 25–29.  Lewis, J. L. (2018, March). Hypercalcemia.  Marcus, J. F., Shalev, S. M., Harris, C. A., Goodin, D. S., &amp; Josephson, A. (2012, January). Severe hypercalcemia following vitamin D supplementation in a patient with multiple sclerosis: A note of caution.  Archives of Neurology ,  69 (1), 129–132.  Mirrakhimov, A. E. (2015, November). Hypercalcemia of malignancy: An update on pathogenesis and management.  North American Journal of Medical Sciences ,  7 (11), 483–493.  Primary hyperparathyroidism. (2012, August).  Vitamin D. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What happens when calcium levels are high?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322012.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, June 2). "What happens when calcium levels are high?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  