 Fasting is a longstanding part of many religious traditions, including the Jewish and Muslim observances of Yom Kippur and Ramadan. A form of fasting known as intermittent fasting has also gained popularity as a weight-loss tool.  Many studies have examined the benefits and risks of giving up food for a day, including how it affects weight loss.  In this article, we look at what happens to the body during fasting, as well as what a person can do to make fasting safer.  Whether a person is fasting or not, the body still needs energy. Its primary energy source is a sugar called glucose, which usually comes from  carbohydrates , including grains, dairy products, fruits, certain vegetables, beans, and even sweets.  The liver and muscles store the glucose and release it into the bloodstream whenever the body needs it.  However, during fasting, this process changes. After about  8 hours of fasting , the liver will use the last of its glucose reserves. At this point, the body enters into a state called gluconeogenesis, marking the body's transition into fasting mode.   Studies have shown  that gluconeogenesis increases the number of  calories  the body burns. With no carbohydrates coming in, the body creates its own glucose using mainly fat.  Eventually, the body runs out of these energy sources as well. Fasting mode then becomes the more serious starvation mode.  At this point, a person's metabolism slows down, and their body begins burning muscle tissue for energy.  Although it is a well-known term in dieting culture, true starvation mode only occurs after several consecutive days or even weeks without food.  So, for those breaking their fast after 24 hours, it is generally safe to go without eating for a day unless other health conditions are present.  It does appear that fasting  can help with weight loss . However, studies make it clear that this is not the case for everyone.  Popular diet plans include 12-hour or 16-hour fasting periods, as well as the 24-hour fast. Some diets require people to drink only water during the fast, while others allowed any zero-calorie beverage.  Fasting is not necessarily better than any other weight-loss method, including reducing daily calorie intake by a small amount.  In a  recent study , people with  obesity  who fasted intermittently for 12 months lost slightly more weight than those who dieted in a more traditional way, but the results were not statistically significant.  The limits of fasting appear to have less to do with its physical effects than how it fits into a given lifestyle.  For example, the same study found that people who fasted were more likely to give up on weight-loss efforts than those who dieted in a more traditional way, such as counting calories. The researchers concluded that fasting might be harder to maintain over time.  Another possible concern is post-fast binging.  Some fasting experts  agree that it is easy to derail weight-loss successes by overeating after the fasting period.  Fasting days can also offer a false sense of security, leading people to disregard positive eating habits on non-fasting days.  As well as aiding weight loss, not eating for a day can have other health benefits.  Research suggests that occasional 24-hour fasting can  improve cardiovascular health .  Some evidence from research on animals shows that fasting can help  fight certain kinds of cancer  or even help  preserve memory .  Drinking enough water is essential for maintaining everyday health, whether a person is eating or not.  Many health authorities recommend drinking eight 8-ounce glasses (about 2 liters) of water every day.  Unless a religious observance forbids it, a person can take advantage of the fast by drinking plenty of water to help curb hunger pangs.  When fasting for 24 hours, some people consume other beverages such as tea, black  coffee , or zero-calorie sweetened drinks.  Although it is generally safe, going a day without eating can be risky for some people, including:  According to  Chelsey Amer , a registered dietitian nutritionist, there are several ways a person can break their fast safely:  Going a day without eating is generally safe and can be beneficial in several ways, including as a weight-loss tool.  Fasting does not help weight loss any more than other conventional approaches and can be harder to stick with over the long term.  If a person is fasting for health reasons, it is essential that they do it safely and for no longer than is necessary. Long-term fasting starves the body of essential nutrients and can cause many complications.    
 Collier, R. (2013, June). Intermittent fasting: The science of going without.  Canadian Medical Association Journal , 185(9), 363–364.  Collier, R. (2013, June). Intermittent fasting: The science of going without.  Canadian Medical Association Journal , 185(9), 363–364.  Di Biase, S., Lee, C., Brandhorst, S., Manes, B., Buono, R., Cheng, C.-W., … Longo, V. D. (2016, July 11). Fasting-mimicking diet reduces HO-1 to promote T cell-mediated tumor cytotoxicity.  Cancer Cell ,  30 (1), 136–146.  Diet review: Intermittent fasting for weight loss. (n.d).  Fasting and your health. (2017, April 22).  Horne, B. D., Cox, J. E., Muhlestein, J. B., Le, V. T., Butler, A. R., May, H. T., … Anderson, J. L. (2014, November 25). 24-hour water-only fasting acutely reduces trimethylamine n-oxide [Abstract].  Circulation ,  130 (2).  Horne, B. D., Muhlestein, J. B., Lappé, D. L., May, H. T., Carlquist, J. F., Galenko, O., … Anderson, J. L. (2013, November). Randomized cross-over trial of short-term water-only fasting: Metabolic and cardiovascular consequences [Abstract].  Nutrition, Metabolism and Cardiovascular Diseases ,  23 (11), 1050–1057.  Trepanowski, J. F., Kroeger, C. M., Barnosky, A. , Klempel, M. C., Bhutani, S., Hoddy, K. K., … Varady, K. A. (2017, July). Effect of alternate-day fasting on weight loss, weight maintenance, and cardioprotection among metabolically healthy obese adults: A randomized clinical trial [Abstract].  JAMA Internal Medicine ,  177 , 930–938.  Veldhorst, M. A. B., Westerterp-Plantenga, M. S., &amp; Westerterp, K. R. (2009, September 1). Gluconeogenesis and energy expenditure after a high-protein, carbohydrate-free diet.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  90 , 519–526.  What happens to your body during a 24 hour fast? (2016, October 11).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Harris, Scott. "What happens if you fast for a day?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 8 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322065.php&gt;    APA  Harris, S. (2018, June 8). "What happens if you fast for a day?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  