 Today, chronic pain affects more people than  cancer ,  heart disease , and  diabetes  combined. Chronic pain is the  most common  cause of long-term disability in the United States.  Most marijuana-based products do not have approval from the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and more evidence is necessary to confirm their safety and effectiveness.  However, anecdotal evidence suggests that marijuana or its compounds may help relieve some types of pain.  There are distinct types or strains of marijuana available, and each may have slightly different effects on the user.  In this article, we look at the best marijuana strains for chronic pain relief.  The different types of marijuana plants include the following:  There is limited research available on the use of specific marijuana strains for pain and other symptoms. As a result, strain-specific recommendations are not medically proven.  The  results  of an online survey, comprising 95 participants, featured in the  Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine  in 2014.  The researchers found that participants preferred  indica  strains for pain management, sedation, and sleep while they would opt for  sativa  strains to improve energy and mood.  Regarding pain management, participants reported a statistically significant effect when using  indica  for:  It is, however, important to note that this study had several limitations. It was small in scale, anonymous, and asked people to self-report on their symptoms. Respondents did not use the marijuana in a controlled setting, potentially resulting in differences in drug composition, dosage, and potency.  Another  study  examined the use of organically grown  sativa  and  indica  strains in the treatment of several medical conditions. Just over half of the participants were using marijuana to treat  HIV .  The study followed participants for 3 years and asked them about the effects of the drug on their condition during this time. The results indicated that  indica  strains are more likely to improve energy and appetite, while both  sativa  and  indica  strains can alleviate nausea to a similar degree.  Marijuana, or cannabis, contains compounds that may relieve pain, nausea, and other symptoms. The components of marijuana that most studies focus on for pain relief are cannabidiol (CBD) and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).  THC resembles the cannabinoid chemicals that occur naturally in the body. When people ingest or inhale THC, it  stimulates  the brain's cannabinoid receptors.  This activates the brain's reward system and reduces pain levels. THC is a psychoactive compound as it binds to cannabinoid receptors and produces an elevated state of mind, known as a high.  CBD does not cause a high, although it does interact with pain receptors in the brain to exert pain-relieving and anti-inflammatory effects.  In recent years, many studies have looked at the effects of marijuana for chronic pain. Some studies used parts of the marijuana plant and some have used the entire plant so more research is needed. Using parts of the marijuana plant (like CBD oil) helps study specific actions of that ingredient, but when the whole plant is used there is what is called an entourage effect, where the parts work together to have more effect.  A  2015 review  of research on the use of marijuana and cannabinoids for various chronic pain conditions reports that several trials had positive results. The researchers suggest that marijuana or cannabinoids may be effective for treating some types of chronic pain including neuropathy (nerve pain).  A  research paper  from 2016 found that marijuana use for cancer pain led to a 64-percent reduction in opioid use, improved quality of life, and caused fewer medication side effects. It also led to participants using fewer medications.  Smaller studies have reported benefits for other types of chronic pain. For example:  However, there is still a need for more research into the area of marijuana use for chronic pain, especially into the use of different strains, dosages, and methods of delivery.  An  Australian study , published in July 2018, concluded that marijuana use did not reduce the symptoms of pain or the need to use opioid medications. However, the findings were mostly based on reports from people who used the drug recreationally.  Using marijuana specifically for medicinal purposes might yield different results.  Medical marijuana refers to the whole, unprocessed plant or its extracts.  Medical marijuana only has approval from the  U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  as a safe or effective treatment for two conditions. These are rare and severe forms of  epilepsy  that involve seizures that other drugs have not been able to control.  The name of the drug is Epidiolex. It contains a purified form of CBD, and the FDA gave approval in June 2018.  The FDA have also approved medications containing synthetic THC cannabinoids called dronabinol (Marinol) and nabilone (Cesamet). These drugs reduce nausea in people undergoing cancer treatments and increase appetite in people living with HIV.  The FDA have not yet approved the use of any marijuana drugs for pain relief.  Synthetic marijuana is also the name given to drugs such as K2 or Spice. The  National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)  point out that these are not marijuana, they are not safe, and they are not recommended for any purpose. The adverse effects of these drugs can be fatal.  Synthetic marijuana attempts to duplicate the effects of the ingredients in the plant. There is theory that the entire plant has a more profound effect with the different ingredients working together to have an entourage effect.  Marijuana use can cause some side effects, including:  Marijuana is available in several different forms, including:  It is possible to extract full extract cannabis oil (FECO) from cannabis using grain alcohol or ethanol.  People usually take FECO orally and should only need small quantities to experience benefits.  CBD is another type of marijuana-based oil that is increasingly popular among people with chronic pain.  People can apply lotions, balms, and salves containing cannabinoids to the skin to relieve pain and  inflammation . Transdermal patches that contain cannabinoids are also available and are typically more potent than lotions and salves.  Edibles are one of the most popular ways to use marijuana. Edibles involve infusing food, such as cookies, brownies, and candies, with the drug.  Marijuana edibles offer an easy way to take marijuana, but the effects of edibles can be difficult to predict.  Sublingual administration involves placing a drug under the tongue. The drug enters the bloodstream faster using this method and so it will work more quickly.  Opioids are powerful medications that relieve pain by acting on the nervous system. They are highly addictive, and withdrawal symptoms are not uncommon.  In 2016, approximately  116 people  died every day in the U.S. from opioid-related drug overdoses, and 11.5 million people misuse prescription opioids every year.  Medical marijuana may offer an alternative to addictive opioids. When researchers  surveyed  almost 3,000 medical cannabis users, they found that 30 percent had used opioids in the last 6 months.  Of those respondents, 81 percent agreed or strongly agreed that marijuana was more effective alone than in combination with opioids.  In addition, 97 percent said they agreed or strongly agreed that they could decrease their opioid usage when taking marijuana.  Several studies report the benefits of marijuana use for chronic pain.  According to some research, it is as effective as opioids, which are among the most potent pain-relieving drugs.  The side effects of marijuana use are usually minimal, especially in comparison with opioid side effects. However, due to lack of regulation for most marijuana-based therapies, the exact composition and quality of a product cannot be guaranteed.  This evidence indicates that marijuana may be beneficial for chronic pain relief.  There are several strains of marijuana available, so even if one strain does not reduce symptoms, another may. Typically, it is best for people to keep their dosage low, especially if they are new to using marijuana.  Those who wish to use medical marijuana should discuss the risks and benefits in more detail with their doctor and ensure they obtain their medications legally and from a reputable outlet.   Article last updated by Yvette Brazier on Fri  3 August 2018.  Visit our  Pain / Anesthetics  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Pain / Anesthetics.   
 Boehnke, K. F., Litinas, E., &amp; Clauw, D. J. (2016, June). Medical cannabis use is associated with decreased opiate medication use in a retrospective cross-sectional survey of patients with chronic pain [Abstract].  The Journal of Pain ,  17 (6), 739–744.  Boehnke, K. F., Litinas, E., &amp; Clauw, D. J. (2016, June). Medical cannabis use is associated with decreased opiate medication use in a retrospective cross-sectional survey of patients with chronic pain [Abstract].  The Journal of Pain ,  17 (6), 739–744.  Campbell, D., Hall, W. G., Peacock, A., Lintzeris, N., Bruno, R., Larance, B., ... Degenhardt, L. (2018, July 1). Effect of cannabis use in people with chronic non-cancer pain prescribed opioids: findings from a 4-year prospective cohort study.  The Lancet, 3 (7), PE341–E350.  Corral, V. L. (2008, October 20). Differential effects of medical marijuana based on strain and route of administration: A three-year observational study [Abstract].  Journal of Cannabis Therapeutics ,  1 (3-4), 43–59.  Lynch, M. E., &amp; Ware, M. A. (2015, June). Cannabinoids for the Treatment of Chronic Non-Cancer Pain: An Updated Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials.  Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology, 10 (2), 293-301.  FDA approves first drug comprised of an active ingredient derived from marijuana to treat rare, severe forms of epilepsy. (2018, June 25).  Hill, K. P. (2015, June 23–30). Medical marijuana for treatment of chronic pain and other medical and psychiatric problems: A clinical review [Abstract].  JAMA ,  313 (24), 2474–2483.  How does marijuana produce its effects? (2018, May).  Pain management. (2013, March 29).  Pearce, D. D., Mitsouras, K., &amp; Irizarry, K. J. (2014, October 9). Discriminating the effects of  Cannabis sativa  and  Cannabis indica : A web survey of medical cannabis users [Abstract].  The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine ,  20 (10), 787–791.  Reiman, A., Welty, M., &amp; Solomon, P. (2017, June 1). Cannabis as a substitute for opioid-based pain medication: Patient self-report.  Cannabis and Cannabinoid Research ,  2 (1), 160–166.  Rhyne, D. N., Anderson, S. L., Gedde, M., &amp; Borgelt, L. M. (2016, May). Effects of medical marijuana on migraine headache frequency in an adult population [Abstract].  Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human Pharmacology and Drug Therapy ,  36 (5), 505–510.  Waissengrin, B., Urban, D., Leshem, Y., Garty, M., &amp; Wolf, I. (2015, February). Patterns of use of medical cannabis among Israeli cancer patients: a single institution experience [Abstract].  Journal of Pain and Symptom Management ,  49 (2), 223–230.  Weir, K. (2015, November). Marijuana and the developing brain.  Monitor on Psychology ,  46 (10), 48.  What are synthetic cannabinoids? (2018, June).  What is medical marijuana? (2018, May).  What is the U.S. opioid epidemic? (2018, March 6).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What are the best cannabis strains for chronic pain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322051.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, August 3). "What are the best cannabis strains for chronic pain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  