 It is located in the uppermost part of the arm, at the shoulder. Tendons attach the deltoid to the collarbone, shoulder blade, and upper arm.  Like many other muscles, the deltoid can be sore for a variety of reasons, including overuse and tendon injuries.  In this article, we explore the causes of deltoid pain. We also describe home remedies and treatments that can provide relief.  When the deltoid muscle is injured, a person may feel pain or tenderness at the front, side, or back of the shoulder, especially when lifting the arm.  In some cases, the deltoid muscle may be torn and cause swelling and bruising.  Strains are given a grade of 1–3, according to their severity:  A deltoid strain can lead to symptoms ranging from a mild tightness of the muscle to severe, restricting pain.  For mild injuries caused by overuse, a doctor may recommend adjusting exercise routines to accommodate the injury and prevent it from worsening.  Many people, including athletes, may need to decrease the intensity and duration of their workouts or sports practices while their shoulders heal.  People can also use over-the-counter anti-inflammatories, such as ibuprofen or naproxen, to reduce  inflammation , swelling, and discomfort.  A doctor may recommend the following treatments, depending on the severity of the strain:  If the pain does not diminish over time with these home remedies, a physician or a rehabilitation specialist can offer additional recommendations designed to speed recovery and manage pain.  As with any form of exercise, it is vital to warm up, cool down, and stretch. Doing so will help to protect the deltoid. To improve flexibility and prevent injury, stretches should involve the shoulder and deltoid.  Gradual strength training and conditioning can also help to prevent strain and injury. When a person is recovering from a deltoid injury, gentle stretching can help to reduce pain.  Deltoid stretches and exercises include:  Bend forward at a roughly 45-degree angle and let the affected arm dangle. Gently swing the arm back and forth for 3–5 minutes to loosen the muscles around the shoulder and relieve pain.  Standing in front of a doorframe, place the forearms on either side of the frame and lean into the doorway for 30 seconds at a time.  While standing upright or sitting in a chair, pull the affected arm across the chest, using the other arm to create slight tension. Hold for 30 seconds.  Lying flat, raise the affected arm so that the fingertips point toward the ceiling. Use the other arm to help support it, if necessary. Keeping the arm straight, swing it a few inches backward toward the head then forwards toward the knee for 3–5 minutes.  In a standing position, bring the arms behind the back and clasp the hands together. Gently lift the hands toward the ceiling as far as is comfortable.  The most common causes of deltoid pain are overuse injuries and strains. People who use their shoulders and deltoid muscles repetitively, especially athletes, have an increased risk of deltoid injury.  A strain can suddenly result from heavy lifting or an accident, such as a trip or fall.  Most injuries to the deltoid muscle take time to develop and are caused by activities such as swimming, lifting weights, or playing baseball.  People can help prevent deltoid pain and shoulder injuries by:  Sports therapists, fitness trainers, and medical professionals may be able to offer tailored advice and suggestions on preventing injuries while playing a particular sport.  People can often treat overuse injuries and strains at home with over-the-counter remedies and therapies.  To avoid developing a chronic problem, it may be a good idea to speak with a doctor, physical therapist, or occupational therapist about preventing further injuries.    
 Brumitt, J., &amp; Dale, R. B. (2009, August). Integrating shoulder and core exercises when rehabilitating athletes performing overhead activities.  North American Journal of Sports Physical Therapy ,  4 (3), 132–138.  Brumitt, J., &amp; Dale, R. B. (2009, August). Integrating shoulder and core exercises when rehabilitating athletes performing overhead activities.  North American Journal of Sports Physical Therapy ,  4 (3), 132–138.  Overuse injury. (n.d.).  Physiotherapy: Anterior deltoid muscle exercises for rotator cuff tears. (2016, December).  Shoulder anatomy. (n.d.).  Sprains and strains: Types. (2015, January 30).  Stretching the major muscle groups. (2015, April 13).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. "Deltoid pain: Types and treatment."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322031.php&gt;    APA  Lori Smith BSN MSN CRNP. (2018, June 5). "Deltoid pain: Types and treatment."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  