 CNH often affects those who sleep on one side of their body more than the other. The condition most commonly occurs in males  aged 40 years old or older , but females and younger adults may also develop a nodule.  Below, we discuss the symptoms and causes of CNH, along with the best treatment options.  The most obvious symptom is a painful raised bump or nodule on the cartilage of the ear.  The nodule will typically grow bigger over time until it is between  5 and 10 millimeters  (mm) in diameter.  There is often a tiny core in the bump that emits a scaly liquid. This liquid may cause a scab to form over the nodule when it dries.  Although small, a nodule caused by CNH is usually sensitive to touch and temperature. It can create an intensely sharp or stabbing sensation when irritated or exposed to cold.  A person cannot get rid of CNH by picking at a nodule. The lump may persist for several months or years.  When someone experiences pressure or trauma to the skin, it can be associated with CNH. People who sleep mainly on one side often develop a nodule. Experts believe changes in blood flow to the cartilage contribute to the problem.  A bump may, however, appear:  Also, people with autoimmune diseases, particularly a condition known as  systemic sclerosis , have reported having CNH.  Importantly, CNH is not contagious or hereditary, and it is not linked to  skin cancer .  A dermatologist or doctor may be able to diagnose CNH by looking at the ear.  They will, however, probably order a biopsy to confirm this and to rule out more serious conditions. During a biopsy, a doctor will remove a small sample of the nodule, and send it away for examination under a microscope.  People sometimes mistake CNH for skin cancer, especially if the skin around the nodule bleeds or becomes scaly. This confusion is because basal cell skin cancer, squamous cell skin cancer, and precancers can resemble some CNH nodules.  People who experience CNH can treat the condition with self-care techniques and medications.  People can find relief using home remedies to improve sleep and reduce the symptoms of pain and pressure in the ear.  To relieve discomfort or pain, a person can:  If someones quality of life is affected by CNH, and they are unable to manage it with self-care techniques, a doctor can treat it with:  Surgery for CNH was once the preferred method of treatment. But  recent studies  suggest that more conservative treatments may be just as effective. Surgery is now reserved for severe cases or when other treatments fail to improve CNH.  When surgery is required, a doctor will usually do an excision biopsy by removing the nodule under a local anesthetic. Changes to the nerves during an operation may help to reduce pain around the CNH.  The recurrence rate of CNH after an excision biopsy is, however, estimated to be around  10 to 38 percent . It may recur because a surgeon did not succeed in removing all of the damaged cartilage during an operation.  People may experience symptoms that range from mild discomfort to severe pain when they have CNH. The condition is not, however, harmful or cancerous.  CNH is treatable, and the long-term outlook is good. Most people respond well to medications or medical procedures.  Doctors typically recommended surgery to remove the nodule when other treatments have not been successful.  Many people can manage their symptoms, at least in the short term, using home remedies, such as special pillows and changes in sleeping habits.    
 Chondrodermatitis nodularis [Fact sheet]. (2016, August).  Chondrodermatitis nodularis [Fact sheet]. (2016, August).  Garrido Colmenero, C., Martínez García, E., Blasco Morente, G., &amp; Tercedor Sánchez, J. (2014, September-October). Nitroglycerin patch for the treatment of chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis: A new therapeutic option [Abstract].  Dermatologic Therapy ,  27 (5), 278–280.  Giraldo, W. A. S., González-García, C., de las Heras Alonso, E., &amp; de la Puente Bujidos, C. (2014, December 1). Chondrodermatitis nodularis chronica helicis in a patient with systemic sclerosis associated with primary biliary cirrhosis (Reynolds syndrome): A case report.  European Journal of Rheumatology ,  1 (4), 161–163.  Jacob. K, J., Satheesh, S., Menon, P., &amp; Saju, K. G. (2005, October–December). Winkler's disease [Abstract].  Indian Journal of Otolaryngology and Head &amp; Neck Surgery ,  57 (4), 323–324.  Juul Nielsen, L., Holkmann Olsen, C., &amp; Lock-Andersen, J. (2016, January 27). Therapeutic options of chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis.  Plastic Surgery International ,  2016 , 4340168.  Oakley, A. (1997). Chondrodermatitis nodularis helicis.  Rex, J., Ribera, M., Bielsa, I., Mangas, C., Xifra, A., &amp; Ferrándiz, C. (2006, March). Narrow elliptical skin excision and cartilage shaving for treatment of chondrodermatitis nodularis [Abstract].  Dermatologic Surgery ,  32 (3), 400–404.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What does chondrodermatitis mean?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322024.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, June 4). "What does chondrodermatitis mean?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  