 Knee buckling is relatively common among adults. In one study,  11.8 percent  of adults aged 36–94 reported at least one episode of knee buckling in the past 3 months. It can affect people of all ages and levels of fitness.  In this article, we look at the causes of knee buckling, exercises that can help, treatment, and when to see a doctor.  Knee buckling is a complicated condition with many different potential causes.  Many people associate knee buckling with osteoarthritis. However,  one study  found that more than half of the participants who reported episodes of knee buckling did not show any signs of  arthritis  in X-rays.  The complex structure of the knee joint can make it difficult to determine what is causing knee buckling.  The knee consists of two joints, which allow it to move in different directions. The knee has support from:  It is possible to damage any of these different parts, sometimes in combination with other injuries to the knee. This can lead to instability in the knee and knee buckling.  Certain factors may be related to knee buckling. These include knee pain, which can occur for a variety of reasons, and weak muscles at the front of the leg.  The following may also contribute to the likelihood of knee buckling:  Certain exercises can strengthen the leg muscles and improve knee stability, which may help to prevent or reduce knee buckling.  A doctor or physical therapist can design an exercise program to address the needs of a person worried about knee buckling. This will usually focus on:  A typical knee rehabilitation program will run for 4–6 weeks. However, it is usually best to continue doing these exercises for as long as possible to maintain the health of the knees.  Specific exercises will stretch and strengthen:  Following a knee rehabilitation program will help a person by:  It is important to start these exercises very slowly and gently. People need to gradually build up strength and flexibility in their legs and knees before moving on to tougher exercises.  However, to make progress, it is important for people to challenge themselves a little, both at home and in  physical therapy  sessions. It can be hard to achieve the right balance, but a trained therapist can help to ensure that the level of exertion is suitable.  People who experience knee buckling may also need to adapt their exercise habits. For example, a person with arthritis may need to switch from high-impact activities, such as running or tennis, to lower-impact activities, such as swimming or cycling.  Cycling can also help to build strength in the upper legs, which will contribute to improved stability in the knee.  Treatment for knee buckling will depend on the cause. Common treatment options include:  Researchers have demonstrated that exercise programs can make a big difference to the lives of people with arthritis and knee instability. One study followed people as they took part in a 12-week exercise program focusing on muscle strength and daily functioning. The participants reported a  20–40 percent  reduction in pain and interference with everyday life.  Lifestyle modifications can also help people manage knee buckling. The following may help to reduce the  stress  on unstable knees:  Minor knee injuries are common. Many people recover from them without medical intervention, often by trying some variation of the RICE approach or other home treatments.  However, some conditions that cause knee buckling can get worse without medical treatment. Anyone who experiences the following symptoms in addition to knee buckling should see a doctor:    
 Abulhasan, J.F., &amp; Grey, M. J. (2017, September 24). Anatomy and physiology of knee stability.  Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology ,  2 (4), 34.  Abulhasan, J.F., &amp; Grey, M. J. (2017, September 24). Anatomy and physiology of knee stability.  Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology ,  2 (4), 34.  Arthritis of the knee. (2014, June).  Common knee injuries. (2014, March).  Felson, D. T., Niu, J., McClennan, C., Sack, B., Aliabadi, P., Hunter, D. J., …Englund, M. (2007, October 16). Knee buckling: Prevalence, risk factors, and associated limitations in function.  Annals of Internal Medicine ,  147 (8), 534–540.  Knee problems. (2016, March 30).  Knee rehabilitation exercises. (2012, October).  Koop, J., Dekker, J., van der Leeden, M., van der Esch, M., Thortensson, C. A., Gerritsen, M., … Steultjens, M. P. M. (2013, August). Knee joint stabilization therapy in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee: A randomized, controlled trial.  Osteoarthritis and Cartilage ,  21 (8), 1025–1034.  Lee, P. Y. F., Nixion, A., Chandratreya, A., &amp; Murray, J. M. (2017, January). Synovial plica syndrome of the knee: A commonly overlooked cause of anterior knee pain.  The Surgery Journal ,  3 (1), e9–e16.  Physical therapist's guide to knee pain. (2011, August 19).  Unstable kneecap. (2007, August).  Walking (gait) difficulties. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "What causes knee buckling?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322074.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, June 9). "What causes knee buckling?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  