 While chiropractors are widely known for treating back and neck pain, they also treat bone and soft tissue conditions.  In this article, we explore myths and truths of chiropractic care. We also describe the training that chiropractors undergo, how safe these treatments may be, and the research behind the practice.  A common myth is that chiropractors do not undergo a significant amount of training.  In fact, they typically complete about 8 years of higher education before they are licensed.  Chiropractors tend to have 4 years of undergraduate education.  They usually graduate with a pre-med major after having taken courses in sciences, such as biology, chemistry, psychology, and physics.  They then attend a chiropractic graduate program. On average, these involve 4 years of education with a total of 4,200 instructional hours in course credits.  Divided by year, a chiropractic graduate program usually involves:  Other studies often accompany those mentioned above.  After completing the educational and training requirements, an aspiring chiropractor in the United States will sit for their state licensing board. Once they have obtained licensure and certification from the board, they will become a doctor of chiropractic.  Chiropractors often receive additional training and certification in a wide  variety of specialties , including  nutrition , sports medicine,  acupuncture , and rehabilitation.  According to the American Chiropractic Association, the average chiropractic program involves  as many classroom hours  as a program that trains medical doctors.  Another common myth is that a chiropractor merely cracks a person's back or bones.  Chiropractic care is centered around spinal manipulation. However, practitioners also study how the spine and its structures are related to the body's function.  A majority of a chiropractor's work involves making adjustments to heal:  They may also provide services such as postural testing and analysis, as well as others designed to promote nutrition and healthful exercise.  According to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health in the U.S., chiropractic therapy is the type most commonly used for back pain. An estimated  74 percent  of Americans with pain in this area have used chiropractic care at some point in their treatment.  Results of a 2010 review cited by the center suggest that spinal manipulation may be  useful for treating  back pain,  migraine  headaches,  whiplash , and other conditions affecting the upper and lower extremities.  Like other forms of treatment, chiropractic care will not benefit all injuries. Sessions should be tailored to a person's needs and performed by a licensed chiropractor.  Several myths surround this question. One myth is that chiropractors only treat back pain. In fact, chiropractic care can also help to heal pain in the foot, elbow, shoulder, and neck.  The same review cited by the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health concluded that chiropractic treatment is  not useful  in treating:  Authors of the review failed to find definitive evidence that chiropractic care treated musculoskeletal conditions, such as  fibromyalgia , temporomandibular joint disorders, and mid-back pain.  Chiropractors also do not treat traumatic injuries, such as  bone fractures . A chiropractor will usually perform an X-ray to ensure that treatment will not worsen a traumatic injury.  A  2018 review  included 17 years of studies involving spinal manipulation and mobilization, which is a more passive form of manipulation.  The studies investigated the effects of these treatments on chronic lower back pain, and the authors concluded that the chiropractic methods were "viable" options for pain management.  A 2017 review examined the effectiveness of spinal manipulation in treating lower back pain.  The authors concluded that treatment improved both function and pain for up to  6 weeks .  The  American College of Physicians  recommend that those with lower back pain use a variety of non-pharmacological treatments, including spinal manipulation.  Researchers generally agree that more studies are needed to determine the ideal length and frequency of chiropractic sessions and to identify what injuries may benefit from specific treatments.  One of the most common sources of contention regarding chiropractic treatments concerns safety.  A person may experience side effects of spinal manipulation, including:  There have been occasional reports of long-term danger related to chiropractic care.  The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health reports that  severe complications  may include worsening pain and cauda equina syndrome, which involves nerve damage in the lower spinal cord.  According to the American Chiropractic Association, most discomfort and soreness subsides within  24 hours  of spinal manipulation.  The World Health Organization (WHO) state that it is unsafe for people with certain health conditions to undergo chiropractic manipulation. These conditions  include :  An aspiring chiropractor must spend thousands of hours studying before obtaining a license. In 2016, an estimated  47,400  chiropractors were practicing in the U.S., according to the country's Bureau of Labor Statistics.  Chiropractic care is drug-free and non-invasive, and it may treat some musculoskeletal problems. While this form of alternative medicine may not benefit everyone, it is generally considered safe for most people.    
 American Board of Chiropractic Specialties (ABCS). (n.d.).  American Board of Chiropractic Specialties (ABCS). (n.d.).  Chiropractors. (2018, April 13).  Chiropractic education. (n.d.).  Chiropractic: In depth. (2012, February).  Chiropractic qualifications. (n.d.).  Coulter, I. D., Crawford, C., Hurwitz, E. L., Vernon, H., Khorsan, R., Booth, M. S., &amp; Herman, P. M. (2018, May). Manipulation and mobilization for treating chronic low back pain: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  The Spine Journal ,  18 (5), 866–879.  Frequently asked questions about chiropractic. (n.d.).  Paige, N. M., Miake-Lye, I. M., Booth, M. S., Beroes, J. M., Mardian, A. S., Dougherty, P., ... Shekelle, P. G. (2017, April 11). Association of spinal manipulative therapy with clinical benefit and harm for acute low back pain: Systematic review and meta-analysis.  Jama ,  317 (14), 1451–1460.  Physicians and surgeons. (2018, May 18).  Qaseem, A., Wilt, T. J., McLean, R. M., &amp; Forciea, M. A. (2017, April 4). Noninvasive treatments for acute, subacute, and chronic low back pain: A clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians.  Annals of Internal Medicine ,  166 (7), 514–530.  What does the research say? (n.d.).  What research shows about chiropractic. (n.d.).  WHO guidelines on basic training and safety in chiropractic. (2005).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What's the truth about chiropractors?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322038.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, June 6). "What's the truth about chiropractors?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  