 Bibasilar atelectasis can cause severe complications if left untreated. How doctors deal with it will vary based on what has caused the collapse.  In this article, learn more about the causes and symptoms of bibasilar atelectasis, as well as what to expect during recovery.  A person's lungs are made up of several areas, each of which is called a lobe. The right lung has three lobes, and the left lung has two lobes.  When someone experiences bibasilar atelectasis, the lowermost lobes of their lungs collapse entirely or partially.  The lobes of the lungs are filled with millions of tiny air sacs called alveoli. The alveoli are arranged in clusters and surrounded by blood vessels. When a person breathes in and out, the alveoli allow their blood to collect oxygen and get rid of carbon dioxide.  During bibasilar atelectasis, the alveoli in the base of the lungs deflate and stop performing this essential task. Oxygen may not be able to reach the vital organs, making bibasilar atelectasis life-threatening in some cases.  Bibasilar atelectasis can also leave behind scarring, which could lead to reduced lung function afterward.  The condition is more common after major surgery, but may also be a complication of other issues.  The condition is sometimes confused with pneumothorax. While the two conditions are similar, they have different causes. In some cases, pneumothorax may lead to atelectasis on one side.  If only a small portion of the lung collapses, atelectasis may not cause any symptoms. If a person does experience symptoms, these may include:  Difficulty breathing is the most common symptom. A person may have other symptoms as well, depending on the underlying cause.  It is most common for a person to experience bibasilar atelectasis after they have undergone a major surgical procedure, involving general anesthesia.  There is a range of other possible causes, as well. Doctors class these causes as either obstructive or nonobstructive.   Obstructive causes   A person may experience obstructive atelectasis when something blocks their airway and prevents their lung from filling correctly. This can occur for a variety of reasons, including:   Nonobstructive causes   Pressure rather than a blockage causes nonobstructive atelectasis.  Things that can put pressure on the lungs and make it hard for them to fill up include:  Atelectasis is often confused with pneumothorax, so a thorough diagnosis is necessary. Doctors may do a physical exam and may also want to monitor a person's oxygen levels or lung function periodically to note any changes.  If they suspect atelectasis, they will usually order a chest X-ray,  ultrasound , or computed tomography (CT) scan to confirm their diagnosis.  A doctor may also perform a bronchoscopy. This procedure is when they insert a tube through a person's nose or mouth to get a closer look at their airways.  How doctors treat bibasilar atelectasis depends largely on what has caused the collapse.  To treat blockages, they will first try to remove the obstruction, using methods such as suction, drainage, or chest percussion. Some medications may also help break up and expel fluids.  To treat causes related to pressure, doctors will relieve the pressure in the lung and allow it to expand fully. This should restore function in the lungs.  When surgery causes atelectasis, doctors may recommend therapies to allow the lungs to expand naturally. They may tell a person to do deep breathing exercises, walk around after surgery to increase their breathing, and gently cough up mucus if possible.  Lung conditions or medical conditions causing atelectasis will need to be treated completely to help prevent further collapse. For instance, if a person has a tumor, they may require  radiation therapy , surgery, or  chemotherapy .  Bibasilar atelectasis must be caught early on and treated quickly to give a person the best chance of recovery without any severe complications.  If there is extensive damage to the lungs or the collapse is not treated urgently, possible complications can include:  Many people experience bibasilar atelectasis while they are still in the hospital and recovering from surgery. Already being in the hospital can make diagnosis and treatment easier, and may help prevent complications.  In cases where a person notices symptoms when they are no longer in the hospital, it is crucial for them to visit a doctor urgently for treatment.  By catching the condition early, they may reduce their risk of scarring and other complications in the lungs.  When treated early, many people can recover from bibasilar atelectasis without any long-term side effects.    
 Acosta, C. M., Maidana, G. A., Jacovitti, D., Belaunzarán, A., Cereceda, S., Rae, E., ... Tusman, G. (2014, June). Accuracy of transthoracic lung ultrasound for diagnosing anesthesia-induced atelectasis in children.  Anesthesiology ,  120 (6), 1370–1379.  Acosta, C. M., Maidana, G. A., Jacovitti, D., Belaunzarán, A., Cereceda, S., Rae, E., ... Tusman, G. (2014, June). Accuracy of transthoracic lung ultrasound for diagnosing anesthesia-induced atelectasis in children.  Anesthesiology ,  120 (6), 1370–1379.  Atelectasis. (n.d.).  Yabluchansky, M., Bogun, L., Martymianova, L., Bychkova, O., Lysenko, N., &amp; Makienko, N. (n.d.). Signs and symptoms of respiratory system diseases. Lecture in internal medicine propaedeutics.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Bibasilar atelectasis: Symptoms, causes, and complications."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322027.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, June 5). "Bibasilar atelectasis: Symptoms, causes, and complications."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  