 Potential causes of vulvovaginitis include:  Typically, the symptoms of vulvovaginitis affect both the vulva and vagina. How someone experiences the condition depends on the cause.  The types and causes of the condition include the following:   Bacterial vaginosis  or BV is the most common type of vulvovaginitis. Bacterial imbalances in the vagina cause the condition.  Any woman can get BV, and sexual activity does not usually play a role in its development, but it can.  BV prevalence in the United States is estimated to be  21.2 million, or 29 percent in females ages 14 to 49 years old , this is according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).  Up to 84 percent of females with BV do not report any symptoms.  Yeast infections, including  Candida  infections, are common causes of vulvovaginitis. These infections are also called vulvovaginal  candidiasis .  Yeast infections are not  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs).  Yeast infections affect up to  75 percent of the female population at least once in their lifetimes , and recurrences are not unusual. Recurrences are more common in those with immunodeficiency disorders, such as  diabetes  and  lupus.   Trichomonas or trichomoniasis is an infection caused by a parasite and is usually spread through sexual contact, but not always.  The prevalence of trichomonas in the U.S. is believed to be around  2.3 million, or 3.1 percent, amongst girls and women, ages 14 to 49 years of age , according to the CDC.  Further causes of vulvovaginitis include:  Vulvovaginitis caused by poor hygiene tends to be more common in  young girls who have not yet hit puberty . This may be due to poor hygiene practices that can transfer fecal bacteria to the vagina.  General symptoms of vulvovaginitis include:  Some women may also experience:  Discharge and odor distinguish the three causes of vulvovaginitis.  Vulvovaginitis can be serious if not treated, although it is not generally a severe condition.  Seeing a doctor is the best way to determine what is happening and to get the right treatments because of the many causes, including sexual contact.  A doctor will make a diagnosis of vulvovaginitis based on symptoms and analysis of any vaginal discharge.  Carrying out a pelvic exam can also help with diagnosis. Pelvic exams involve physical and visual examination of the reproductive organs, including the vulva and vagina.  A doctor may test vaginal discharge with a  wet prep test , also called a vaginal wet mount.  They may test vaginal pH as well, as raised pH levels can indicate BV or trichomoniasis. A doctor will apply a pH testing stick to the vaginal walls to check pH levels.  Once a doctor has decided the bacteria, yeast, or parasite source of the vulvovaginitis, they will diagnose the type of vulvovaginitis, and treatment can begin.  Treatments depend on the cause and include the following:   BV treatments   Treating BV involves an individual taking medications and applying gels and creams to the vulva and vagina.  Medications, such as metronidazole (available as a tablet or gel) or clindamycin (a cream) are only available with a doctor's prescription.   Yeast infection treatments   Treating yeast infections can be done with over-the-counter (OTC) antifungal creams and suppositories, such as miconazole, which is available under the brand name Monistat.  Doctors may treat yeast infections with prescription oral antifungal medications, including fluconazole (Diflucan). If they have diagnosed a yeast infection, they will probably prescribe fluconazole or another prescription antifungal.   Trichomoniasis    A single dose  of either metronidazole or tinidazole can treat and cure trichomoniasis, according to the CDC.  It is necessary to treat all sexual partners. They should also avoid sexual contact for at least a week, and until all symptoms are gone to prevent reinfection.  It is also essential to get rechecked if symptoms return.  Mild cases of BV and yeast infections can go away without treatment or with home remedies. It may still be a good idea to see a doctor who can prescribe appropriate treatments, however.  Research has been done on natural remedies for BV and yeast infections, including  yogurt, garlic, and boric acid .  Because yogurt contains good bacteria, eating it daily is  an effective remedy for BV . Moreover, the probiotics in yogurt help maintain pH levels to minimize bad vaginal bacteria and yeast growth.  Garlic has been found to be similar to  metronidazole in treating BV  and does not cause side effects. It can be added to the diet or taken as a supplement to manage symptoms and prevent BV.  Research from the  Journal of Women's Health  found that boric acid is a safe alternative for  treating recurrent yeast infections . A person can apply it as a vaginal suppository before bedtime. It is a good idea to check with a doctor before starting boric acid treatment.  Treatment for vulvovaginitis depends on the cause, and some cases may go away without treatment.  Good hygiene is the best way to prevent non-infectious vulvovaginitis. Wearing comfortable clothing that absorbs moisture can also reduce infection. Using a condom can prevent most sexually transmitted forms of vulvovaginitis.  Adoption of good lifestyle habits, including a healthy diet, and management of all health conditions can also help avoid vulvovaginitis.    
 20 best home remedies for bacterial vaginosis. (n.d).  20 best home remedies for bacterial vaginosis. (n.d).  Bacterial vaginosis (BV) statistics. (2015, December 17).  Frobenius, W., &amp; Bogdan, C. (2015, April). Diagnostic value of vaginal discharge, wet mount and vaginal pH — An update on the basics of gynecologic  infectiology .  Geburtshilfe und Frauenheilkunde ,  75 (4), 355–366.  Goje, O., &amp; Munoz, J. L. (2017, March). Vulvovaginitis: Find the cause to treat it.  Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine ,  84 (3), 215–224.  Gorbachinsky, I., Sherertz, R., Russell, G., Krane. L. S., &amp; Hodges, S. J. (2014, December). Altered perineal microbiome is associated with vulvovaginitis and urinary tract infection in preadolescent girls.  Therapeutic Advances in Urology ,  6 (6), 224–229.  Gordon, D., Gardella, C., Eschenbach, D., &amp; Mitchell, C. M. (2016, January). High prevalence of sexual dysfunction in a vulvovaginal specialty clinic.  Journal of Lower Genital Tract Disease ,  20 (1), 80–84.  Hemalatha, R., Ramalaxmi, B. A., Swetha, E., Balakrishna, N., &amp; Mastromarino, P. (2013, September). Evaluation of vaginal  p H for detection of bacterial vaginosis.  Indian Journal of Medical Research ,  138 (3), 354–359.  Iavazzo, C., Gkegkes, I. D., Zarkada, I. M., Falagas, M. E. (2011, August). Boric acid for recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis: The clinical evidence [Abstract].  Journal of Women's Health ,  20 (8), 1245–1255.  Machado, D., Castro, J., Palmeira-de-Oliveira, A., Martinez-de-Oliveira, J., &amp; Cercal, N. (2016, January 20). Bacterial vaginosis biofilms: Challenges to current therapies and emerging solutions.  Frontiers in Microbiology ,  6 , 1528.  Mohammadzadeh, F., Dolatian, M., Jorjani, M., Majd, H. A., &amp; Borumandnia, N. (2014, July 5). Comparing the therapeutic effects of garlic tablet and oral metronidazole on bacterial vaginosis: A randomized controlled clinical trial.  Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal ,  16 (7), e19118.  Paladin, H. L., &amp; Desai, U. A. (2018, March 1). Vaginitis: Diagnosis and treatment.  American Family Physician ,  97 (5), 321–329.  Santos, C. M., Pires, M. C., Leão, T. L., Hernández, Z. P., Rodriguez, M. L., Martins, A. K., … Nicoli, J. R. (2016, July). Selection of Lactobacillus strains as potential probiotics for vaginitis treatment [Abstract].  Microbiology ,  162 (7), 1195–1207.  Talaei, Z., Sheikhbahaei, S., Vajihe, O., Ganjalikhani Hakemi, M., Meidani, M., Naghshineh, E., … Sherkat, R. (2017, October–December). Recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis: Could it be related to cell-mediated immunity defect in response to  Candida  antigen?  International Journal of Fertility &amp; Sterility ,  11 (3), 134–141.  Trichomoniasis statistics. (2017, January 31).  Trichomoniasis treatment and care. (2017, January 4).  What causes vaginitis? (2016, December 1).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "Can you treat vulvovaginitis at home?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322014.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, June 1). "Can you treat vulvovaginitis at home?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  