 If a person experiences pain when chewing food, or if teeth suddenly become sensitive to hot and cold, one tooth may be a cracked.  Any pain associated with a cracked tooth tends to come and go. This can make it more challenging for a dentist to locate the crack, especially if it is very small.  Anyone who suspects that they have a cracked tooth should make an appointment with the dentist as soon as possible. Leaving a cracked tooth untreated may lead to more problems, pain, and discomfort over time.  A cracked tooth will not necessarily cause any symptoms. People often have cracked teeth without even realizing it.  Some types of cracks are harmless and do not require treatment.  However, if a person notices the following symptoms, they may have a more extensive type of crack that requires dental treatment:  There are many different reasons why teeth can crack.  Causes of a cracked tooth include:  A  sudden temperature change  can also crack a tooth. For example, this could happen if a person burns their mouth while drinking tea, then drinks a glass of cold water to soothe the pain.  A cracked tooth is not always simple to diagnose.  If the crack is not visible, a dentist will try to make a diagnosis by asking the person about their dental history and symptoms they are having.  The dentist will then examine the teeth, possibly using a magnifying glass to help to identify cracks.  They may also use a pointed instrument called a dental explorer, which catches on any rough, cracked edges on the teeth's surface.  A dental dye can also make cracks more visible.  During the examination, the dentist will check the gums for signs of  inflammation  because cracks in teeth tend to irritate the gums. They may also ask the person to bite down on something, to try and pinpoint the source of the pain.  A dentist may take an X-ray of the teeth. X-rays do not always show where cracks have formed, but they can reveal problems in the pulp of the teeth. If the pulp of a tooth appears to be unhealthy, this can suggest a crack.  Anyone who suspects that they have a cracked tooth should make an appointment with a dentist as soon as possible. It is especially important to do so when there are pain and discomfort.  In the meantime, the following home remedies can relieve uncomfortable symptoms:  The longer that a cracked tooth goes untreated, the more difficult it may be for a dentist to save the tooth. Complications may also occur, such as infection.  Tooth cracks are  more common  in people over the age of 40, and women develop them more often than men.  Cracks can vary in length, depth, as the location on the tooth.  The smallest cracks are known as craze lines, and they develop within tooth enamel. A person is unlikely to notice a craze line, and no treatment is necessary unless it causes symptoms.  The following are other types of cracks in teeth:  The best treatment depends on the location of the crack and the extent of the damage.  If a crack is tiny and causes no discomfort, no treatment may be necessary.  Treatments for cracked teeth include:  In the most severe cases, when a crack has penetrated the pulp of the tooth, root canal treatment may be necessary. If a tooth is badly cracked, a dentist may remove it altogether.  If a tooth with a filling becomes cracked, a dentist may need to remove the filling to examine the damage more thoroughly.  Cracked teeth can cause complications, particularly if they are left untreated. For example, an infection may occur. Signs of infection include:  If the event of infection,  pus  may need to be drained, and a person may need to take  antibiotics .  Cracked teeth are not always preventable, but a few strategies can help. These include:  If a person grinds their teeth or clenches their jaw in their sleep, they may wish to talk to their dentist about wearing a mouthguard at night.    
 Cracked teeth. (n.d.).  Cracked teeth. (n.d.).  Cracked tooth. (n.d.).  Dental emergencies. (n.d.).  Lubisich, E. B., Hilton, T. J., &amp; Ferracane, J. (2013, December 22). Cracked teeth: A review of the literature.  Journal of Esthetic and Restorative Dentistry ,  22 (3).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "How do you know if you have a cracked tooth?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322015.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, June 2). "How do you know if you have a cracked tooth?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  