 Shatavari, also known as satavari, satavar, or  Asparagus racemosus  ( A. racemosus ), is said to promote fertility and have a range of health benefits, particularly for the female reproductive system.  The herb is thought to be adaptogenic, which means that it may help to regulate the body's systems and improve resistance to  stress .  In this article, we look at the uses, health benefits, and side effects of shatavari, and whether it is safe to take during pregnancy.  Shatavari is a popular supplement that people use to treat a wide range of symptoms. It can be taken orally as a tablet, a powder, or liquid essence.  Recent studies suggest that the root could provide a number of health benefits. However, more studies are needed before this herb can be recommended to treat any specific condition, and it is not currently used in clinical medicine.  Research has suggested that shatavari may provide the following health benefits:  Perhaps the most common traditional use of shatavari, or  A. racemosus , is to treat female health conditions, specifically reproductive disorders.  A review of studies published in  Biomedicine and Pharmacotherapy  in  2018  suggests that this plant may improve conditions such as hormonal imbalances and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).  In line with its traditional use as a treatment for female reproductive conditions, recent research suggests that a combination of herbal medicines, including  A. racemosus , may reduce the symptoms of  menopause .  A small-scale study from  2018  tested the effects of herbal medicine on menopausal symptoms in 117 women. After taking  A. racemosus  and three other herbs for 12 weeks, women reported a reduction in hot flashes and night sweats, but no difference in hormone levels or overall health.   Antioxidants  protect the body from harm caused by free radicals, which can damage cells and lead to the development of diseases, including  cancer . Antioxidants also fight against oxidative stress, another cause of disease.  A review from in  2018  suggested that shatavari may have antioxidant properties, though more research is needed in humans. A study from  2018  found some evidence that the plant's extract had antioxidant effects in mice.  Shatavari supplements have also traditionally been used to combat  anxiety  and  depression . No research has investigated these effects in humans, though studies suggest that the plant may have these effects in rats.  A  2014  study published in  Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology  proposes that shatavari reduces anxiety in rats by interacting with the  serotonin  and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) systems, which are involved in anxiety, both in rats and humans.  Research published in  Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behaviour  in  2009  suggests that shatavari extract had  antidepressant  effects in rats.  A substance that boosts milk production during breast-feeding is called a galactagogue, and shatavari is commonly used for this purpose.  Authors of a review published in  The Ochsner Journal  in  2016  found mixed evidence. One study reported a boost in milk supply after shatavari supplementation, and another showed no difference.  More research is needed to ensure that a supplement containing shatavari is safe to take while pregnant or breast-feeding. During these periods, consult a doctor or another healthcare professional before taking any herbs or supplements.  Results of earlier studies involving mice and rats suggest that shatavari may have additional health benefits, though it is unclear whether humans will experience similar effects.  Benefits observed in animals include:  Very little research has investigated the effects of shatavari in humans. Anyone who takes the supplement runs certain risks.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the United States do not regulate the dosages or instructions for this supplement.  Being allergic to shatavari is possible. Shortly after taking the supplement, a person with an allergy may experience:  If a person has any of these symptoms after taking shatavari, they should seek immediate medical attention.  Shatavari is thought to have a diuretic effect that inhibits the body's ability to absorb sodium. This means that people taking the supplement may have a higher risk of becoming dehydrated. Anyone taking diuretic medication should avoid shatavari.  The supplement may also cause low blood sugar. People taking medications or herbal remedies to lower blood sugar should refrain from taking shatavari.  The FDA do not monitor or regulate health supplements or herbal medicines. Because of this, the strength, quality, and purity of these remedies can widely vary. They are also no FDA recommendations about dosages.  A person can buy the supplement in powder, tablet, or liquid form. The usual dose of shatavari tablets is 500 milligrams, and a person may take this up to twice a day.  A liquid dose of shatavari extract is usually diluted in water or juice and ingested up to three times a day.  Anyone interested in taking shatavari should consult a doctor and only buy the supplement from a trusted supplier.  People have used shatavari as an herbal medicine for hundreds of years. However, there is not yet enough clinical evidence to support its use as a treatment.  While consuming the herb in small quantities appears to be safe, there may be side effects when taking it during pregnancy or in larger doses.  Before taking the supplement, it is essential to discuss the risks and benefits with a doctor.    
 Alok, S., Jain, S. K., Verma, A., Kumar, M., Mahor, A., &amp; Sabharwal, M. (2013, June). Plant profile, phytochemistry and pharmacology of  Asparagus racemosus  (Shatavari): A review.   Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Disease ,  3 (3), 242–251.  Alok, S., Jain, S. K., Verma, A., Kumar, M., Mahor, A., &amp; Sabharwal, M. (2013, June). Plant profile, phytochemistry and pharmacology of  Asparagus racemosus  (Shatavari): A review.   Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Disease ,  3 (3), 242–251.  Bazzano, A. N., Hofer, R., Thibeau, S., Gillispie, V., Jacobs, M., &amp; Theall, K. P. (2016). A review of herbal and pharmaceutical galactagogues for breast-feeding.  The Ochsner Journal ,  16 (4), 511–524.  Bhatnagar, M., Sisodia, S. S., &amp; Bhatnagar, R. (2005, November). Antiulcer and antioxidant activity of  Asparagus racemosus  Willd and  Withania somnifera  Dunal in rats [Abstract].  Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences ,  1056 (1), 261–278.  Garabadu, D., &amp; Krishnamurthy, S. (2014, May).  Asparagus racemosus  attenuates anxiety-like behavior in experimental animal models [Abstract].  Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology ,  34 (4), 511–521.  Hannan, J. M. A., Marenah, L., Ali, L., Rokeya, B., Flatt, P. R., &amp; Abdel-Wahab, Y. H. (2007, January 8). Insulin secretory actions of extracts of  Asparagus racemosus  root in perfused pancreas, isolated islets and clonal pancreatic β-cells.  Journal of Endocrinology ,  192 (1), 159–168.  Karuna, D. S., Dey, P., Das, S., Kundu, A., &amp; Bhakta, T. (2018, January). In vitro antioxidant activities of root extract of  Asparagus racemosus  Linn.  Journal of Traditional and Complementary Medicine ,  8 (1), 60–65.  Kumar, M. C., Udupa, A. L., Sammodavardhana, K., Rathnakar, U. P., Shvetha, U., &amp; Kodancha, G. P. (2010, January). Acute toxicity and diuretic studies of the roots of  Asparagus racemosus  Willd in rats.  West Indian Medical Journal ,  59 (1), 3–6.  Mandal, S. C., Kumar, C. K. A., Lakshmi, S. M., Sinha, S., Murugesan, T., Saha, B. P., &amp; Pal, M. (2000, December). Antitussive effect of  Asparagus racemosus  root against sulfur dioxide-induced cough in mice [Abstract].  Fitoterapia ,  71 (6), 686–689.  Pandey, A. K., Gupta, A., Tiwari, M., Prasad, S., Pandey, A. N., Yadav, P. K., ... Chaube, S. K. (2018, April 7). Impact of stress on female reproductive health disorders: Possible beneficial effects of shatavari ( Asparagus racemosus ) [Abstract].  Biomedicine &amp; Pharmacotherapy ,  103 , 46–49.  Singh, G. K., Garabadu, D., Muruganandam, A. V., Joshi, V. K., &amp; Krishnamurthy, S. (2009, January). Antidepressant activity of  Asparagus racemosus  in rodent models [Abstract].  Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior ,  91 (3), 283–290.  Steels, E., Steele, M., Harold, M., Adams, L., &amp; Coulson, S. (2018, January 9). A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial evaluating safety and efficacy of an Ayurvedic botanical formulation in reducing menopausal symptoms in otherwise healthy women [Abstract].  Journal of Herbal Medicine .  Venkatesan, N., Thiyagarajan, V., Narayanan, S., Arul, A., Raja, S., Kumar, S. G. V., ... Perianayagam, J. B. (2005, February 25). Anti-diarrhoeal potential of  Asparagus racemosus  wild root extracts in laboratory animals.  Journal of Pharmacy &amp; Pharmaceutical Sciences ,  8 (1), 39–46.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What are the health benefits of shatavari?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322043.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, June 6). "What are the health benefits of shatavari?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  