 Many people experience abdominal cramps and vaginal discharge. Pain low in the tummy and around the belly button is usually described as cramping.  Some discharge from the vagina and cervix is usual. It varies in response to hormones produced as part of the female menstrual cycle. Vaginal discharge plays a vital role in keeping the vagina clean and preventing infection.  However, if the color, smell, or consistency seems unusual, especially if accompanied by itching, burning, or abdominal pain, it could be a sign of an infection or other condition and should not be overlooked.  This article looks at the most common causes of abdominal cramps and vaginal discharge. It also covers treatment, prevention, and when to see a doctor.  A person may experience abdominal cramps and vaginal discharge for many reasons. Some of the most common causes include:  It is common for a person to have abdominal cramps and vaginal discharge before and during a monthly period. Pain, which is known as dysmenorrhea, and which is associated with the shedding of the uterus lining, causes cramping.  Menstruation may also cause vaginal discharge. Its color and consistency vary during the monthly cycle, depending on the stage of  ovulation .  Abdominal pain is common in pregnancy. Ligaments in the abdomen, stretching to support the growth of a baby, are often the reason.  Gas, bloating, or  constipation  can also be behind abdominal cramps during pregnancy.  Anyone who experiences severe pain during pregnancy or has blood or any unusual vaginal discharge should go to the doctor. These could be signs of an ectopic pregnancy, pregnancy loss, or preterm labor, depending on the stage of the pregnancy.  When someone has painful cramping before and during periods, pain with intercourse, and irregular bleeding patterns,  endometriosis  could be a reason.  Endometriosis is usually a chronic condition that happens over long periods of time. Women who have been through  menopause  are  less likely  to experience pain linked to endometriosis.  BV is an infection in the vagina. It can cause abdominal pain and an increase in vaginal discharge with an unpleasant smell.  During pregnancy, up to  30 percent  of women will experience BV. It is also the  most common  vaginal infection in women aged between 15 and 44 years old.  BV can develop after sex, douching, and using perfumed body wash around the vagina.  Abdominal cramps may be a symptom of an STD, most commonly  gonorrhea ,  chlamydia , and trichomoniasis.  When a person has noticeable changes in vaginal discharge, it can also be a sign of an STD. However, sometimes STDs develop without symptoms.  In some people, an infection of the upper genital tract can lead to PID. This condition affects the uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries.  PID can cause similar symptoms to BV and STDs, such as   Human papillomavirus  (HPV) is a common STD and the cause of the  majority  of cervical  cancers .  High-risk HPV types can develop into  cervical cancer  if left untreated. While there are often no signs of cervical cancer, vaginal discharge, abnormal bleeding, and pelvic pain can be among the indicators.  Treatment of abdominal cramps and vaginal discharge depends on the underlying cause:  For abdominal cramps associated with menstruation, the pain can be relieved with over-the-counter (OTC) pain medications and heat pads.  There are  guidelines  for using different types of pain relief during pregnancy. Anyone who is pregnant should see their doctor or midwife first before using pain medication to have an evaluation of their pain.  A person can keep their body strong during pregnancy and relieve aches and pains with pregnancy-specific massages, exercises, and stretches.  Some people may gain benefit from using OTC painkillers, such as ibuprofen or acetaminophen for pain and cramping associated with endometriosis.  Doctors may prescribe  antibiotics  for some people with BV. This will depend on a person's symptoms and whether they are pregnant. Anyone taking antibiotics should always make sure to complete the course to prevent reinfection.  Applying antibacterial gel to the vagina can also treat BV. Anyone doing this should ensure their hands are clean and dry when applying the gel.   Probiotic foods , such as those containing the bacteria  Lactobacillus , may be effective in treating and preventing vaginal infections that cause discharge.  Using a gentle, fragrance-free soap and not douching may also help to prevent BV. People should also avoid wearing tight underwear, as this can lock in sweat that can lead to bacterial buildup.  Anyone who is concerned that they may have an STD, or is in acute pain with new-onset discharge,  fever , or a generalized feeling of being unwell, should see their doctor. It is important to treat STDs and PID with antibiotics if the diagnosis is confirmed.  Practicing safe sex, using condoms for protection, and having careful partner selection can prevent STDs.  A doctor will recommend treatment for people with HPV or cervical cancer. Attending regular cervical smear test appointments is essential.  The following measures may help to prevent abdominal cramping and vaginal discharge:  Anyone experiencing unusual abdominal cramping, pain, discharge, or bleeding that does not pass should see their doctor or  gynecologist .    
 Babb, M., Koren, G., &amp; Einarson, A. (2010, January). Treating pain during pregnancy.  Canadian Family Physician ,  56 (1), 25–27.  Babb, M., Koren, G., &amp; Einarson, A. (2010, January). Treating pain during pregnancy.  Canadian Family Physician ,  56 (1), 25–27.  Bacterial vaginosis — CDC fact sheet. (2017, February 17).  Bacterial vaginosis during pregnancy. (2015, August).  Donders, G. G. G., Zodzika, J., &amp; Rezeberga, D. (2014, April). Treatment of bacterial vaginosis: What we have and what we miss [Abstract].  Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy ,  15 (5).  Gemmell, L. C., Webster, K. E., Kirtley, S., Vincent, K., Zondervan, K. T., &amp; Becker, C. M. (2017, July 1). The management of menopause in women with a history of endometriosis: A systematic review.  Human Reproduction Update ,  23 (4), 481–500.  Human papillomavirus (HPV) and cervical cancer. (2018, February 15).  Kim, J.-M., &amp; Park, Y. J. (2017, December). Probiotics in the prevention and treatment of postmenopausal vaginal infections:Review article.  Journal of Menopausal Medicine ,  23 (3), 139–145.  Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) — CDC fact sheet. (2017, January 27).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lewin, Jo. "What can cause cramps and discharge?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322077.php&gt;    APA  Lewin, J. (2018, June 9). "What can cause cramps and discharge?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  