 People with this nervous habit may get painful sores and redness on their lips.  Lip biting can be a difficult habit to break because the behavior can become so automatic that a person may no longer be aware of it. However, there are effective ways to overcome this habit.  Read on to learn about the causes of lip biting, similar anxious habits, and treatment options.  In some cases, physical conditions can cause a person to bite their lips when they use their mouth for talking or chewing.  In other cases, the cause can be psychological. People may bite their lip as a physical response to an emotional state, such as  stress , fear, or  anxiety .  Physical causes of lip biting include:  People with malocclusion or TMD may often bite their lips, cheeks, or tongue. A dental professional should be able to recommend treatment options, which may include dental braces or removing one or more teeth.  Chronic lip biting is  one example  of a body-focused repetitive behavior, or BFRB. This term refers to any repetitive self-directed behavior that damages the skin, hair, or nails.  BFRBs occur as a coping mechanism in situations where a person is feeling uncomfortable or anxious. People with a BFRB find that repetitive behaviors can provide relief from painful emotions.  Relatively few studies have looked at lip biting as a BFRB. Most research has instead focused on the three most common habits, which are:  However, there is likely to be an overlap in the psychology behind different kinds of BFRBs, including lip biting.   Research from 2014  suggests that even thinking about these habits can trigger a person to act on them, so just thinking about lip biting can make a person start biting their lip.  BFRBs begin during the onset of  puberty , from age 11–14.  Research suggests  that those who have close relatives who engage in a BFRB are more likely to develop one themselves.  Some people may not have any side effects from compulsive lip biting, but it will cause certain complications for others, including:  Lip biting is often a compulsive behavior, so a person may not notice the habit until there is already damage to the lips.  Treatments for lip biting differ depending on the cause. It is possible to treat physical causes such as dental problems by resolving the underlying issue. When lip biting has a psychological cause, many people benefit from counseling or behavioral therapies.  Treatments for lip biting as a BFRB include:  People with BFRBs or tics  may benefit  from  cognitive behavioral therapy  (CBT).  The TLC Foundation for BFRBs  recommend  CBT as an effective treatment.  CBT is a step-by-step approach that focuses on changing specific behaviors by identifying their causes.  It also teaches skills that help a person change their behavior and thoughts going forward.  Habit reversal training ( HRT ) is one type of CBT. It is especially effective for BFRBs and tics.  There are three key steps in  HRT  therapy:  Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) is another option for treating BFRBs, including lip biting. People with BFRBs may need help regulating emotions such as anxiety. This therapy may be useful for treating the causes behind body-focused behaviors.  The four aspects of DBT are:  Other behavioral therapies that can treat BFRBs include acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) and the Comprehensive Behavioral Model of Treatment (ComB). These are both relatively new and more research is necessary to confirm their effectiveness.  The general opinion is that CBT and  HRT  therapy are both more effective than medication for BFRBs. There are currently no specific medications to treat BFRBs.  However, some individuals may achieve relief by taking  antidepressant  and anti-obsessive medications, such as clomipramine or selective  serotonin  reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).  Medication may be useful for those who engage in BFRBs and also suffer from anxiety,  depression , or  obsessive-compulsive disorder  (OCD).  Understanding the underlying cause of lip biting is essential to create an appropriate treatment plan.  If lip biting is leading to an impaired quality of life, a psychologist will be able to recommend the most appropriate treatment.  Anyone seeking help should use The TLC Foundation for Body-Focused Repetitive Behaviors'  Find a Therapist  tool to locate a local psychologist.    
 Find help and support: Find a therapist. (n.d.).  Find help and support: Find a therapist. (n.d.).  Grant, J. E. (n.d.). Medications for body focused repetitive behaviors.  Gupta, S., &amp; Gargi, P. D. (2012, May 12). Habit reversal training for trichotillomania.  International Journal of Trichology ,  4 (1), 39–41.  Learn about BFRBs: Other body-focused repetitive behaviors. (n.d.).  Learn about BFRBs: Therapy for BFRBs. (n.d.).  Morand-Beaulieu, S., O'Connor, K. P., Richard, M., Sauvé, G., Leclerc, J. B., Blanchet, P. J., &amp; Lavoie, M. E. (2016, May 10). The impact of a cognitive–behavioral therapy on event-related potentials in patients with tic disorders or body-focused repetitive behaviors.  Frontiers in Psychiatry ,  7 , 81.  Morris, S. H., Zickgraf, H. F., Dingfelder, H. E., &amp; Franklin, M. E. (2013. September). Habit reversal training in trichotillomania: Guide for the clinician [Abstract].  Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics .  13 (9), 1069–1077.  My anxiety plan for body focused repetitive behaviors. (n.d.).  O'Connor, K., Lavoie, M., Desaulniers, B., &amp; Audet, J. S. (2018, March). Cognitive psychophysiological treatment of bodily-focused repetitive behaviors in adults: An open trial.  Journal of Clinical Psychology ,  74 (3), 273–285.  O'Connor, K., St-Pierre-Delorme, M.-È., Leclerc, J., Lavoie, M., &amp; Blais, M. T. (2014, August). Meta-cognitions in Tourette syndrome, tic disorders, and body-focused repetitive disorder.  The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry,  59  (8), 417–425.  Redden, S. A., Leppink, E. W., &amp; Grant, J. E. (2016, April). Body focused repetitive behavior disorders: Significance of family history [Abstract].  Comprehensive Psychiatry ,  66 , 187–192.  Rego, S. A. (2012, April 15). Beating body-focused repetitive behaviors: A two-pronged approach.  Roberts, S., O'Connor, K., Aardema, F., &amp; Bélanger, C. (2015, March). The impact of emotions on body-focused repetitive behaviors: Evidence from a non-treatment-seeking sample [Abstract].  Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry ,  46 , 189–197.  Schreiber, L., Odlaug, B. L., &amp; Grant, J. E. (2011, February 21). Impulse control disorders: Updated review of clinical characteristics and pharmacological management.  Frontiers in Psychiatry ,  2 (1).  Snorrason, I., Berlin, G. S., &amp; Lee, H.-J. (2015, April 7). Optimizing psychological interventions for trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder): An update on current empirical status.  Psychology Research and Behavior Management ,  8 , 105–113.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Stinson, Adrienne. "How to stop anxious lip biting."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322093.php&gt;    APA  Stinson, A. (2018, June 11). "How to stop anxious lip biting."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  