 Adults may be alarmed when they notice loose teeth. Adult teeth are permanent and designed to last a lifetime.  Some causes of loose teeth in adults are harmless. Others require the care of a dental professional to save the tooth, remove it, or replace it with an implant or bridge.  The following factors are often responsible for looseness in one or more teeth:  Also known as  periodontitis , this disease involves  inflammation  and infection of the gums. It is usually caused by poor dental hygiene habits.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the United States report that  half  of the country's adults aged 30 or older have  gum disease .  When brushing and flossing do not remove plaque, gum disease can develop. Plaque contains bacteria. It sticks to teeth and hardens over time until only a dental health professional can remove it.  Hardened plaque, known as tartar, causes the gums to pull away from the teeth, creating gaps that can become infected.  Over time, this process can break down the bone and tissue supporting the teeth, causing the teeth to become loose.  Other signs of gum disease include:  Any signs of gum disease should be checked by a dentist as soon as possible. Early detection and treatment can prevent tooth loss.  Raised levels of  estrogen  and  progesterone  during pregnancy can affect the bones and tissues in the mouth.  Having more of these hormones can alter the periodontium, which is the collection of bones and ligaments that support the teeth and keep them in place. When the periodontium is affected, one or more teeth may feel loose.  The changes to this part of the body will resolve after pregnancy, and they are not a cause for concern. However, anyone experiencing pain or loose teeth during pregnancy should see a dentist to rule out gum disease and other oral health problems.  It is  safe  for pregnant people to have dental checkups, cleanings, and X-rays, according to the American Dental Association and the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.  In fact, because of a possible link between gum disease and premature birth, pregnant people are encouraged to see dentists regularly.  Healthy teeth are strong, but an impact from a blow to the face or a car accident, for example, can damage teeth and surrounding tissue. The result may be chipped or loose teeth.  Similarly, clenching the teeth during times of  stress  or grinding them at night can wear down the tissues and loosen the teeth.  Many people are unaware of their clenching or grinding habits until they result in jaw pain. A dentist may be able to detect the problem before the teeth are permanently damaged.  Anyone who suspects that an injury has damaged the teeth should see a dentist as soon as possible. Sports injuries, accidents, and falls, for example, can cause dental damage.   Osteoporosis  is a disease that causes the bones to weaken and become porous. As a result, even minor bumps and impacts can lead to broken bones.  While osteoporosis commonly affects the spine, hips, and wrists, it can also damage the bones in the jaw that support the teeth.  If the jaw bones become less dense, the teeth may loosen and fall out. The  National Institutes of Health  (NIH) in the U.S. also report a possible link between bone loss and an increased risk of gum disease.  Certain medications used to treat osteoporosis can cause dental health problems, though this is uncommon. In rare cases, drugs called bisphosphonates, which help to treat bone loss, can lead to loose teeth. This is known as osteonecrosis of the jaw.  Authors of one  study  suggest that osteonecrosis rarely occurs in people who are taking bisphosphonates in pill form, but that the condition may develop in people who receive the medication intravenously.  Trauma and surgical procedures, such as tooth extraction, can also cause osteonecrosis.  Loose teeth cannot always be prevented, but a person can take steps to reduce the risk. Tips for tooth and gum health include:  A range of treatments can help, and the best option will depend on the cause of the looseness.  Treatments include:  If a loose tooth falls out, a dentist can often restore a person's smile with:  While these options are effective, it is essential to treat the underlying cause of tooth loss and take any other steps needed to prevent further damage.  For an adult, a loose tooth can be alarming. However, the tooth can sometimes be saved, especially when the problem is detected early.  If a tooth is lost or must be removed, a number of restorative methods can give the appearance of a natural tooth.    
 CDC: Half of American adults have periodontal disease. (2012, September 4).  CDC: Half of American adults have periodontal disease. (2012, September 4).  Ficarra, G., &amp; Beninati, F. (2007, January–April). Bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws: The point of view of the oral pathologist.  Clinical Cases in Mineral and Bone Metabolism ,  4 (1), 53–57.  Gum disease. (2018, February).  Oral health and bone disease. (2016, May).  Oral health topics: Pregnancy. (2017, November 22).  Silk, H., Douglass, A. B., Douglass, J. M., &amp; Silk, L. (2008, April 15). Oral health during pregnancy.  American Family Physician ,  77 (8),1139–1144.  Treating periodontal diseases. (2005, January).  What are dental implants? (2018).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "How to treat a loose tooth in adults."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322028.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, June 5). "How to treat a loose tooth in adults."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  