 When a ring forms, a person may have no symptoms. Or, they may have difficulty swallowing, which the medical community calls  dysphagia . The difficulty may  get worse  when a person eats dry bread or meat.  Schatzki rings are not cancerous, and they are usually harmless. Changing the diet and patterns of eating can help with symptoms.  In this article, we explore the symptoms and causes of a Schatzki ring. We also describe how a doctor makes a diagnosis and the treatment options.  Many people with Schatzki rings experience no symptoms. Others usually start to notice symptoms after the  age of 25 .  Upon examination, a doctor may find that the diameter of the esophagus, which is normally around three-fourths of an inch, is reduced to half an inch.  Those with symptoms may notice the following:  Symptoms are usually more severe when the ring is large and resulting in more pronounced narrowing of the food pipe.  Sipping water between bites and chewing food thoroughly can make swallowing easier.  One possible complication of a Schatzki ring is food bolus obstruction, or "steakhouse syndrome." This involves a ball of food completely blocking the esophagus, often because it has not been thoroughly chewed.  A food bolus obstruction can cause severe chest pain, and it is considered a medical emergency. Treatment involves a doctor pushing or pulling away the ball of food using an endoscope, which is a long, flexible tube.  Doctors are not sure why some people develop a Schatzki ring.  The condition can run in families. In others, a Schatzki ring forms in response to irritation caused by  acid reflux  or gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ).  A doctor will first ask about a person's symptoms and perform a physical examination. The following tests can help the doctor to confirm the presence of a Schatzki ring:  Treatment is not always necessary if a person experiences no symptoms. Many people avoid symptoms by chewing food thoroughly and taking sips of water between bites.  If a person tries these techniques but still has trouble swallowing, certain procedures can widen the diameter of the food pipe, making it easier to swallow.  Possible treatments include:  A person can try to reduce acid reflux by:  A Schatzki ring is a band of tissue that can form in the lower esophagus, causing the pipe to narrow. While some people with Schatzki rings have no symptoms, others experience difficulty swallowing. A person may also find that food becomes stuck in their throat.  A doctor will be able to determine whether someone has a Schatzki ring. They may recommend a procedure to widen the ring's diameter.  Lifestyle changes and acid suppression therapy can also help to relieve symptoms of a Schatzki ring.    
 Dysphagia. (2017, March 6).  Dysphagia. (2017, March 6).  Guelrud, M. (2018, April). Management of benign esophageal strictures.  Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). (n.d.).  Lynch, K. L. (n.d.). Lower esophageal ring.  Müller, M., Gockel, I., Hedwig, P., Eckardt, A. J., Kuhr, K., König, J., &amp; Eckardt, V. F. (2011, June 21). Is the Schatzki ring a unique esophageal entity?  World Journal of Gastroenterology: WJG ,  17 (23), 2838–2843.  Novak, S. H., Shortsleeve, M. J., &amp; Kantrowitz, P. A. (2015, December). Effective treatment of symptomatic lower esophageal (Schatzki) rings with acid suppression therapy: Confirmed on barium esophagography.  American Journal of Roentgenology ,  205 (6), 1182–1187.  Patel, B., Han, E., &amp; Swan, K. (2013, November). Richard Schatzki: A familiar ring.  American Journal of Roentgenology ,  201   (5), W678–W682.  Smith, M. S. (2010, November). Diagnosis and management of esophageal rings and webs.  Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  6 (11), 701–704.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What to know about a Schatzki ring."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 May. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322002.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, May 31). "What to know about a Schatzki ring."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  