 Gastrointestinal perforation is a painful condition that can lead to further health complications, so emergency surgery is often necessary.  This article explores the causes and symptoms of gastrointestinal perforation. It also covers complications, diagnosis, treatment, and when to see a doctor.  Gastrointestinal perforation is a hole in the wall of the gastrointestinal tract. Other names for the condition include:  Most people who have gastrointestinal perforation will have a hole in their stomach or small intestine.  A hole in the large bowel, also known as the lower intestine, occurs less frequently. Researchers estimate that perforations of the lower intestine only affect  4 in every 100,000 people  in the European population.  A perforation can cause the contents of the stomach, small intestine, or large bowel to seep into the abdominal cavity. Bacteria will also be able to enter, potentially leading to a condition called peritonitis, which is life-threatening and requires immediate treatment.  Peritonitis is  inflammation  of the peritoneum, the thin layer of tissue that lines the abdomen. Without treatment, peritonitis can cause blood poisoning, or  sepsis . Sepsis may lead to organ failure.  People with a gastrointestinal perforation, therefore, need emergency medical care. Intestinal perforations are the  most common  surgical emergency that occurs worldwide.  Many different conditions can cause gastrointestinal perforation, including:  Although rare, accidents during specific medical procedures can also cause gastrointestinal perforation. Examples include:  The primary symptoms of gastrointestinal perforation are severe abdominal pain and tenderness. The abdomen may also protrude or feel hard to the touch.  If the hole is in a person's stomach or small intestine, the onset of pain is usually sudden, but if the hole is in the large bowel, the pain may come on gradually. In either case, once the pain starts, it is likely to be constant.  The pain may get worse when the person moves or if there is any pressure on the abdomen. However, it may lessen if they lay down.  Other symptoms of gastrointestinal perforation may include:  If a person with gastrointestinal perforation develops peritonitis, the following symptoms may occur:  If peritonitis leads to sepsis, a person may experience:  If people experience any of the symptoms of gastrointestinal perforation or peritonitis they should see a doctor immediately.  Most cases of gastrointestinal perforation require emergency treatment. The situation is particularly urgent if a person has symptoms of sepsis, which is life-threatening.  To diagnose the condition, the doctor may carry out one or more of the following tests:  People with gastrointestinal perforation often require emergency surgery.  This will usually involve an exploratory laparotomy. The surgeon will open up the person's abdomen and repair any holes in the gastrointestinal tract.  They will also remove any substances from the person's stomach, small intestine, or large bowel that are now in the abdomen. This helps to treat the peritonitis and prevent sepsis.  For some people, it may be necessary to remove part of the intestine. This can lead to a person needing a colostomy or ileostomy. These procedures allow the contents of the person's intestine to collect in a bag that attaches to their abdomen.  On rare occasions, a gastrointestinal perforation may heal on its own and not require surgery. If this occurs, a course of  antibiotics  may be the only treatment.  If a person has sepsis, they will require intravenous antibiotics as soon as possible.  Possible complications of gastrointestinal perforation include internal bleeding and sepsis. Gastrointestinal perforation can also lead to abdominal abscesses or permanent bowel damage. It may even cause part of the bowel to die.  Sometimes a person's wounds might fail to heal following surgery, or they may develop an infection. Certain lifestyle factors may increase the risk of this, including smoking, drinking too much alcohol, and  obesity .  There are also some medical conditions that can contribute to poor wound healing, including:  Gastrointestinal perforation is a serious condition with many different causes, some of which are more preventable than others.  If a person has any of the illnesses that may lead to gastrointestinal perforation, they should follow the treatment plan that their doctor advises. This reduces the risk of developing the condition.  As with any condition, the outlook improves with early diagnosis and treatment.  The size of the hole and the length of time before treatment may determine how successfully surgeons can repair the perforation. This will, in turn, affect the recovery.    
 Malik, P., Yadav, B. L., Haldeniya, K., Anuragi, G., &amp; Goyal, R. (2014). A 3 year prospective study of 1400 cases of perforation peritonitis: Asia's largest single centre study.  Global Journal of Human-Social Science: I Surgeries and Cardiovascular System ,  14 (3), 49–54.  Malik, P., Yadav, B. L., Haldeniya, K., Anuragi, G., &amp; Goyal, R. (2014). A 3 year prospective study of 1400 cases of perforation peritonitis: Asia's largest single centre study.  Global Journal of Human-Social Science: I Surgeries and Cardiovascular System ,  14 (3), 49–54.  Shin, R., Lee, S. M., Sohn, B., Lee, D. W., Song, I., Chai, Y. J., … Heo, S. C. (2016, December). Predictors of morbidity and mortality after surgery for intestinal perforation.  Annals of Coloproctology ,  32 (6), 221–227.  Strangfeld, A., Richter, A., Siegmund, B., Herzer, P., Rockwitz, K., Demary, W., … Listing, J. (2017). Risk for lower intestinal perforations in patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with tocilizumab in comparison to treatment with other biologic or conventional synthetic DMARDs.  Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases ,  76 , 504–510.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Causes and treatment of gastrointestinal perforation."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322008.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, June 1). "Causes and treatment of gastrointestinal perforation."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  