 Typically, polyps are groups of abnormal cells that appear along mucous membranes in the body, though they can appear almost anywhere. Polyps can form in organs and be either harmless or potentially cancerous.  Polyps in the bladder may not cause symptoms, and a person can take some steps to avoid risk factors that may help prevent them occurring. A thorough diagnosis and treatment will be needed in every case, however, to avoid potentially serious complications.  The cells in a bladder polyp are abnormal. Even though the cells are abnormal, they are not always cancerous.  A bladder polyp may be benign, meaning the abnormal cells are harmless. Benign growths or tumors will not metastasize, in other words, spread to other tissues or organs in the body. Benign growths in the bladder are usually not life-threatening.  But bladder polyps can also be cancerous. And, cancerous growths in the bladder may spread to other areas of the urinary tract or nearby tissues.  Bladder  cancer  is one of the more common cancers. Because of this, a person with polyps in the bladder should have them regularly monitored even if doctors initially diagnosed them as benign.  Many people do not show symptoms in the early stages of bladder polyps. Other people will notice signs early on, or notice symptoms appear over time as the polyps progress.  Symptoms of bladder polyps can include:  A person with any of these symptoms should take them seriously, as they may be signs of bladder cancer, in some cases. A thorough diagnosis is needed in each case, however, as the symptoms are common in other conditions, including  urinary tract infections , urinary stones, or prostate  inflammation .  Polyps in the bladder are groups of abnormal cells. These cells mutate, grow out of control, and group together to form the growth. Their cause is usually unknown.  Polyps that appear quickly and start spreading to other organs are typically cancerous. Several factors may lead to cancerous growths in the bladder.  Causes of bladder cancer include:  It is possible for people to change or control most of these risk factors in some way. However, there are certain risk factors for bladder cancer that an individual cannot control.  Correctly diagnosing bladder polyps is critical, as cancerous polyps may spread quickly if left untreated.  Doctors may ask about a person's symptoms or personal medical history. If they appear to be having signs of bladder polyps or bladder cancer, the doctor may refer them to a specialist called a urologist for a more in-depth diagnosis.  A urologist will often recommend tests to help them identify polyps in the bladder or bladder cancer.  They will sometimes use cystoscopy to take a closer look at the polyp. This procedure is when a doctor inserts a thin tube with a light and camera into the bladder. They may also attach a small needle-like tool to the tube to take a few cells from the polyp for a biopsy. These cells will be sent to a lab to be examined for any abnormalities or malignancy.  In addition to cystoscopy and biopsy, doctors may recommend other tests, such as:  Treating a bladder polyp can vary and depend on what type of polyp a doctor has diagnosed.  A benign polyp that is not causing any symptoms may not require treatment at all. However, doctors might still want to monitor it over time.  They will usually opt to remove polyps that are large or causing symptoms.  A transurethral bladder resection is one way to remove these growths. During this procedure, a doctor will insert a cystoscope into the bladder through the urethra or tube that leads to the outside of the body. Once inside the bladder, an attached wire, laser, or electrical charge will remove the abnormal tissues.  Cancerous polyps or growths that have spread to other areas in the body may require more extensive treatment. Practices, including  chemotherapy  and immunotherapy, may help some people.  If cancer has spread into the deeper muscle tissue of the bladder, surgeons may need to remove the organ completely. This is called a radical cystectomy.  Depending on what other organs are affected, surgery may be required to remove all or part of these organs. Depending on whether it is a male or female patient, these may include the:  Along with medical treatment, a person may wish to explore complementary therapies and make lifestyle changes, such as:  The outlook when a person has polyps in the bladder varies significantly based on whether the growths are cancerous or benign. A non-cancerous growth that doctors can completely remove from the bladder should no longer cause symptoms.  The outlook for cancerous polyps and bladder cancer vary based on the severity and stage of the disease. If doctors catch someone cancer quickly, they will typically have a better survival rate, which is why early diagnosis is so vital.  Anyone who notices symptoms, such as blood in their urine or pain and difficulty urinating, should contact a doctor for a thorough diagnosis.    
 Bladder cancer risk factors. (2016, May 23).  Bladder cancer risk factors. (2016, May 23).  Bladder cancer symptoms, tests, prognosis, and stages (PDQ®)– Patient version. (2018, May 3).  Siegel, R. L., Jacobs, E. J., Newton, C. C., Feskanich, D., Freedman, N. D., Prentice, R. L., &amp; Jemal, A. (2015, September). Deaths due to cigarette smoking for 12 smoking-related cancers in the United States.  JAMA Internal Medicine ,  175 (9), 1574–1576. Treating bladder cancer. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "What to know about bladder polyps."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322033.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, June 5). "What to know about bladder polyps."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  