 Most people have a slight tremor in the hands, and it may be especially noticeable when holding the hands straight out in front of the body.  Tremors range in severity, and several conditions can cause more noticeable shaking.  In this article, we explore common causes of hand tremors and their treatments.  A tremor is a common movement disorder. An involuntary, rhythmic muscle contraction causes the shaking. Tremors are most common in the hands, but they can also occur in the arms, head, vocal cords, torso, and legs.  Tremors can be intermittent, happening every so often, or constant. Sometimes tremors develop on their own, and other times they signal an underlying health issue.  Shaky hands may lead to difficulty writing and drawing. A person may also have trouble holding and using tools and utensils, such as cutlery.  There are  more than 20 types of tremor , but most fall into two categories:   Resting tremors : These occur when the muscles are relaxed, such as when the hands are resting on the lap.   Action tremors : The majority of tremors are action tremors. They happen when the muscles are contracted because of voluntary movement.  Issues affecting the brain are usually responsible for tremors.  In some cases, the cause is unknown, but tremors often result from neurological conditions, movement disorders, or other health problems.  Some neurological conditions that can cause shaky hands include:  The following are examples of movement disorders that can cause hand tremors:  The following health issues can also cause shaky hands:  Certain drugs can also cause hand tremors, such as:  If an underlying condition, such as hyperthyroidism, is responsible for the tremor, it will usually get better when a person receives treatment. If a tremor is a side effect, it will often go away when a person switches medications.  The following may also help:  Limiting or avoiding substances that can cause tremors, such as caffeine and amphetamines, can reduce or eliminate a person's shaking.  This can improve muscle control, functioning, and strength while enhancing coordination and balance. An occupational therapist can help people living with tremors to continue to engage in daily activities.  If anxiety or panic is responsible for a tremor, a person may benefit from practicing relaxation techniques, such as breathing exercises.  Most types of tremor cannot be cured, and a mild tremor usually requires no treatment.  If the shaking is impacting everyday life, however, many treatments are available.   Essential tremor treatments   For essential tremor, a doctor may prescribe  beta-blockers , such as propranolol, metoprolol, or nadolol. A doctor may also recommend anti-seizure medication, such as primidone.   Parkinson's disease treatments   Doctors often prescribe disease-specific drugs, such as levodopa and carbidopa, to manage advanced cases.   MS treatments   Beta-blockers, anti-anxiety drugs, and anticonvulsive medications are among the treatment options for people with MS-related tremors.   Tremors with no obvious cause   If doctors cannot determine the cause of tremors, they may prescribe tranquilizers. Some may prescribe injections of botulinum toxin, or Botox, though these can lead to weakness in the fingers.  If a person does not respond to medication or has a severe tremor that significantly impacts their life, a doctor may recommend interventions such as deep brain stimulation (DBS).  DBS requires a doctor to place a small generator under the skin in the upper chest. It sends electrical signals to electrodes implanted in the thalamus, which is the part of the brain that coordinates and controls some involuntary movements.  Doctors use DBS to treat tremors associated with  Parkinson's disease , essential tremor, or dystonia.  The hands may shake more as a person ages. Certain medications, substances such as caffeine, and anxiety can also cause tremors.  If shaking persists or worsens and gets in the way of everyday activities, seek medical advice.    
 Siniscalchi, A., Gallelli, L., Labate, A., Malferrari, G., Palleria, C., &amp; De Sarro, G. (2012, September). Post-stroke movement disorders: Clinical manifestations and pharmacological management.  Current Neuropharmacology ,  10 (3), 254–262.  Siniscalchi, A., Gallelli, L., Labate, A., Malferrari, G., Palleria, C., &amp; De Sarro, G. (2012, September). Post-stroke movement disorders: Clinical manifestations and pharmacological management.  Current Neuropharmacology ,  10 (3), 254–262.  Tremor. (n.d.).  Tremor fact sheet. (2018, May 23).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "What does it mean if you have shaky hands?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322195.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, June 20). "What does it mean if you have shaky hands?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  