 The Epstein-Barr virus is very common and most people are affected by it at some point in their lives.  The Epstein-Barr virus is highly contagious, and people contract it through contact with saliva or other bodily fluids. When a person has contracted the virus once, it remains dormant in the body and can reactivate at any time.  In children, the virus often does not cause any symptoms. However, in teens and adults, it may cause mono, or mononucleosis, and can be associated with other illnesses, including some types of  cancer .  The symptoms of Epstein-Barr virus infection are similar to symptoms of several other illnesses. Because of this similarity, doctors may recommend an Epstein-Barr virus test, or EBV test, to see if a person has a current or past Epstein-Barr virus infection.  The symptoms of Epstein-Barr virus infection include:  In some cases, a person's liver or spleen may also swell and become enlarged.  When a person has Epstein-Barr virus, their body's immune system releases proteins, known as antibodies, to fight off the virus. The Epstein-Barr virus test checks their blood for these Epstein-Barr virus antibodies through a simple blood draw.  The presence of these antibodies would confirm that someone has had Epstein-Barr virus in the past or currently has an active infection.  A medical technician performs an Epstein-Barr virus antibody test the same way they would do any other simple blood test. No preparation is required.  A technician will use the following steps:  The blood will be sent to a laboratory to check for the presence of the Epstein-Barr virus antibodies.  A doctor may recommend a person be tested for the Epstein-Barr virus if they exhibit symptoms of the infection or mononucleosis, particularly if they have already tested negative for mononucleosis.  The symptoms may include:  A doctor is more likely to order this test if a person is in their teens or early 20s.  The results of the Epstein-Barr virus test can come back as either 'normal' or 'non-normal.'  If the results come back as 'normal,' this means that the lab did not detect any Epstein-Barr virus antibodies in the blood. In this case, it is unlikely that the person has Epstein-Barr virus or mononucleosis.  When the test is done too soon after infection, there may not be enough antibodies in the blood to trigger a positive result. So if a person's symptoms continue and a doctor cannot find another cause, the test may need to be redone after 2 weeks.  If the test results are normal, a person may still contract the Epstein-Barr virus at some point in the future.  If the results of the Epstein-Barr virus are 'non-normal,' it means the lab has detected any one of three or a combination of Epstein-Barr antibodies. These antibodies give doctors information about when the virus occurred:  There are no medical treatments for Epstein-Barr virus or mononucleosis. However, a doctor may recommend the following to ease a person's symptoms:  People with an active case of mononucleosis may feel better more quickly if they reduce their activities until the illness resolves. Doing too much too soon can lead to a relapse or longer recovery time.  Heavy lifting or strenuous activities can increase the risk of rupturing the spleen, a rare but life-threatening complication of mononucleosis.  The Epstein-Barr virus affects people differently. Some people, especially children, may not be aware that they have the virus, while others may have symptoms for weeks or months.  Usually, symptoms resolve from an active Epstein-Barr infection or mononucleosis after 1 to 2 months. After a person recovers, the virus remains dormant in the body, and an Epstein-Barr virus antibody test will still work. The virus can reactivate at any time but usually will not cause symptoms if it does.  While most people with Epstein-Barr virus recover, there may be a link between Epstein-Barr virus and chronic illnesses and cancers, including Burkitt's  lymphoma  and Hodgkin's lymphoma.  In rare cases, the Epstein-Barr virus may remain active and lead to long-lasting symptoms.    
 About Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). (2018, May 8).  About Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). (2018, May 8).  Christian, M. (2014, June 20). Dendritic cells during Epstein Barr virus infection.  Frontiers in Microbiology ,  5 , 308.  Epstein- barr  virus fact sheet. (n.d.).  Epstein-Barr virus protein can "switch on" risk genes for autoimmune diseases. (2018, April 16).  Gequelin, L. C. F., Riediger, I. N., Nakatani, S. M., Biondo, A. W., &amp; Bonfim, C. M. (2011, May 19). Epstein-Barr virus: General factors, virus-related diseases and measurement of viral load after transplant.  Revista Brasileira de Hematologia E Hemoterapia ,  33 (5), 383–388.  Kimura, H., &amp; Cohen, J. I. (2017, December 22). Chronic active Epstein–Barr virus disease.  Frontiers in Immunology ,  8 , 1867.  Moeini, M., Ziyaeyan, M., Asaei, S., &amp; Behzadi, M. A. (2015, April 18). The incidence of Epstein-Barr virus primary infection among suspected patients referred to Namazi Hospital of Shiraz, Iran.  Jundishapur Journal of Microbiology ,  8 (4), e16109.  Reshkova, V., Kalinova, D., &amp; Milanov, I. (2015, November 14). Evaluation of antiviral antibodies against Epstein-Barr virus and neurotransmitters in patients with fibromyalgia.  Journal of Neurology and Neuroscience ,  6 (3), 1–4.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What to know about Epstein-Barr virus testing."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322117.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, June 13). "What to know about Epstein-Barr virus testing."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  