 Dermatitis is a term referring to an  inflammation  of the skin, and perioral means around the mouth. The skin condition is sometimes called periorificial dermatitis. When perioral dermatitis affects children, it is called childhood perioral dermatitis.  Perioral dermatitis is most common in females between the ages of  16 and 45 years . Older people, males, and children can also have the condition, but this happens less frequently.  Perioral dermatitis is a rash that develops around the mouth and tends to be bumpy or scaly.  The bumps generally do not affect the skin right next to the mouth but appear a short distance away from the lips. They may form a ring around the mouth.  Sometimes the rash can appear around the nose or eyes. It can occasionally appear around the genitals too, but this is rare.  Some people with perioral dermatitis may only get a few bumps, and their rash may not be very discernible. Others may have many lumps forming a noticeable rash.  The bumps may be skin colored, or, in people with fair skin, may appear red or pink. Although they might resemble  pimples , the bumps are not the same as  acne .  It is possible that the rash will look inflamed, with the underlying and surrounding skin appearing red or pink.  The rash may be itchy or non-itchy, but it does not usually hurt. Some people with perioral dermatitis may feel tightness or mild burning in the affected skin, which may be dry or flaky.  There is no underlying condition that causes perioral dermatitis, and it is not contagious.  Although the exact cause is unknown, researchers think it may relate to the use of topical corticosteroids.  Topical corticosteroids are steroid ointments, creams, or gels that people use to treat skin conditions. People should only ever use these products as a short-term treatment, and most of them are not suitable for application on the face.  Sometimes people use corticosteroids for longer than they should or use them on their face. This can result in skin damage.  A  2017 study  explores the effects of the misuse of topical corticosteroids on facial skin. Researchers found that perioral dermatitis was one of the adverse effects.  Additional possible causes of perioral dermatitis include:  More research is necessary to understand the exact causes of perioral dermatitis.  As topical corticosteroids seem to be a primary risk factor for perioral dermatitis, it is essential to stop using them on the skin. This includes hydrocortisone.  If a doctor has prescribed corticosteroids, it is best to ask them for an alternative. The continued use of corticosteroids could cause the rash to worsen.  When a person stops using corticosteroids, the rash may get worse before it improves. It is vital that they are not tempted to use the corticosteroids again.  It is important to see a dermatologist if the rash does not get better on its own. The dermatologist may prescribe an oral or topical  antibiotic  or a cream that suppresses the immune response.  The following home remedies and lifestyle changes may help to manage the symptoms:  A  2018 study  notes that  coconut oil  is a safe and effective skin moisturizer. Research suggests that it can benefit the skin by:  Due to these properties, coconut oil may help perioral dermatitis. However, researchers need to carry out more studies into its effectiveness as a treatment for this skin condition.  Females are more likely to get perioral dermatitis, especially between the ages of 16 and 45.  Those with a hormonal imbalance or history of allergies are more at risk of getting the skin condition, and the use of topical steroids can also increase the risk.  In addition, the following may trigger the condition:  To prevent perioral dermatitis, people should only use topical steroids as a doctor advises.  Following a skin care routine consisting of fragrance-free products may also help to keep skin healthy. It is a good idea to avoid heavy makeup too.  Avoiding the sun and strong winds may also promote skin health.  If someone has perioral dermatitis that does not go away when they stop using topical steroids, they should speak to their doctor.  The doctor can recommend the best course of treatment.  Perioral dermatitis usually clears up on its own a few weeks after a person stops using topical steroids. Using fragrance-free products helps to avoid irritating the skin while it heals.  This skin condition may flare up if a person starts using topical steroids again, so it is best to discuss alternative options with a doctor.    
 Lin, T.-K., Zhong, L., &amp; Santiago, J.-L. (2018, January). Anti-inflammatory and skin barrier repair effects of topical application of some plant oils.  International Journal of Molecular Sciences ,  19 (1), 70.  Lin, T.-K., Zhong, L., &amp; Santiago, J.-L. (2018, January). Anti-inflammatory and skin barrier repair effects of topical application of some plant oils.  International Journal of Molecular Sciences ,  19 (1), 70.  Reichenberg, J. (2018, May). Perioral (periorificial) dermatitis.  Sharma, R., Abrol, S., &amp; Wani, M. (2017, March 31). Misuse of topical corticosteroids on facial skin. A study of 200 patients.  Journal of Dermatological Case Reports ,  11 (1), 5–8.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What is perioral dermatitis and how is it treated?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322181.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, June 19). "What is perioral dermatitis and how is it treated?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  