 Hypohidrosis is a less severe form of anhidrosis, where a person is entirely unable to sweat. It is also possible for a person to sweat excessively, a condition known as  hyperhidrosis .  In this article, we discuss the additional symptoms of hypohidrosis as well as possible causes and treatments.  A person with hypohidrosis is less able to sweat. This means that the body is less effective at cooling down. The condition often causes parched skin, intolerance to heat, and a general feeling of being unwell.  A person with hypohidrosis is most likely to experience symptoms when they are exercising or experiencing high temperatures.  Symptoms of hypohidrosis include:  Hypohidrosis occurs due to poorly functioning sweat glands. Ordinarily, as body temperature rises, the autonomic nervous system stimulates the sweat glands which then release moisture onto the skin's surface. The evaporation of the sweat cools the skin.  A localized skin condition or injury can damage the sweat glands, leading to reduced sweating. Hypohidrosis may also be one of the symptoms of an immune or neurological condition.  Some people may have idiopathic hypohidrosis, which is hypohidrosis that occurs with no known cause.  Some causes of hypohidrosis are listed below:  Hypohidrosis that results from skin conditions and injuries usually affects a single area of the body. If the affected area is small, then the condition should not be cause for concern. This is because sweat glands in other areas of the body will compensate to keep the person cool.  The most common causes of localized hypohidrosis include:  Certain inflammatory skin conditions can also impair sweat gland function. These include:  In addition, some conditions that primarily affect other parts of the body may cause hypohidrosis and other abnormalities of the skin. Examples include the immune system conditions Sjogren's syndrome and graft-versus-host disease (GvHD).  If a person has lost more fluid than they have taken in, they will lack the moisture they require to sweat.  The following medications can interfere with sweat gland function:  If someone thinks that a particular medication is causing their hypohidrosis, they should speak to a doctor. They should never adjust their dosage or stop taking medication of their own accord.  In some cases, hypohidrosis can occur as a result of damage to the nerves that control sweating.  Sometimes this damage will be due to an underlying disorder involving the  central nervous system , which consists of the brain and spinal column.  Some examples include:  Disorders involving the peripheral nervous system can also cause hypohidrosis. These include:  A person may inherit a defective gene that causes the sweat glands to function poorly or not at all. People affected by a rare genetic condition called hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) are born either without sweat glands or with very few functional sweat glands.  To diagnose hypohidrosis, the doctor will need to make a thorough assessment of the person's medical history. People who suspect that they have hypohidrosis may wish to keep a written record of any activities that cause symptoms.  A doctor may perform the following tests to diagnose hypohidrosis and to establish its underlying cause.  One of the biggest risks of hypohidrosis is the development of heat  stroke . Heat stroke is a serious and potentially fatal medical condition.  If a person suspects that they have heat stroke, they should phone the emergency services immediately. Symptoms of heat stroke include:  The treatment of hypohidrosis will depend on its underlying cause. If the cause is due to another medical condition, hypohidrosis may improve once a person begins treatment for that condition.  A  2013 review  outlining approaches to diagnosing and treating hypohidrosis recommends that people manage the condition by doing the following:  Below are some additional tips on how to keep the core body temperature within safe limits:  Hypohidrosis that affects only a small area of the body should not be cause for concern.  When the condition affects large areas of the body, it can severely impair a person's ability to keep cool.  If this is the case, a person should speak to their doctor, especially if they have additional risk factors for other medical conditions. A doctor will conduct diagnostic tests with the aim of developing a tailored treatment plan.  Hypohidrosis can occur as an isolated case, or as a symptom of another medical condition.  Treatment options will vary depending on the underlying cause.  Managing hypohidrosis entails taking steps to prevent the core body temperature from becoming dangerously elevated. This will reduce the risk of a more severe heat-related condition such as heat stroke.    
 Anhidrosis (inability to sweat). (n.d.).  Anhidrosis (inability to sweat). (n.d.).  Cheshire Jr, W. P. (2016, April). Thermoregulatory disorders and illness related to heat and cold stress.  Autonomic Neuroscience: Basic &amp; Clinical ,  196 , 91–104.  Chia, K. Y., &amp; Tey, H. L. (2013, July). Approach to hypohidrosis.  Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology ,  27 (7), 799–804.  Das, S. (2017, March). Hypohydrosis.  Mullaaziz, D., Kaptanoglu, A. F., &amp; Eker, A. (2016, September). Hypohidrosis or hyperhidrosis? Ross syndrome.  Dermatologica Sinica ,  34 (3), 141–143.  Ohshima, Y., &amp; Tamada, Y. (2016). Classification of systemic and localized sweating disorders [Abstract].  Current Problems in Dermatology ,  51 , 7–10.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lillis, Charlotte. "What to know about hypohidrosis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322193.php&gt;    APA  Lillis, C. (2018, June 20). "What to know about hypohidrosis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  