 In this article, learn about seven possible causes of lower  back pain  and vaginal discharge. We also explore risk factors and treatment options for each issue.  Conditions that cause lower back pain and vaginal discharge include:  When a UTI is in the bladder, the condition is called  cystitis . When a UTI affects the urethra, the condition is called urethritis. When it is located in the kidneys, this is simply called a  kidney infection .  Bacteria are most commonly responsible for UTIs, but fungi and viruses can also cause them.  UTIs can occur in people of any age, including children.  Symptoms of a UTI include:  Lower back pain and abnormal vaginal discharge can indicate pregnancy. Vaginal discharge may increase in volume and otherwise change during this time.  Increased discharge helps to protect the womb from infection. Even more discharge may appear in the final few weeks of pregnancy.  Lower back pain is also common during pregnancy, especially as the baby grows heavier or moves. These actions can hit nerves that affect the back.  An ectopic pregnancy occurs when a fertilized egg attaches outside of the uterus, usually to a fallopian tube.  When this happens, a doctor must remove the fertilized egg before it grows too large and causes internal damage.  An ectopic pregnancy can cause:  This condition causes  inflammation  in the joints. Infection, including those transmitted sexually, can trigger the symptoms.  Reactive  arthritis  can cause abnormal discharge and lower back pain, but the condition is not linked to serious health risks.   Gonorrhea  is a  sexually transmitted infection  (STI). Symptoms do not show immediately after transmission, and they may take several weeks to appear.  Because of the delay in symptoms, gonorrhea often goes untreated. This can cause serious health complications, including  infertility .  Most women with gonorrhea experience no symptoms. When present, symptoms can include discharge and pelvic pain, which may radiate to the lower back.  This results from an infection in the upper genital tract. It can appear in the uterus, fallopian tubes, or ovaries.  The disease most commonly develops in women under 25, but it can occur at any age.  PID can cause:  In rare cases,  cervical cancer  can cause lower back pain and unusual discharge. Discharge may be pink or smell unpleasant. Pelvic pain is another symptom of this type of  cancer .  Cervical cancer often has no symptoms in the initial stages. For this reason, it is important to have regular cervical smear tests, also called Pap smears.  A doctor will begin by asking about symptoms and a person's medical and sexual history.  The doctor will often request a urine sample, to detect infections such as UTIs. They may also use a swab to take a sample from the inside of the vagina. A lab will test the sample for signs of STIs, including gonorrhea.  Swabs and urine tests can also help to diagnose similar conditions, such as PID.  Pregnancy and ectopic pregnancy can be confirmed with blood or urine tests. If a doctor suspects an ectopic pregnancy, they will perform a physical examination and an  ultrasound .  Treatment methods depend on the underlying cause. A doctor may prescribe  antibiotics  to treat UTIs and some STIs.  They may prescribe antifungal medications, as pills or creams, to treat  vaginitis  caused by yeast infections.  If a person is experiencing lower back pain and unusual discharge during pregnancy, no treatment may be necessary.  However, if the discharge smells unpleasant or is irritating or painful, this can indicate infection.  Ectopic pregnancies should receive immediate treatment. Doctors usually use a medication called methotrexate, and they may perform surgery to remove the fertilized egg.  Unprotected sexual activity is the most significant risk factor for conditions that can cause lower back pain and abnormal vaginal discharge.  Other risk factors include:  However, it is not always possible to prevent the conditions listed above.  For most people, lower back pain and vaginal discharge are not linked to serious health risks. Many common causes can be easily treated with antibiotic or antifungal medications.  Symptoms usually subside within a few weeks, but speak with a doctor if symptoms are severe or persistent.  It is also essential to have regular smear tests to check for  HPV  and cervical cancer.    
 Barash, J. H., Buchanan, E. M., &amp; Hillson, C. (2014, July 1). Diagnosis and management of ectopic pregnancy.  American Family Physician ,  90 (1), 34–40.  Barash, J. H., Buchanan, E. M., &amp; Hillson, C. (2014, July 1). Diagnosis and management of ectopic pregnancy.  American Family Physician ,  90 (1), 34–40.  Cervical cancer. (n.d.).  Gonorrhea. (2017, October 6).  Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID). (2015, September).  Reactive arthritis. (2017, March).  Urinary tract infections (UTIs). (2015, May).  Vaginal discharge in pregnancy. (2018, February 28).  Vaginitis. (2015, January 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "Lower back pain and vaginal discharge: What to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322123.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, June 13). "Lower back pain and vaginal discharge: What to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  