 Hormonal changes,  stress , and poor hygiene are all common triggers of  acne . The condition does not pose any serious health risks, but people may think that it appears unattractive, and it can cause discomfort.  In this article, we look at what causes acne and  pimples  to develop on the forehead, and how they can be treated and prevented.  Acne is a chronic skin condition that can lead to the following lesions:  Acne can develop anywhere on a person's body, but is particularly frequent on the face, shoulders, back, chest, and arms. A person may notice the appearance of acne when tiny glands just below the surface of the skin become blocked.  These glands, known as sebaceous glands, produce an oily substance called sebum. They can become blocked by too much sebum, dead skin cells, or bacteria. When this happens, the glands may become inflamed, and a pimple can develop.  Certain factors can increase the amount of sebum that is produced by the sebaceous glands. This sebum increases the likelihood of acne and pimples developing. Factors include:  Treatment will vary depending on the severity of the acne outbreak. Most people can treat their acne with over-the-counter (OTC) medications.  A wide variety of gels, soaps, lotions, and creams are available to treat acne. These products usually contain one or more of the following active ingredients:  People can purchase many of these acne treatments  online .  How well these treatments work can vary between individuals, so trial and error may be necessary to determine what is best. People with sensitive skin may benefit from sticking to creams or lotions.  A person's symptoms may take several weeks to clear up entirely, so it is often necessary to be patient with these treatments. It is also common for some people to have mild side effects, such as skin irritation, in the early stages of treatment.  For people with more severe acne, prescription medication may be necessary. A skin specialist will be able to assess a person's symptoms and determine the best treatment. These can include oral medications and gels or creams that a person can apply directly to their forehead.  Prescription medications for acne may include:  People with acne should avoid popping their pimples as this increases the risk of scarring and infection.  Home remedies can also be used alongside medication, or for very mild cases of acne on the forehead.  An example of a home remedy is to apply a warm compress to the forehead twice daily, which can help remove excess sebum and improve recovery.  Other home remedies that people with acne on the forehead can try include:  People can also combine the following ingredients to make a face mask that they can leave on overnight:  Maintaining a good standard of personal hygiene is the best way for someone to prevent acne on the forehead. While some pimples may be inevitable, especially during puberty, washing regularly will help to minimize the risk of a significant outbreak occurring.  Other acne prevention tips include:  It is not unusual for people to have acne on the forehead, especially when someone is going through puberty. Stress, poor hygiene, hair products, makeup, and skin irritation can all make a person's acne worse.  People with milder acne can often treat their symptoms at home with a variety of OTC gels, soaps, lotions, and creams. Someone with more severe acne should speak to their doctor, who will be able to prescribe stronger and more effective medications if they feel it might be necessary.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Acne. (n.d.).  Acne. (n.d.).  Acne. (2016, September 1).  Chularojanamontri, L., Tuchinda, P., Kulthanan, K., &amp; Pongparit, K. (2014, May). Moisturizers for acne: What are their constituents?  The Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology ,  7 (5), 36–44.  Ravenscroft, J. (2005, November 21). Evidence based update on the management of acne.  Archives of Disease in Childhood — Education and Practice ,  90 (4), ep98–ep101.  Zaenglein, A. L., Pathy, A. L., Schlosser, B. J., Alikhan, A., Baldwin, H. E., Berson, D. S., ... Bhushan, R. (2016, May). Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris.  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  74 (5), 945—973.e33.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What causes forehead acne?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322130.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, June 14). "What causes forehead acne?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  