 Ischemic colitis is the most common type of gut-based ischemia, accounting for  1 in every 2,000  hospital admissions.  Symptoms of ischemic colitis include pain, tenderness, and digestive problems. It is often mistaken for irritable bowel disease (IBD) or other gastrointestinal issues.  The condition can develop over time (chronic) or come on suddenly (acute). Sometimes, chronic ischemic colitis can heal on its own, but some people may still need treatment to prevent infection or colon damage.  Ischemic colitis that comes on suddenly is considered a medical emergency and requires urgent care.  This article describes the causes and symptoms of ischemic colitis, along with the available treatment options.  The most typical symptom of ischemic colitis is stomach cramping and pain. The pain may be mild or moderate, and it often occurs suddenly. Typically, pain occurs on the left side of the abdomen.  Some people may notice  blood  in their stool, but excessive bleeding suggests another condition, such as  Crohn's disease  or  cancer .  Other symptoms of ischemic colitis include:  The risk of complications is higher when symptoms develop on the right side of the stomach, and pain in this area may be more severe as well. Pain on the right side suggests a blockage in the arteries leading to the small intestine as well as the colon.  A lack of blood flow to the colon causes ischemic colitis. This lack of blood flow (ischemia) can occur for many reasons.  In people with  coronary artery disease  (CAD) or  peripheral vascular disease  (PVD), inadequate blood supply may result from a hardening of the mesenteric arteries that lead to the intestines.  Other factors that contribute to ischemic colitis include:  Rarely, medications can cause ischemic colitis, including:  Certain factors increase a person's chance of developing ischemic colitis. These include:   Age.  Adults over the  age of 60  are most at risk, possibly because arteries tend to harden with age.   Clotting abnormalities.  Disorders such as Factor V Leiden increase the risk of blood clots.   Other medical conditions.  Diabetes, congestive  heart failure , and low blood pressure all increase the risk of ischemic colitis.   Prior surgery.  People who have previously had surgery involving the aorta or abdomen are at higher risk than others of developing ischemic colitis.   Heavy exercise.  Engaging in strenuous activities, such as running a marathon, can limit blood flow to the colon.  Treatment for ischemic colitis depends on its severity.  Mild cases may resolve within a few days. If treatments are required, they include:  Other ways to manage the condition include:  Acute ischemic colitis is a medical emergency. Treatments include medications such as thrombolytic drugs for blood clots or vasodilators to widen narrow arteries.  Typically, follow-up colonoscopies are performed to check for healing and complications.  Severe ischemic colitis that does not respond to other treatments may require surgery. An estimated  20 percent  of people with the condition will need some form of surgical intervention.  Those with underlying medical conditions are more likely to need surgery.  Surgeons may operate to:  Ischemic colitis shares symptoms with other digestive disorders, particularly inflammatory bowel diseases, which include Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. This can make diagnosis more complicated.  After taking a medical history, a doctor may order imaging tests to confirm a diagnosis and rule out other conditions. Imaging tests used to diagnose ischemic colitis include:  Other diagnostic tests include:  The most serious complication of ischemic colitis is  gangrene  (tissue death). Gangrene results from a loss of blood flow to the tissue and can be life-threatening. People who experience gangrene need surgery to remove the blockage and damaged tissue.  Other complications include:  Most people with chronic ischemic colitis recover with medication, and those experiencing severe ischemic colitis can have surgery. People may need to make some lifestyle changes to prevent the condition from returning.  Examples of helpful lifestyle changes include  quitting smoking , exercising regularly, and eating a balanced diet. People may need to stop taking medications that contribute to ischemic colitis, with a doctor's advice.  Acute ischemic colitis has a poorer outlook and a higher mortality rate than chronic ischemic colitis because it often causes gangrene. Swift medical treatment is crucial in acute cases.  People who experience symptoms of ischemic colitis should see a doctor promptly to improve the outlook and reduce the risk of complications. People should not ignore bloody stools. Seek emergency medical attention for severe abdominal pain that makes it difficult to sit down or get comfortable.    
 Ansari, P. (n.d.). Ischemic colitis.  Ansari, P. (n.d.). Ischemic colitis.  FitzGerald, J. F., &amp; Hernandez III, L. O. (2015, June). Ischemic colitis.  Clinics in Colon and Rectal Surgery ,  28 (2), 93–98.  Washington, C., &amp; Carmichael, J. C. (2012, December). Management of ischemic colitis.  Clinics in Colon and Rectal Surgery ,  25 (4), 228–235.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to know about ischemic colitis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322162.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, June 17). "What to know about ischemic colitis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  