 A wide variety of inflammatory conditions can cause elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) levels, including the following:  Significantly high CRP levels of  more than 350 milligrams per liter (mg/L)  are nearly always a sign of a serious underlying medical condition. The most common cause is a severe infection, but a poorly controlled autoimmune disease or severe tissue damage can also lead to high CRP levels.  There is no need to fast or avoid liquids before having a CRP test. However, people having a high-sensitivity CRP (hs-CRP) test are likely to undergo other blood tests at the same time, and these may require fasting for 9–12 hours beforehand.  The hs-CRP test is different from the CRP test. The hs-CRP test detects lower levels of CRP in the bloodstream  (0.5–10 mg/L) , whereas the CRP test measures levels in a higher range  (10–1,000 mg/L) . Doctors will use the hs-CRP test to evaluate a person's risk of developing cardiovascular disease.  Some conditions that may cause an elevated hs-CRP level include:  Obtaining the sample for the test will only take a few minutes and should be relatively painless aside from a small needle prick.  The symptoms of elevated CRP levels depend entirely on the underlying condition that is causing them.  Many people who have moderate infections or injuries, or conditions that cause chronic inflammation, may experience similar symptoms. These include:  People with very high CRP levels are most likely to have an acute bacterial infection.  Signs of acute infection include:  There is currently no set standard for CRP blood levels, and guidelines vary.  However, as a general rule, the  following classifications  apply to CRP:  The hs-CRP  test results  indicate a person's risk of developing cardiovascular disease accordingly:  CRP levels that are mildly or moderately elevated can be hard to interpret.  A huge range of conditions can raise CRP levels slightly, and, as there is no standard reference range set for CRP, there is usually no way to draw any conclusions by looking at CRP levels alone.  The following factors can also make it challenging to interpret CRP levels:  A doctor will usually order a CRP test alongside several other tests to get a broad overview of a person's health. This will allow them to consider a range of medical factors.  A doctor will also often want to repeat the test to see how CRP levels change over time before they make a diagnosis.  However, regardless of any other external factors, CRP levels above 10 mg/L will typically indicate an underlying inflammatory issue.  Usually, moderately elevated CRP levels are due to RA or infectious  arthritis , which occurs when a joint is infected.  Significantly elevated CRP levels tend to occur with severe infections, such as bacterial or fungal infections. Infection is responsible for around  80 percent  of the cases involving CRP levels greater than 10 mg/L.  Sometimes higher levels also occur due to certain cancers and other conditions that can cause significant inflammation, such as pericarditis.  Doctors use CRP and hs-CRP tests to detect the levels of CRP in the body. Elevated levels of the protein may indicate an underlying condition or a higher risk of cardiovascular disease. The treatment for elevated levels will differ according to the cause.  A range of conditions can cause mildly or moderately raised CRP levels, but very high CRP levels are generally easier to interpret.   Article last updated by Phil Riches on Tue  6 November 2018.  Visit our  Medical Devices / Diagnostics  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Medical Devices / Diagnostics.   
 C-reactive protein (CRP). (2018, June 12).  C-reactive protein (CRP). (2018, June 12).  High-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP). (2018, June 6).  Landry, A., Docherty, P., Ouellette, S., &amp; Cartier, L. J. (2017, June). Causes and outcomes of markedly elevated C-reactive protein levels.  Canadian Family Physician ,  63 (6), e316–e323.  Nehring, S. M., &amp; Bhimji, S. S. (2017, June 15).  C Reactive Protein (CRP) . Treasure Island, FL: StatPearls Publishing LLC.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What does it mean if you have a high C-reactive protein?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Nov. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322138.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, November 6). "What does it mean if you have a high C-reactive protein?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  