 Allergic  eczema  causes a red and itchy rash, which can become painful and infected without treatment.  In this article, learn about the causes and symptoms of allergic eczema, as well as the treatment options.  Allergic eczema is a form of eczema that occurs in response to contact with an allergen. An allergen is any substance to which a person may be allergic. It is commonly called contact dermatitis.  The primary symptom of allergic eczema and other eczema types is a dry, itchy rash. Some types of eczema may be painful or cause blisters to form.  Researchers do not fully understand why eczema occurs in some people and not others. However, there are specific environmental triggers, and it is likely that genetics also play a role.  A person can experience allergic eczema after touching an allergen, consuming something they are allergic to, or coming into contact with an airborne allergen, such as pollen.  Some of the most common causes of contact dermatitis include:  Exposure to these allergens will not cause eczema in most people but may trigger a reaction in people with the condition.  Symptoms of allergic eczema usually only occur in the area of the skin that comes into contact with the allergen. However, people who have severe reactions may notice the symptoms elsewhere.  The most common symptoms of allergic eczema include:  The hands are often the most vulnerable to allergic eczema symptoms because they are more likely to touch items that cause an allergic reaction.  According to the  National Eczema Association , three types of contact dermatitis occur most frequently:  The best treatment for allergic eczema is prevention, which means avoiding any irritants known to cause the reaction.  Avoiding allergens can be difficult though, especially if a person comes into contact with them as a result of their occupation.  Other treatments for allergic eczema include:  If a person has a severe allergic eczema reaction, which may involve extreme swelling with oozing and crusting, they should see their doctor. A doctor may prescribe an oral or topical  antibiotic  to prevent infection.  Another common treatment for allergic eczema is light therapy or phototherapy. Research has shown that exposure to special types of light can reduce eczema symptoms in some people. However, a person should only use phototherapy with a doctor's prescription.  There are several different types of eczema. In addition to allergic or contact dermatitis, other eczema varieties include:  Allergic eczema or contact dermatitis is an itchy, irritating skin condition that occurs after exposure to certain allergenic substances. These reactions may occur immediately, or there may be a delay.  In addition to avoiding the allergen, a person can usually treat eczema with OTC creams, including topical hydrocortisone.  If a person has a severe reaction with open sores, they should see a doctor for antibiotics or prescription treatments.    
 An overview of the different types of eczema. (n.d.).  An overview of the different types of eczema. (n.d.).  Darsow, U., Eyerich, K., &amp; Ring, J. (2014, August). Eczema, atopic eczema and atopic dermatitis.  Eczema (atopic dermatitis) overview. (n.d.).  Eczema causes and triggers. (n.d.).  Eczema in children. (2017, December 28).  Goldenberg, A., &amp; Jacob, S. E. (n.d.). Contact dermatitis 101: Dermatologist perspective on managing this form of eczema.  Jain, N. (n.d.). Eczema and allergies case studies: Start with skin care.  Schneider, L. (n.d.). Eczema, atopic dermatitis and allergies: What is the connection?  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Everything you need to know about allergic eczema."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322173.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, June 18). "Everything you need to know about allergic eczema."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  