 Experiencing chest pain and a  headache  at the same time may be related to the heart, the immune system, or psychological factors.  The cause is usually not serious, but people may be concerned that these symptoms indicate a problem with  high blood pressure  or a  heart attack .  In this article, we look at conditions that can cause chest pain and a headache. We also explain whether or not they are serious and when to see a doctor.  As many as  5.5 million people  will seek medical advice for chest pain in a given year. In most cases, there is no cause for concern.  Below, we discuss various conditions that can cause both chest pain and a headache at the same time.  According to the Anxiety and Depression Association of America (ADAA),  anxiety  can cause both  headaches  and  chest pain .  A  panic attack  can often feel similar to a heart attack, which can further increase a person's anxiety. Symptoms of a panic attack  include :  Panic attacks can arise spontaneously and without warning, or can occur as a result of a stressful event. Learning to recognize the symptoms of a panic attack can ease a person's worry when they arise.  A  migraine  is a type of headache that typically causes severe pain on one side of the head. A small-scale research study from  2014  suggests that chest pain can be a migraine symptom too, though not a common one. When a migraine does cause chest pain, antimigraine medication seems to relieve the pain.  The other symptoms of a migraine often include:  A person can experience a migraine with aura and other symptoms without actually developing a headache.  The ADAA  suggest that  there may be a link between migraines and anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), panic disorders, and  post-traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD).   Lupus  is an autoimmune disorder that causes the immune system to attack otherwise healthy tissue. It can target the heart, which can lead to chest pain. If it also targets blood vessels, a person may experience a headache as well.  Additional symptoms of lupus include:  It is possible that a person may experience two unrelated conditions or issues. In this case, one condition will cause a headache, while the other causes chest pains.  For example,  dehydration  can cause someone to have a headache. They may also have an upper respiratory infection that could cause the chest pain. Both conditions may require medical attention.  In addition to the above, a person may also experience a combination of chest pain and a headache with any of the following conditions:  Some people believe that high blood pressure can cause headaches, chest pain, and dizziness.  However, the American Heart Association (AHA) say that high blood pressure usually has no symptoms at all, unless a person is having a hypertensive crisis, which refers to a  blood pressure  of  180/120  or higher.  A hypertensive crisis is a medical emergency, so it is vital to call the emergency services if the following symptoms occur:  A headache is not a common symptom of a heart attack. Severe chest pain is the primary symptom.  According to the  AHA , the additional early signs of a heart attack may include:  The AHA also noted that women are more likely than men to experience other symptoms of a heart attack. The other symptoms can be confusing and prevent a person from realizing that they are having a heart attack.  It is essential for anyone experiencing a feeling of tightness or pressure in the chest to seek medical attention immediately. Early help during a heart attack can help the outcome.  A person should seek medical attention if they experience additional symptoms alongside their headache. Some symptoms that indicate a more significant issue include:  The National Headache Foundation provide  a guide  explaining when to seek medical attention for a headache.  The treatment for chest pain and a headache will depend on the cause.  A doctor will initially need to rule out any underlying severe causes. They may ask about any additional symptoms, the severity of the symptoms, and possible risk factors. They may also use diagnostic tests such as an electrocardiogram (EKG) to monitor the heart or blood tests to look for underlying conditions.  If there are no underlying conditions, or they are benign, a person may try some home remedies. Some examples include:  If there are no serious underlying conditions, a person can expect their headache and chest pain to subside with minimal intervention. In these cases, long-term effects are unlikely.  If there is an underlying condition, treating this should provide the individual with symptom relief. However, the recovery from other conditions can take a long time.  People should seek medical attention immediately if they have unexplained pain in the chest or if other symptoms are present.    
 Am I having a panic attack or a heart attack? (n.d.).  Am I having a panic attack or a heart attack? (n.d.).  Chest pain: A heart attack or something else? (2017, August 12).  Headaches. (n.d.).  Howard, B. (2013, January). 9 symptoms you should never ignore.  How lupus affects the heart and circulation. (n.d.).  Hypertensive crisis: When you should call 9-1-1 for high blood pressure. (2017, November 13).  Panic attacks and panic disorder. (2018, May 4).  Roldan, C. J. (2014, March). Chest pain a manifestation of migraine.  Journal of Emergency Medicine ,  46 (3), 420-427.  Warning signs of heart attack, stroke &amp; cardiac arrest. (n.d.).  What are the symptoms of high blood pressure? (2017, November 13).  What is noncardiac chest pain? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What does having both chest pain and headache mean?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322184.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, June 19). "What does having both chest pain and headache mean?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  