 A chronic  urinary tract infection  (UTI) might also be called a persistent or recurring UTI. According to  one study , a doctor will diagnose a recurring UTI (RUTI) if a person has three positive urine cultures during a 12-month period or two infections during the previous 6 months.  According to the same 2013 study, UTIs are more common in women. The report noted that around  50-60 percent  of females would develop a UTI in their lifetimes, but they will not always become chronic.  The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive Kidney Diseases state that around  1 in 4 women  will have recurring UTIs.  The symptoms of a UTI in the bladder or urethra include:  If the infection spreads to the kidneys, a person may experience:  The urinary tract is divided into the upper and lower urinary tract and is composed of a series of organs and tubes that take urine out of the body:  A UTI may affect any part of the urinary tract. However, infection typically occurs when bacteria enter the urinary tract through the urethra, which is the tube carrying urine from the kidneys to the bladder.  If the infection starts in the urethra and bladder, it is usually not serious and clears up with treatment.  However, if a UTI reaches the kidneys, it can be more serious. A person with an upper urinary tract infection may need to go to the hospital for treatment.  Females are more likely than males to get a UTI because of the position and shorter length of their urethras.  The female urethra is near the anus, which makes it easy for bacteria from the stool to get into the urethra. To prevent this, always wipe from front to back after going to the toilet.  Bacteria do not have as far to travel to infect the bladder because a female has a shorter urethra than a male. Because of this, bladder infections can happen more easily.  Having  kidney stones , a weakened immune system, or being pregnant makes it more likely a person will get a UTI.  A  2014 review  linked the following factors with RUTIs in otherwise healthy women:  Some specific ways of having sex make getting a UTI more likely. If people have anal sex, it is essential they wash their genitals before engaging in other sexual activities to reduce the spread of bacteria.  Genetic factors and urinary tract abnormalities may also make getting a chronic UTI more likely.  Males rarely get UTIs. If they do, it may be because they have an enlarged prostate. An enlarged prostate may mean the bladder cannot empty fully, leaving bacteria to multiply.  A doctor may carry out the following tests to reach a diagnosis and understand why a UTI is recurring:  Doctors normally treat chronic UTIs with  antibiotics . They may suggest either:  The doctor may also prescribe pain-relieving medication to ease discomfort.  Home remedies for a UTI include:  Drinking cranberry juice is a popular home remedy for UTIs. But there is little scientific evidence to suggest it is effective.  However, a sugar found in cranberries called D-mannose shows promise as a home remedy to treat a UTI. A  2014 study  found that D-mannose powder reduced the risk of recurring UTIs and may be useful for UTI prevention. More research is needed to confirm these findings.  If a bladder infection remains untreated, it can spread to the kidneys, which is more dangerous. If a person has a  kidney infection , they may need treatment in the hospital.  Without proper treatment, a kidney infection may lead to permanent kidney damage.  Rarely, chronic UTIs may cause  sepsis  (blood poisoning) if left untreated, which may be life-threatening.  Some lifestyle changes may make UTIs less likely to recur. These include:  Vaginal  estrogen  may also help  reduce the risk of UTIs  in women during or after menopause.  Chronic UTIs usually clear up with long-term antibiotics.  The doctor may prescribe antibiotics for self-directed use. Getting to know the early signs of infection will help a person take their antibiotics as soon as they are needed.  It is vital to work closely with the doctor and ask for further treatment if UTIs continue to recur.    
 Al-Badr, A., &amp; Al-Shaikh, G. (2013, August). Recurrent urinary tract infections management in women: A review.  Sultan Qaboos University Medical Journal ,  13  (3), 359–367.  Al-Badr, A., &amp; Al-Shaikh, G. (2013, August). Recurrent urinary tract infections management in women: A review.  Sultan Qaboos University Medical Journal ,  13  (3), 359–367.  Anger, J.,  et al.  (2019). Recurrent uncomplicated urinary tract infections in women: AUA/CUA/SUFU guideline (2019).  https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/recurrent-uti   Bladder infection (urinary tract infection—UTI) in adults. (n.d.).  Glover, M., Moreira, C. G., Sperandio, V., &amp; Zimmern, P. (2014, March). Recurrent urinary tract infections in healthy and nonpregnant women.  Urological Science ,  25  (1), 1–8.  Kranjčec, B., Papeš, D., &amp; Altarac, S. (2014, February). D-mannose powder for prophylaxis of recurrent urinary tract infections in women: A randomized clinical trial [Abstract].  World Journal of Urology ,  32 (1), 79–84.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "How can you stop a chronic UTI?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322185.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, June 20). "How can you stop a chronic UTI?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  