 Gum recession occurs when gum tissue wears away, exposing more of the tooth at the root. This may cause increased sensitivity, especially when eating or drinking hot or cold foods. Because gum recession tends to happen slowly, many people do not realize it is happening to them.  If left untreated, gum recession could eventually lead to tooth loss.  Some people choose to have a gum graft for cosmetic reasons, such as to have a better smile; while for others, a gum graft is necessary to protect the exposed tooth from damage and repair any damage already done.  There is a variety of gum grafts available, and the type of surgery undertaken depends on the extent and severity of damage and a person's individual needs.  A periodontist will discuss the different types of surgery available with the person to decide which option is the most suitable.  Before starting the gum graft, the periodontist will administer a local anesthetic to numb the area so that the procedure does not hurt.  They may also lift some of the existing gum away to expose the root of the tooth and clean it.  The three different types of gum graft surgery are:  In this procedure the periodontist:  This is the preferred method for people with thin gums who require extra tissue to enlarge the gums.  In this procedure the periodontist:  This is the preferred method for people who have lots of gum tissue growing near the exposed tooth.  In this procedure the periodontist:  A periodontist may source the tissue from a tissue bank rather than removing gum tissue from a person's mouth.  Once the person and their dentist have considered all the options and decided on the type of surgery, there is not much that a person needs to do to prepare for the procedure.  However, it is essential to ensure a family member or friend is available to drive to and from the appointment.  This is important because the pain medication prescribed to manage the discomfort means it is unsafe for a person having gum graft surgery to drive.  People getting gum grafts will be able to go home right away after the procedure. A periodontist will discuss all the aftercare instructions to ensure the graft heals successfully.  A person can aid recovery by:  The pain and discomfort a person experiences will vary. If the periodontist is using tissue from a tissue bank, for example, a person should feel minimal pain. If they remove the tissue from the roof of the mouth a person may feel pain for a few days.  The healing process is often quick, taking 1 to 2 weeks for the mouth to heal fully but may take longer. People can take over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers or prescription medications to help manage any discomfort.  After the procedure, teeth may feel more sensitive than usual, particularly to hot and cold foods, and people may benefit from using desensitizing toothpaste or mouthwash.  Most people can return to work the following day.  A person will probably have a follow-up appointment with their dentist after surgery to check the healing process is progressing as it should. The dentist may also remove any stitches if necessary.  The gums will not only look different after surgery but may feel tighter and firmer too.  Complications of gum graft surgery are minimal and uncommon.  It is, however, possible that people may experience the following:  Occasionally, the graft tissue may not attach to the graft site properly. This is very rare, but if this happens a person might require repeat surgery.  Some people do not like the way their smile looks after their gum graft surgery. In these situations, the periodontist may be able to reshape the gums to help change the way they look.  People should call their dentist as soon as possible if they notice any symptoms that suggest the gums have become infected after surgery.  Symptoms of infection include:  Gum graft surgery varies in price.  The procedure cost usually depends on the type of surgery required.  People may be able to get all or part of the surgery paid for by their insurers if they have dental insurance. Insurance companies can provide estimates to give an idea of overall cost.  A person deciding whether to have gum graft surgery should consider the following:  By maintaining good oral hygiene, and visiting a dentist for routine checkups on a regular basis, a person can reduce their risk of developing gum disease and catching it early should it begin to develop.  Gum graft surgery is a procedure that helps to restore gums that have worn down, can help protect teeth, and improve the appearance of a person's smile.  There are different types of gum graft surgery available. All are relatively straightforward procedures with minimal risk of any complications.  People may feel some discomfort after surgery but should make a full recovery within 2 weeks.    
 Gum grafting. (n.d.).  Gum grafting. (n.d.).  Gum graft surgery. (n.d.).  Jankovic, S., Aleksic, Z., Klokkevold, P., Lekovic, V., Dimitrijevic, B., Barrie Kenney, E., &amp; Camargo, P. (2012, April). Use of platelet-rich fibrin membrane following treatment of gingival recession: A randomized clinical trial.  International Journal of Periodontics and Restorative Dentistry ,  32 (2), e40–e50.  Kassab, M. M., &amp; Cohen, R. E. (2003, February). The etiology and prevalence of gingival recession [Abstract].  The Journal of the American Dental Association ,  134 (2), 220–225.  McGuire, M. K., Scheyer, E. T., Nevins, M. L., Neiva, R., Cochran, D. L., Mellonig, J. T., ... Bates, D. (2011, October 1). Living cellular construct for increasing the width of keratinized gingiva: Results from a randomized, within‐patient, controlled trial [Abstract].  Journal of Periodontology ,  82   (10), 1414–1423.  Oral health. (2016, October 18).  Periodontal disease fact sheet. (n.d.).  Periodontal disease in adults (age 20 to 64). (2018, February).  Periodontal (gum) disease: Causes, symptoms, and treatments. (2013, September).  Periodontal surgery. (2017, February).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "How long does it take for a gum graft to heal?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322115.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, June 13). "How long does it take for a gum graft to heal?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  