 Symptoms of  depression  can include feelings of helplessness, sadness, and hopelessness, and these may be worse in the morning. The common term for this diurnal variation is morning depression.  Diurnal means that symptoms seem to occur or grow more severe every day at around the same time. For some people, this happens in the afternoon or evening.  A person with morning depression will have the diagnostic symptoms of major depressive disorder. These symptoms will arise or, more often, intensify in the morning.  The symptoms may dissipate or feel less severe as the day goes on.  Doctors diagnose depression according to criteria listed in the  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition  (DSM-5).  To receive a diagnosis of depression, a person must experience five or more of the symptoms listed below for 2 weeks or more.  A defining aspect of the condition is a depressed mood or a loss of interest or pleasure in activities once enjoyed.  Other symptoms include:  In addition, a person with morning depression may notice the following symptoms:  In a person with morning depression, these symptoms will reduce or disappear as the day progresses.  Doctors have not identified a specific cause of morning depression, but there are many contributing factors.  Because morning depression occurs at around the same time every day, doctors often connect it to imbalances in a person's circadian rhythm.  The body's circadian rhythm is a process that signals the sleep-wake cycle, among other things. Hormonal changes throughout the day can influence the circadian rhythm. One of these hormones is melatonin, which makes a person sleepy.  While people who are not clinically diagnosed with depression often experience changes in mood throughout the day, those with morning depression seem to have more pronounced highs and lows that occur daily or almost every day.   Some research suggests  that imbalances in a person's internal body clock and the amount of sleep and light exposure could lead to mood changes, especially in those with depression.  Beyond changes to the body's natural rhythms, several other factors may contribute to morning depression and major depressive disorder. These factors include:  Doctors begin to diagnose depression and any diurnal variations, such as morning depression, by asking a person about their symptoms.  They may ask questions about changes in mood, sleep, weight, and appetite. The doctor will attempt to establish how long these symptoms have lasted and whether they are improving or getting worse.  They will also try to rule out other possible causes, such as a medical condition that can cause similar symptoms.  Hypothyroidism  is one example.  Some medications can also lead to mood changes and symptoms of depression, so a doctor will also ask about any drugs a person is taking.  Anyone having  suicidal thoughts  or thoughts of self-harm should seek emergency medical attention. A doctor can help to provide immediate and continuing care.  Many treatments for depression exist. They include:  Some people also benefit from alternative therapies, including  acupuncture , meditation, and  yoga . While these can help people to feel better and maintain good  mental health  over time, they should not replace medical treatment for major depressive disorder.  While pursuing medical treatments, a person may wish to adopt habits that can help them to cope with symptoms. Positive changes can include:  A doctor or therapist can make individual recommendations based on a person's symptoms and needs.  According to some research, morning depression is  a common form  of diurnal depression.  If a person has morning depression, medical treatments and support are available to help.    
 Daly, M., Delaney, L., Doran, P. P., &amp; MacLachlan, M. (2011). The role of awakening cortisol and psychological distress in diurnal variations in affect: A day reconstruction study [Abstract].  Emotion ,  11 (3), 524–532.  Daly, M., Delaney, L., Doran, P. P., &amp; MacLachlan, M. (2011). The role of awakening cortisol and psychological distress in diurnal variations in affect: A day reconstruction study [Abstract].  Emotion ,  11 (3), 524–532.  Depression. (2017, August).  Murray, G. (2007, September). Diurnal mood variation in depression: A signal of disturbed circadian function? [Abstract].  Journal of Affective Disorders ,  102 (1–3), 47–53.  Murray, G. (2008). Major depressive disorder: Afternoon and evening diurnal mood variation is common.  Evidence-Based Mental Health ,  11 (2), 59.  Peeters, F., Delespaul, P., Berkhof, J., Rotternberg, J., &amp; Nicolson, N. A. (2006). Diurnal mood variation in major depressive disorder.  Emotion ,  6 (3), 383–391.  Reynolds, C. R., &amp; Kamphaus, R. W. (2013). Major depressive disorder.  Wirz-Justice, A. (2008, September). Diurnal variation of depressive symptoms.  Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience ,  10 (3), 337–343.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Why do I wake up depressed?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322155.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, June 15). "Why do I wake up depressed?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  