 If  peripheral vascular disease  (PVD) occurs only in the arteries, it is called  peripheral artery disease  (PAD). Most cases of PVD affect the arteries as well, so the terms are often interchangeable.  In this article, we take a close look at PVD, including causes, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatments.  There are two main types of PVD:  Signs and symptoms of PVD often appear gradually. They occur more commonly in the legs than the in arms because the blood vessels in the legs are further from the heart.  Pains, aches, or cramps while walking are typical symptoms of PVD. However, up to 40 percent of people with PVD or PAD do not experience any  leg pain .  Pains, aches, and cramps related to walking, which is known as claudication, might occur in the following areas:  Symptoms of claudication often develop when someone is walking quickly or for long distances. The symptoms typically go away with rest. However, as PVD progresses, symptoms can get worse and become more frequent. Leg pain and  fatigue  may persist even while resting.  Other symptoms of PVD include:  Causes of PVD vary and depend on the type a person has.   Causes of organic PVD   Arteriosclerosis, which is caused by changes in the structure of the blood vessels, is a common cause of organic PVD.  Atherosclerosis, which is a specific type of arteriosclerosis, occurs when plaque (fats and other substances) build up in the blood vessels. Atherosclerosis can restrict blood flow, and if left untreated, can cause clots. Clots block the arteries and cause loss of limbs or organ damage.  Common risk factors for atherosclerosis include:  The following conditions may cause structural changes in the blood vessels:  Injury, inflammation, or infection in the blood vessels may also cause structural changes in the blood vessels.   Causes of functional PVD   Functional PVD occurs when blood vessels have an increased response to brain signals and environmental factors. Common causes of this include:  In general, the risk factors for PVD are similar to those for arteriosclerosis. They include:  If a person suspects they have PVD, it is essential that they see a doctor. Early diagnosis and treatment can improve the outlook for the disease and prevent severe complications from occurring.  A doctor will diagnose PVD by:  They may also order tests to confirm a diagnosis or rule out other conditions. Several other disorders can mimic the symptoms of PVD and PAD.  Diagnostic tests used to diagnose PVD include:  Effective PVD treatment aims to slow or stop disease progression, manage pain and other symptoms, and reduce the risk of serious complications.  PVD treatment plans usually involve lifestyle changes. Some people may also require medication, and severe cases may require surgical treatment.  Lifestyle changes include:  Medications to treat PVD include:  Co-occurring conditions may also require medicines to keep symptoms under control. For example, some people may need:  People with severe PVD might require surgery to widen arteries or bypass blockages. Surgical options are:  If PVD is left undiagnosed and untreated, it can cause severe or life-threatening complications such as:  A person can reduce their risk of developing PVD by:  When diagnosed early, PVD is often easily treated with lifestyle modifications and medications.  A doctor can monitor a person's improvement by measuring the distance they can walk without claudication. If treatments are effective, people should be able to gradually walk longer distances without pain.  Early intervention may prevent the condition from progressing and can help to avoid complications. Anyone experiencing any of the symptoms of PVD should see a doctor.  The sudden development of pale, cold, and aching limbs with loss of pulses is a medical emergency and requires immediate treatment.    
 About peripheral artery disease (PAD). (2018, February 20).  About peripheral artery disease (PAD). (2018, February 20).  Atherosclerosis. (n.d.).  Facts about peripheral arterial disease (P.A.D.) [Fact sheet]. (2006, August).  Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) fact sheet. (2016, June 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to know about peripheral vascular disease."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322182.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, June 19). "What to know about peripheral vascular disease."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  