 The discs between the vertebrae in the spinal column absorb shock and impact and prevent the bones from rubbing against each other.  There are five different sections of the spine:  Disc desiccation is a normal part of aging. The discs can become smaller and less flexible as they dehydrate, and can eventually start to break down or degenerate.  The symptoms of desiccation depend on the area of the spine that is affected.  Cervical spine disc desiccation causes neck pain, while lumbar disc desiccation will cause pain in the lower back.  Other symptoms of disc desiccation include:  Aging is the most common cause of desiccated discs, though it can occur in younger people as well.  Other causes of disc desiccation include:  Disc desiccation and degenerative disc disease are among the most common causes of lower  back pain .  Most people learn that they have this condition when they see their doctor about their pain. The doctor will start by taking a history and performing a physical exam.  In addition to asking about previous medical or surgical conditions, the doctor will want to know about the pain, including:  The doctor may feel the back, legs, and arms during the physical exam to determine where the pain is occurring or radiating too.  The doctor may move the arms and legs to see if there is a decrease in the range of motion, and test the strength of the various muscles. Sensation in the limbs and deep tendon reflexes will also be tested.  A doctor will use all the information to figure out what area of the back or which particular disc may be affected.  Additional testing may be ordered after the initial visit, including:  These tests allow the doctor to look directly at the bones and structure of the spine, including the shape and size of the discs.  Dessicated discs may appear smaller or thinner, and the bones themselves may appear to have some damage if they are rubbing against each other.  No treatment may be necessary if desiccated discs are not causing significant pain or interfering with daily life.  Basic home remedies include:  Surgery may be necessary if these measures do not work.  There are many different ways that surgery can help with a desiccated disc. Possible procedures may include:  Someone who is considering surgery should find a spinal specialist who can present the options that are best for their situation. Getting a second or third opinion may help someone to find the best approach.  Taking steps to prevent disc desiccation and degeneration is essential.  Prevention methods are good for general health and wellbeing and include the following:  Disc desiccation is a common and natural effect of aging. In most cases, taking precautions at home and making lifestyle changes can manage or prevent pain from worsening.  If someone's daily life is impacted, consulting with the doctor or spinal specialist may help them to identify treatments that can reduce pain or increase daily motion.    
 Anatomy and function. (2003).  Anatomy and function. (2003).  Degenerative disc disease. (n.d.).  Saleem, S., Aslam, H. M., Rehmani, M. A. K., Raees, A., Alvi, A. A., &amp; Ashraf, J. (2013, November 28). Lumbar disc degenerative disease: Disc degeneration symptoms and magnetic resonance image findings.  Asian Spine Journal , 7(4), 322–334.  What is degenerative disc disease? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "How can disc desiccation be treated?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322121.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, June 13). "How can disc desiccation be treated?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  