 Bubonic plague is one of three types of plague caused by the bacterium  Yersinia pestis.   It is passed to humans by the bite of an infected flea, which can be spread far and wide by hitching a ride on small animals.   Y. pestis  resides in some animal populations — such as ground squirrels — in the United States, but it is very rare to see it passed to humans.  This most recent case occurred in a 14-year-old boy in Elmore County, ID. At this stage, it is not clear whether the child — who has remained anonymous — contracted the disease in his home state of Idaho or during a recent trip to Oregon.  However, according to officials, ground squirrels near the child's home had tested positive for  Y. pestis  in both 2015 and 2016.  The news was  initially broken  by Elmore County Central District Health Department (CDHD). In their statement, they make it clear that this is not an emerging pattern of infections, saying:   "Since 1990, eight human cases were confirmed in Oregon, and two were confirmed in Idaho."    This is the first case of bubonic plague in the state for 26 years and only the fifth since 1940. The press release continues, "Symptoms of plague usually occur within 2–6 days of exposure and include sudden onset of  fever , chills,  headache , and weakness."  "In most cases, there is also a painful swelling of the lymph nodes in the groin, armpit, or neck."  In the Middle Ages, the plague descended on Europe. It is known as the Black Death, and it killed an incredible one third to one half of the continent's population.  With medical advancements today, the disease can be treated. The Elmore County CDHD news release provides us with a dash of comfort, saying that "[p]rompt diagnosis and appropriate  antibiotic  treatment can greatly reduce the risk of death."  Importantly, the CDHD also offer some advice to help minimize the risk of contracting plague. They explain signs to look out for in pets:   "Plague signs in cats and dogs include fever, lethargy, and loss of appetite. There may be a swelling in the lymph nodes under the jaw."   If you are in the area, they offer further detailed advice:  Although bubonic plague is considered to be a disease of the distant past, in some parts of the world it does, occasionally, rear its ugly head. For instance, in 2017, there was a 4-month long  outbreak  in Madagascar. There were around 2,300 suspected cases and over 200 deaths.  According to  Sarah Correll , an epidemiologist with the CDHD, "The great news is the child is recovering and received appropriate antibiotic treatment."   Medical News Today  contacted the CDHD to inquire about the boy's recovery and any other updates. We were told:   " The child is continuing to do well and recovering at home. We do not know yet if the disease was contracted in Oregon or Idaho."  Hopefully, any potential outbreaks will be nipped in the bud by following the rules above.  