 In the United States, there are  up to one million estimated cases  of  shingles  every year. Shingles refers to the reactivation of the dormant  herpes  varicella zoster virus after childhood. Aging, trauma,  stress , or another illness can all activate the virus.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend seeking medical advice as soon as any symptoms appear.  In 2017, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) licensed a vaccine called  Shingrix  that protects against the condition. The CDC recommend that adults over 50 years of age receive the vaccine to reduce their risk of shingles.  The 10 natural treatments and home remedies below may provide relief from symptoms, although people should note that these are not medical treatments.  Some of these remedies may relieve pain and itchiness and improve healing:  People have used essential oils as herbal remedies for many years, often for skin conditions.  Some essential oils have properties that may help with skin irritation and healing These oils include:  In some cases, pure essential oils can cause  allergic reactions . Therefore, people should always do a patch test before trying them.  It is best to dilute oils with a carrier oil or to visit a pharmacy to purchase them pre-mixed as a safe topical ointment.  The FDA have not approved many essential oils for use, so it is important to talk to a pharmacist or doctor before using any of them.  Holding cool cloths or compresses against the rash site may assist in relieving itchiness and reducing  inflammation .  People can lightly soak a natural cotton cloth or towel with cool water and wring it out before placing it on sore, itchy areas. They can then repeat this as necessary.  It is also best not to expose the skin to extreme temperatures, so people should avoid using ice baths or very hot water. Hot water will increase blood flow and potentially slow down the healing of sores, whereas ice will increase skin sensitivity.  Researchers believe that witch hazel is more effective than chamomile for reducing inflammation and itchiness in some individuals.  It is possible to purchase witch hazel in a variety of forms, the most common of which are creams or witch hazel water. Many witch hazel creams are  available online .  People can apply witch hazel topically to areas of irritation and inflammation to achieve relief.  Taking cool baths or showers every day, with minimal scrubbing, will help to keep sores and blisters clean and reduce the risk of infection.  Cool water should also relieve sore and itchy spots, helping to prevent scratching, which could cause scarring.  Some studies suggest that oat extract may moisten dry skin and  soothe  sensitive and inflamed skin.  The FDA have approved colloidal oatmeal as a safe and effective treatment. Colloidal oat products usually exclude oat protein to prevent allergic reactions.  The active ingredients that help reduce inflammation include flavonoids and saponins. People can use oat products in a cool bath to help relieve pain and itchiness.  Researchers have found that  Gentiana scabra , a blue or purple flower occurring throughout North America, has a positive effect on pain relief in shingles and decreases the likelihood of  postherpetic neuralgia .  By reducing inflammation in the skin,  Gentiana scabra  minimizes pain and promotes healing. A reputable Chinese medicine practitioner can prepare the herbal formula by boiling the plant in water. People can then take the remedy orally.  A healthful diet is vital for preventing and fighting illness.  The  Dietary Guidelines for Americans  recommend eating a varied diet comprising many vegetables, fruits, and whole-grains as well as legumes, nuts, and lean meats.  People should aim to include orange, red, and green foods that  contain the carotenoids  lycopene, lutein, zeaxanthin, and provitamin A in their diet. Carotenoids are very important for immune function, and occur in the following foods:  Limiting trans and saturated fats, and avoiding added sugar and salt where possible can also reduce inflammation and improve immune function.  Healthy individuals should not need to take supplements. However, individuals who are immune-compromised and over the age of 50 should consider supplementation to maintain good health and strong immunity.  There is a link between  vitamin D  and  immune function . Many older people are at risk of low  vitamin  D levels, so they must ensure that they get sufficient sun exposure or take supplements to protect their immunity.  Taking vitamin C, zinc, and  selenium  supplements can also improve immunity in older adults.  However, taking high doses of vitamins and minerals can do more harm than good. Multivitamins, which contain lower and safer levels of many vitamins and minerals, are usually a better option.  Smoking offers no health benefits and is always harmful. It is vital to  quit smoking  as it increases the risk of many cancers and diseases.  Smoking  lowers immunity against  infection, especially in older people, and can delay recovery and healing.  Using meditation to relax and trying to rest when possible may help to reduce the symptoms of stress.  Unfortunately, it is not possible to cure shingles. However, as with other viruses, resting and eating a healthful diet will help with recovery.  Using treatments to alleviate symptoms will increase comfort and mental well-being, and may also reduce the risk of postherpetic neuralgia.  There is now a vaccine available to prevent shingles. Anyone who is aged over 50 or is at risk of developing shingles should consider seeing their doctor about getting the vaccine or a booster dose.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 2015-2020 Dietary guidelines for Americans (eighth edition). (2015).  2015-2020 Dietary guidelines for Americans (eighth edition). (2015).  Cheng, J. &amp; Rosenquist, R. W. (2018).  Fundamentals of Pain Medicine .  de Groot, A. C., &amp; Schmidt, E. (2016, September). Tea tree oil: Contact allergy and chemical composition [Abstract].  Contact Dermatitis ,  75 (3), 129–143.  Fabbrocini, G., &amp; Saint Aroman, M. (2014, December). Cosmeceuticals based on Rhealba® oat plantlet extract for the treatment of acne vulgaris [Abstract].  Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology ,  28 (Suppl. 6), 1–6.  Miguel, F. G., Cavalheiro, A. H., Spinola, N. F., Ribeiro, D. L., Barcelos, G. R. M., Antunes, L. M. G., ... &amp; Berretta, A. A. (2015, September 3). Validation of a RP-HPLC-DAD method for chamomile ( Matricaria recutita ) preparations and assessment of the marker, apigenin-7-glucoside, safety and anti-inflammatory effect.  Evidence–Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2015 , 828437.  Orchard, A., &amp; van Vuuren, S. (2017, May 4). Commercial essential oils as potential antimicrobials to treat skin diseases.  Evidence–Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2017 , 4517971.  Qiu, F., Liang, C.-L., Liu, H., Zeng, Y.-Q., Hou, S., Huang, S., ... &amp; Dai, Z. (2017, January 3). Impacts of cigarette smoking on immune responsiveness: Up and down or upside down?  Oncotarget ,  8 (1), 268–284.  Shingles (herpes zoster) [Fact sheet]. (2018. January 30).  Shingles (herpes zoster): Prevention &amp; treatment. (2018, January 19).  Shingles (herpes zoster): Vaccination. (2018, February 28).  Tabassum, N., &amp; Hamdani, M. (2014, January–June). Plants used to treat skin diseases.  Pharmacognosy Review ,  8 (15), 52–60.  Toti, E., Chen, C. –Y. O., Palmery, M., Valencia, D. V., &amp; Peluso, I. (2018, May 9). Non pro-vitamin A and pro-vitamin A carotenoids as immunomodulators: recommended dietary allowance, therapeutic index, or personalized nutrition?  Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity ,  2018 , 4637861.  VanPutte, C. L., Regan, J. L., Russo, A. F., &amp; Seeley, R. R. (2016, January 4).  Seeley's Anatomy &amp; Physiology (11th edition) . New York, N.Y.: McGraw-Hill Education.  Vitamin D [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Wang, K., Coyle, M. E., Mansu, S., Zhang, A .L., &amp; Xue, C. C. (2017, March). Gentiana scabra bunge. Formula for herpes zorster: Biological actions of key herbs and systematic review of efficacy and safety [Abstract].  Phytotherapy Research ,  31 (3), 375–386.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "What are some home remedies for shingles?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322131.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, June 14). "What are some home remedies for shingles?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  