 This form of  tendinitis  can be very painful and may prevent a person from performing everyday activities. When the condition is mild, a person can usually treat it with rest, home remedies, and by practicing certain exercises.  More severe cases of tendinitis tend to respond well to steroid injections or surgery.  People often develop rotator cuff tendinitis by doing repeated movements, such as reaching or lifting overhead.  Symptoms are usually mild at first. The most common symptoms include:  Playing some sports involves moving in ways that tend to become painful as rotator cuff tendinitis develops.  Problematic movements can include:  Symptoms become more severe and persistent as rotator cuff tendinitis progresses. This can cause problems, such as:  If rotator cuff tendinitis develops suddenly because of an injury, the shoulder will usually be extremely tender or painful. A person may be unable to move it.  A doctor will begin by asking questions about symptoms, such as when they started, when they occur, and how they have progressed.  The doctor will then examine the shoulder and check for tender points or abnormalities. They will then ask the person to move the shoulder in different directions so that they can assess the range of motion.  Finally, the doctor will test the strength of the shoulder. To do this, they will ask the person to press against their hand.  To rule out other possible conditions, a doctor will usually order imaging, such as:  In most cases, a doctor will recommend nonsurgical treatments for people with minor to mild rotator cuff tendinitis. These include:  A person may also benefit from applying over-the-counter creams, ointments, or patches that contain analgesic medications, such as:  In addition, a doctor may recommend  physical therapy  to improve symptoms and restore function.  A physical therapist will teach a person stretches that can improve the range of motion in the shoulder.  Once the person can move their shoulder without pain, the physical therapist will teach them strengthening exercises to help fully restore the use of their shoulder.  A doctor may suggest steroid injections if rest, basic care, and physical therapy do not resolve symptoms.  The steroid will have strong anti-inflammatory properties. The doctor will inject it directly into the shoulder. They will also use a local anesthetic.  They will often need to repeat these injections every few months until the shoulder responds to less invasive treatments.  Some basic stretches and exercises can help to manage or treat rotator cuff tendinitis.  Before trying them at home, it is important to warm up the body for 5–10 minutes by doing some low-impact cardio exercise, such as walking.  Three exercises that tend to benefit people with rotator cuff tendinitis include:  Next, do two sets of ten repetitions each using the opposite arm. It may be a good idea to repeat this exercise on both arms 5–6 days a week.  A person may benefit from performing this stretch four times on each arm daily.  An individual should feel the stretch in the back muscles behind the shoulders.  Rest for 1 minute and repeat on the opposite side. Repeat this exercise four times on each side, 4–5 days a week.  If all other forms of treatment fail, a doctor may recommend surgery. The appropriateness of surgery can depend on:  The surgeon will remove portions of the bursa, a fluid-filled sac that sits within the rotator cuff. A healthy bursa helps the shoulder bones and tendons to move without friction.  The surgeon may also remove a piece of the acromion, which is a bone at the top of the shoulder. They usually remove the front edge.  It takes most people 2–4 months to fully recover from surgery for rotator cuff tendinitis.  In the first few weeks of recovery, a person will usually wear a sling to reduce pressure and  stress  on the healing shoulder.  Once the shoulder is no longer painful, a person can begin stretching and doing strengthening exercises recommended by a doctor or physical therapist.  The best way to prevent rotator cuff tendinitis is to avoid or limit activities that irritate the shoulder. Taking this precaution can also help a person with the condition to reduce the number of flare-ups.  People who play sports that involve the shoulder should ensure that they are using correct technique to limit irritation as much as possible.  The following tips can also help to prevent or manage rotator cuff tendinitis:  Depending on how the severity of the tendinitis and a person's profession or hobbies, the condition can cause complications, including:  As with any surgery, the procedure to correct rotator cuff tendinitis involves some risks, most commonly:  It may take a person weeks or months to recover from rotator cuff tendinitis and regain full, pain-free use of the shoulder.  However, when the condition is mild, most people can achieve a complete recovery with rest, at-home care, and over-the-counter medications.  People with more severe tendinitis may require additional treatment. This usually involves steroid injections. If nothing else works, a doctor may recommend surgery. When followed by the right recovery plan, this surgery is typically successful.    
 Factor, D., &amp; Dale, B. (2014, April). Current concepts of rotator cuff tendinopathy.  International Journal of Sports Physical Therapy ,  9 (2), 274–288.  Factor, D., &amp; Dale, B. (2014, April). Current concepts of rotator cuff tendinopathy.  International Journal of Sports Physical Therapy ,  9 (2), 274–288.  Hanchard, N. C. A., Lenza, M., Handoll, H. H. G., &amp; Takwoingi, Y. (2013, April 30). Physical tests for shoulder impingements and local lesions of bursa, tendon or labrum that may accompany impingement.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  4 .  Rotator cuff and shoulder rehabilitation exercises. (2012, October).  American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What are the symptoms of rotator cuff tendinitis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322169.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, June 18). "What are the symptoms of rotator cuff tendinitis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  