 It can take as few as 5 successive days of malnourishment for a person to be at risk of refeeding syndrome. The condition can be managed, and if doctors detect warning signs early, they may be able to prevent it.  Symptoms of the syndrome usually become apparent within several days of treatment for malnourishment.  If a person does not eat enough, the body can quickly go into starvation mode and become malnourished.  After an extended period of starvation, the ability to process food is severely compromised.  A malnourished body produces less  insulin , and this inhibits the production of  carbohydrates .  If the body has insufficient carbohydrates, it uses fat reserves and stored proteins for energy.  If, over time, the body continues to rely on reserves of fat and protein, this can change the balance of electrolytes. Levels of  vitamin  and electrolytes diminish as the body tries to adapt to starvation mode.  Potassium , phosphorus,  magnesium ,  calcium , and thiamine levels are commonly affected.  When food is reintroduced, the body no longer has to rely on reserves of fat and protein to produce energy.  However, refeeding involves an abrupt shift in metabolism. This occurs with an increase in glucose, and the body responds by secreting more insulin. This can result in a lack of electrolytes, such as phosphorous.  Refeeding syndrome can  cause  hypophosphatemia, a condition characterized by a phosphorus deficiency. It can also lead to low levels of other important electrolytes.  The harmful effects of refeeding syndrome are widespread, and they can include problems with the:  If doctors are unable to treat the syndrome, it can be fatal.  Refeeding syndrome affects people who do not receive enough  nutrition .  This may be because of:  The following medical conditions can also increase the risk of developing refeeding syndrome:  Undergoing particular surgeries, especially weight loss surgeries, can also  increase  a person's risk.  Electrolytes play an essential role in the body. When the balance is skewed, the most common complication is hypophosphatemia, which is a lack of phosphorus.  Symptoms of hypophosphatemia include:  Refeeding syndrome can also lead to a lack of magnesium. Hypomagnesemia is the name for dangerously low levels of magnesium.  Signs and symptoms of hypomagnesemia include:  Refeeding syndrome can also cause potassium levels to drop dangerously low. This can lead to:  Other symptoms include:  In some cases, a potassium deficiency can lead to a  coma  or death.  Doctors can identify people at risk for refeeding syndrome, but it is impossible to know whether a person will develop it. Attempting to prevent the syndrome from developing is vital.  People who have experienced recent starvation have the highest risk of developing refeeding syndrome.  The risk is high when a person has an extremely low body mass index.  People who have recently lost weight quickly, or who have had minimal or no food before starting the refeeding process are also at significant risk.  Other people at risk include:  Regardless of age, a person is at high risk if they have:  Two or more of the following issues also increases the risk of developing refeeding syndrome:  Anyone who suspects that they have refeeding syndrome should seek immediate medical care.  People with refeeding syndrome need to regain normal levels of electrolytes. Doctors can achieve this by replacing electrolytes, usually intravenously.  Replacing vitamins, such as thiamine, can also help to treat certain symptoms. A person will need continued vitamin and electrolyte replacement until levels stabilize.  Doctors may also slow the refeeding process, to help a person to adjust and recover.  The person will require continual observation in a hospital. Doctors will monitor electrolyte levels and bodily functions with tests, including urine and blood analyses.  Recovery times vary, depending on the extent of illness and malnourishment.  Treatment will continue for up to 10 days, and monitoring may continue afterward.  If a person has complications or underlying medical problems, treatment for these may lead to longer recovery time.  Prevention is the most effective way to combat refeeding syndrome.  Healthcare professionals that are aware of warning signs and risk factors are better able to treat malnourished patients.  In 2013,  researchers  found that in a large sample of people being fed intravenously in the UK, 4 percent had refeeding syndrome. The authors noted that doctors only recognized the risk in half of the at-risk patients.  Healthcare professionals can prevent refeeding syndrome by:  Malnourishment can result when food intake is severely limited. This may occur in people with:  Surgery and illnesses such as cancer can result in increased metabolic demands, leading to malnourishment.  Malnourishment can also occur when the body no longer absorbs nutrients as it should. This can result from conditions such as celiac disease and inflammatory bowel disease.  Patients at high risk of malnourishment and refeeding syndrome must be identified and treated. Guidelines state that doctors should consider a person's alcohol intake, nutrition, weight changes, and psychological state before refeeding.  Refeeding syndrome can occur when food is reintroduced too quickly after a period of starvation or malnourishment. This can lead to electrolyte imbalances and severe complications that can be fatal.  The best way to combat refeeding syndrome is to identify and treat at-risk people. People with the syndrome can recover if they receive treatment early. Education and increased awareness of the condition can help.    
 Boland, K., Solanki, D., O'Hanlon, C. (2013, November). Prevention and treatment of refeeding syndrome in the acute care setting.  Boland, K., Solanki, D., O'Hanlon, C. (2013, November). Prevention and treatment of refeeding syndrome in the acute care setting.  Chiappetta, S., &amp; Stein, J. (2016, March). Refeeding syndrome: An important complication following obesity surgery.  Obesity Facts ,  9 (1), 12–16.  Crook, M. A. (2014, November–December). Refeeding syndrome: Problems with definition and management [Abstract].  Nutrition ,  30 (11–12), 1448–1455.  Hammami, S., Aref, H. L., Khalfa, M., Kochtalli, I., &amp; Hammami, M. (2018, January 31). Refeeding syndrome in adults with celiac crisis: A case report.  Journal of Medical Case Reports ,  12 (1), 22.  Hearing, S. D. (2004, April 15). Refeeding syndrome.  Khan, L. U. R., Ahmed, J., Khan, S., &amp; MacFie, J. (2010, August 3). Refeeding syndrome: A literature review [Abstract].  Gastroenterology Research and Practice .  Lambers, W. M., Kraaijenbrink, B., &amp; Siegert, C. E. (2015, January 1). The refeeding syndrome [Abstract].  Nederlands Tijdschrift Voor Geneeskunde ,  159 , A8610.  Mehanna, H., Nankivell, P. C., Moledina, J., &amp; Travis, J. (2009, January 26). Refeeding syndrome–awareness, prevention and management.  Head &amp; Neck Oncology ,  1 (4).  Mehanna, H. M., Moledina, J., &amp; Travis, J. (2008, June 26). Refeeding syndrome: What it is, and how to prevent and treat it [Abstract].  The BMJ ,  336 (7659), 1495–1498.  Nutritional assessment: Assessment of risk of re-feeding syndrome. (2016, May 18).  Walmsley, R. S. (2013, December). Refeeding syndrome: Screening, incidence, and treatment during parenteral nutrition [Abstract].  Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology ,  28 (S4), 113–117.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What is refeeding?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322120.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, June 13). "What is refeeding?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  