 There are many possible causes of a urine odor in the breath, including:  Read on to learn more about the possible reasons for breath that smells like urine and the treatment options.  Nasal congestion, or a stuffy nose, refers to a runny nose or mucus buildup in the nasal cavities.  Nasal congestion may occur on its own or link to a condition called  sinusitis , which is  inflammation  or infection of the hollow cavities in the nose and face.  Both nasal congestion and sinusitis can result from bacterial infections, allergies, or irritation of the nasal cavities.  They often result in  bad breath , which in some people could smell similar to urine.  People can treat nasal congestion and sinusitis with one or more of the following, depending on the cause:  Some home remedies that may provide quick relief include:  A common bacterium called  Helicobacter pylori  ( H. pylori ) is present in nearly  one-half  of the world's population. Most people, however, do not show any symptoms.   H. pylori  is a bacterium that lives in the stomach, causes inflammation and ulcers, and can lead to  stomach cancer  in infected people. Breath that smells like ammonia or urine is a common symptom.  Additional symptoms of  H. pylori  complications can include persistent pain or intermittent discomfort in the stomach, lack of appetite, nausea or vomiting, bloating, weight loss, and dark-colored stools.  People should talk to a doctor if they suspect an  H. pylori  infection. If the doctor diagnoses an infection, treatment may include:  The foods that people eat can affect their breath, on both a temporary and long-term basis.  Certain foods react in the body to produce ammonia and its byproducts, which have odors resembling that of urine.  This is common in people who consume a high-protein or ketogenic diet. A high intake of specific foods such as  onions  and garlic can also lead to bad breath.  Excessive alcohol consumption can also affect breath by lowering  saliva production .  In most cases, it is easy to treat bad breath when it results from dietary causes.  People should check for particular foods in their diet that could be causing the problem and reduce their intake accordingly.  A well-balanced diet with multiple daily servings of fruit and vegetables will also result in a healthy digestive system and potentially better-smelling breath.  CKD comprises a range of diseases and disorders that damage the kidneys and limit their ability to filter body waste. This leads to a serious buildup of toxins in the body, including ammonia, which causes urine-scented breath.  Other health complications that can result from CKD include  anemia ,  high blood pressure , abnormal electrolyte levels, fluid buildup,  heart disease , increased risk of  stroke  and  heart attack , and kidney failure.  An estimated  30 million  American adults have CKD. Several factors can increase a person's risk of CKD, including  diabetes , drug abuse, high blood pressure, and a family history of kidney disease.  It is not possible to cure CKD, so treatment aims to relieve symptoms and help patients manage the condition.  To manage CKD, people will need to make lifestyle changes and possibly also take medications for high blood pressure and high  cholesterol .  People with advanced stage CKD may need dialysis or a kidney transplant.  Uremia is the end stage of kidney failure. As the kidneys will no longer be able to filter waste effectively, waste substances such as urea, creatine, and other nitrogenous products build up in the blood rather than leaving the body in the urine.  The accumulation of these nitrogenous compounds in the system often results in breath smelling like ammonia.  Uremia is a severe medical condition that requires urgent care and often hospitalization. Doctors will determine the underlying cause of uremia and recommend dialysis to filter the blood.  Some people may also require a kidney transplant if the kidneys are too damaged to filter blood on their own.  A foul taste in the mouth is the primary indication of bad breath.  Some other quick ways to check your breath include:  People can help to avoid bad breath by adopting the following practices:  There are many conditions that can cause breath to smell like urine or ammonia. Some of these are temporary and resolve on their own, while others may require medical attention.  A dentist will be able to treat many of the causes of bad breath, but people should also maintain good oral hygiene and health.  Written by Gillian D'Souza    
 About chronic kidney disease. (2017, February 15).  About chronic kidney disease. (2017, February 15).  Ajibola, O. A., Smith, D., Španěl, P., &amp; Ferns, G. A. A. (2013, October 31). Effects of dietary nutrients on volatile breath metabolites [Abstract].  Journal of Nutritional Science ,  2 , e34.  Bicak, D. A. (2018, April 30). A current approach to halitosis and oral malodor — a mini review.  The Open Dentistry Journal ,  12 , 322-330.  Crowe. S. E. (2017, September 5). Patient education: Helicobacter pylori infection and treatment (beyond the basics).  Is rinsing your sinuses with neti pots safe? (2017, January 24).  Malfertheiner, P., Kandulski, A., &amp; Venerito, M. (2017, September 20). Proton-pump inhibitors: Understanding the complications and risks.  Nature Reviews Gastoenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  14 , 697–710.  Musa-Veloso, K., Likhodii, S. S., &amp; Cunnane, S. C. (2002, July 1). Breath acetone is a reliable indicator of ketosis in adults consuming ketogenic meals.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  76 (1), 65–70.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  D’Souza, Gillian. "What causes breath to smell like urine?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322127.php&gt;    APA  D’Souza, G. (2018, June 13). "What causes breath to smell like urine?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  