 Rashes on the wrist can occur as a result of infection, genetic factors, or contact with something that causes irritation or an allergic reaction.  Rashes can develop on almost any part of the body. People can often determine the cause of a rash by looking at its specific symptoms.  Depending on the cause, a rash that appears on the wrist can have a wide range of symptoms.  It is often possible to determine the cause of a rash based on its specific symptoms and how long it takes to develop. Some rashes take days to develop while others appear very quickly.  Rashes typically have some of the following characteristics:  Read on for pictures of common rashes that occur on the wrist, along with their symptoms, causes, and treatments.  Common causes of a rash on the wrist include:  Rashes are a common effect of allergic reactions. A wrist rash could appear if a person reacts to certain materials they are wearing there, including:  When external substances or materials are the cause of an allergic skin reaction, it is called allergic contact dermatitis.  This allergic reaction causes skin irritation and reddish-pink bumps, or blisters that typically appear within 2–3 days of the skin touching the allergen.  One of the most common causes of allergic contact dermatitis is nickel. Researchers believe that at least  18 percent  of people in North America are allergic to nickel.  Other common triggers for contact dermatitis include:   Eczema , also called atopic dermatitis, refers to a range of similar conditions that cause skin irritation. Eczema affects more than  30 million American people .  Eczema causes distinctive patches of dry, red, cracked skin that may sometimes swell, ooze, or bleed.  This skin condition can affect any part of the body, but it is more common in places where the skin folds or comes into contact with the elements, such as around the hands and face.   In one study , researchers found that eczema frequently caused severe rashes on the wrists and ankles, especially in children, and that conventional treatments did not seem as effective at these sites.  A person with an allergy to medication may notice an itchy, pink, or red rash appearing on the body. This is a drug rash or drug eruption.  Drug rashes can spread, or they may only affect one part of the body, which can be an arm or wrist.  Common drug allergies include  penicillin , other  antibiotics , and sulfa drugs. Anyone who suspects a drug allergy should contact their doctor immediately, as the symptoms can become severe without treatment.   Lichen planus  is a common, non-contagious condition that may be an autoimmune disorder. This condition primarily affects the skin, but it can also impact on the nails, scalp, and inside of the mouth.  Lichen planus can develop anywhere on the body, including the wrists, lower back, and ankles.  It causes small bumps to appear on the skin, which are usually reddish-purple, shiny, and firm to the touch. The bumps may have small white lines on them.   Scabies  is a highly contagious condition that people get when mites called  Sarcoptes scabiei  bite into the skin, causing a very itchy rash.  A scabies rash consists of small, pinkish bumps. There may also be burrow marks, which are small lines showing where the mites burrowed.  The rash is more common in places where the skin folds, such as between the fingers, around the wrists, and by the elbows and knees.  Scabies is an infestation that causes a type IV hypersensitivity, or delayed-type hypersensitivity allergic reaction, meaning that it can take some time to develop.  The first time a person gets scabies, it can take  2–6 weeks  of infestation before they experience symptoms. Symptoms appear much faster if a person has had scabies before.  Common ways of catching scabies include being in the same house as someone who has scabies or sharing a bed with them. It is more common when people live in close, crowded conditions.  Many different infections can cause a rash on the wrist. In many cases, the rash clears up when the infection passes.  However, if a  fever  accompanies the rash, there is a chance that the infection could be serious, and the individual should speak to their doctor.  Rocky Mountain spotted fever is an infectious condition that comes from tick bites.  This condition can cause a splotchy or pinpoint rash anywhere on the body, including the arms and wrists.  The rash can appear  2–4  days after a person develops a fever, but may occasionally not appear at all. Other symptoms include a  headache , nausea, muscle pain, and loss of appetite.  After spending time outdoors, people should always check for ticks, especially on children. Without treatment, Rocky Mountain spotted fever can cause serious health complications and quickly progress into a life-threatening illness.  To determine the cause of a rash on the wrist, a doctor will conduct a detailed physical examination, take a person's medical history, and ask a variety of questions about when and how the outbreak developed.  A doctor will look for:  Doctors may use skin-patch testing and skin biopsies to identify allergies or other skin conditions that may be causing the rash.  They may also order a blood test to check for allergies or conditions such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever.  Most rashes go away on their own within a few days. A rash on the wrist can be a sign of an allergy or illness, so if it does not show any signs of improvement after a few days, the individual should seek medical advice.  People should also see their doctor if they suspect scabies. This condition will not improve without medical treatment, and a doctor can prescribe a scabicide to tackle the condition.  In addition, it is best to see a doctor if these symptoms appear:  Rocky Mountain spotted fever can be life-threatening, so people with symptoms who may have come into contact with ticks should seek medical care immediately.  It is also essential to seek emergency medical treatment if a sudden rash occurs and a person also has trouble breathing.  Although the symptoms for different types of rash can be very similar, finding the best treatment for a rash on the wrist depends entirely on what is causing the specific outbreak.  For example, if an individual is allergic to nickel and develops a rash on their wrist after wearing a new bracelet for a few days, the best treatment would be to stop wearing that bracelet.  Similarly, people who develop a rash after starting a new medication may need to stop taking that medication, but only under the guidance of a doctor.  Self-care treatments for rashes that are not too severe include:  When a rash occurs as part of an allergic reaction, people can take an over-the-counter (OTC) antihistamine to help reduce the swelling, redness, itchiness, and pain. Many antihistamines are available at drugstores and  online .  If the rash on the wrist is severe or spreading to other parts of the body, or troubling symptoms such as fever are present, individuals should see a physician for more comprehensive treatment.  A doctor may prescribe:  The antibiotic doxycycline is the  recommended  treatment for Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and an affected person should start taking it as soon as possible to address this severe and life-threatening disease.  Most rashes tend to go away, but for individuals with chronic skin conditions, learning how to manage a rash on the wrist is an ongoing process.  Consistent self-care through careful cleaning and moisturizing can help people to manage their sensitive skin.  If a rash occurs due to a medication, the outbreak should end following the discontinuation of the drug. However, the body may take at least a few days to start resolving the rash.  Lichen planus may last for  2 years  before disappearing, although some people do have recurrent outbreaks. It can leave brown spots on the skin, but they may eventually go away on their own over time.  After treatment for scabies, which usually takes care of the problem, a person can prevent re-infestation by washing all clothing, bedding, and towels in hot water, and drying them in a hot dryer. They should also vacuum all rugs and upholstery, and clean the washing and drying machines after use.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 An overview of the different types of eczema. (n.d.).  An overview of the different types of eczema. (n.d.).  Atopic dermatitis. (n.d.).  Eczema causes and triggers. (n.d.).  Kang, J. H. (2015, September 30). Febrile illness with skin rashes.  Infection &amp; Chemotherapy ,  47 (3),155–166.  Kim, H. J., &amp; Kim, I. H. (2012, October). Evaluation of clinical manifestation according to 'dermatitis mapping' in atopic dermatitis [Abstract].  Korean Journal of Dermatology ,  50 (10), 867–873.  Lichen planus: Diagnosis and treatment. (n.d.).  New itchy skin rashes in adults. (n.d.).  Nickel allergy: How to avoid exposure and reduce symptoms. (n.d.).  Rash 101 in adults: When to seek treatment. (n.d.).  Rashes. (2018, March 6).  Red, itchy rash? Get the skinny on dermatitis. (2012, April).  Rocky Mountain spotted fever. (2017, June 26).  Rock Mountain spotted fever (RMSF): Signs and symptoms. (2017, June 27).  Rock Mountain spotted fever (RMSF): Treatment. (2017, May 18).  Scabies: Treatment. (2016, September 16).  Skin rashes &amp; other skin problems. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "What is causing this rash on my wrist?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322196.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, June 20). "What is causing this rash on my wrist?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  