 In this article, we look at seven natural remedies for burns on the roof of the mouth. We also describe how to prevent them and when to see a doctor.  A person's mouth contains delicate tissues that are easily burned by very hot foods and drinks.  A hot slice of pizza will often burn the roof of the mouth because the cheese contains fats that can reach a very high temperature. Hot drinks are another common culprit.  Fats, oils, and liquids can hold heat for a long time. Consuming them before they have had time to cool can result in a burn.  Most burns on the roof of the mouth are first-degree burns, affecting only the top layer of skin. The skin is usually painful, swollen, and unusually red.  Burns can damage tissue and kill skin cells. As the roof of the mouth heals, the dead cells will fall away and reveal new cells underneath.  New skin can be tender at first, but it will quickly toughen up. A first-degree burn takes around 1 week to heal.  If a person has a first-degree burn, they can usually treat it at home. Taking immediate steps can limit the damage, and natural remedies can promote healing and prevent infection.  Taking immediate action after burning the roof of the mouth can curb the extent of the damage. Cooling the area right away can prevent the burn from affecting inner layers of skin.  The American Academy of Dermatology  recommend  that anyone who experiences a burn should submerge the area in cold water for at least 10 minutes.  When the burn is in the mouth, a person can fill the mouth with cold water. When the water is no longer cool, spit it out and replace it with cold water.  Cubes or chips of ice can stick to the skin and cause further pain and damage. Instead of sucking on an ice cube, try adding some ice to a glass of water.  Eating some cool natural yogurt or drinking a glass of milk can help to ease the discomfort of a mouth burn. Yogurt and milk coat the skin and provide a temporary barrier. This can prevent irritation and soothe itching as the wound heals.  A healthful diet can also help with healing. This can include dairy products, alongside proteins, whole grains, and plenty of fruits and vegetables.  Drinking plenty of fluids will keep the body hydrated and support healing.  Aloe vera gel is often used on external burns to soothe the skin. It can help to reduce  inflammation  and discomfort.  When applying aloe vera gel to a burn in the mouth, it is important to choose a product designed for use in this area.  Honey can help a burn on the roof of the mouth to heal. Gently coating the burn with honey keeps it moist, which can help with healing.   Some research  suggests that honey has antimicrobial properties. This means that it may kill harmful organisms or slow their growth, which can prevent infection and speed the healing process.  One of the skin's essential jobs is to be a barrier against infection. If the skin is damaged, it becomes vulnerable to infection.  Keeping the roof of the mouth clean can help to prevent this issue, and rinsing the mouth with salt water is a natural way to keep a burn clean.  A person can make a salt water mouth rinse at home by:  This rinse can be used two to three times a day until the wound heals.  It is important to protect the roof of the mouth as it heals. After a burn, the damaged skin usually peels away, revealing new skin underneath. This new skin is often tender, and foods with sharp edges can cause pain or damage.  Eating soft foods can help to ensure that wounds heal and new skin has time to strengthen. Eggs, soup, and yogurt are some examples of soft foods that can help.  As the skin heals, the area will be delicate and often sore. Avoid further discomfort by taking care not to interfere with the wound or the new skin forming beneath it.  Brushing the teeth, eating, and drinking can agitate the roof of the mouth. Some simple steps to protect the healing skin include:  A person can treat most burns on the roof of the mouth at home. Over-the-counter painkillers can help to reduce inflammation and pain.  An individual may have a first-, second-, or third-degree burn, and they are most likely to have a first-degree burn on the roof of the mouth.  People with second- or third-degree burns should seek urgent medical attention. Clear blisters and weeping skin characterize second-degree burns. Third-degree burns destroy every layer of skin, and the area will be dark brown.  Burns can be more severe in infants and older adults. They are more likely to need medical attention and treatment.  If a burn on the roof of the mouth has not healed within 2 weeks, it may be a good idea to see a doctor.  A person may need treatment if the wound becomes infected. Signs of infection include:  Being aware of foods that hold heat for long periods can help to prevent burns. Oils, fats, and liquids can reach and hold very high temperatures.  Waiting until foods and drinks have cooled and can prevent burns on the roof of the mouth.    
 How to treat a first-degree, minor burn. (n.d.).  How to treat a first-degree, minor burn. (n.d.).  Lloyd, E. C. O., Rodgers, B. C., Michener, M., &amp; Williams, M. S. (2012, Jan 1). Outpatient burns: Prevention and care.  American Family Physician ,  85 (1), 25–32.  Mangaiyarkarasi, S. P., Manigandan, T., Elumalai, M., Cholan, P. K., &amp; Kaur, R. P. (2015, April). Benefits of  Aloe vera  in dentistry.  Journal of Pharmacy &amp; Bioallied Sciences ,  7 (1), S255–S259.  MyPlate: Build a healthy eating style. (2018, January 26).  Oryan, A., Alemzadeh, E., &amp; Moshiri, A. (2016, May). Biological properties and therapeutic activities of honey in wound healing: A narrative review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  Journal of Tissue Viability ,  25 (2), 98–118.  Understanding a burn injury (MSKTC). (2018).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "How to treat a burn on the roof of the mouth at home."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322188.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2018, June 19). "How to treat a burn on the roof of the mouth at home."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  