 Doctors may need to use a chest tube for many purposes, such as inflating a collapsed lung, draining fluid or blood, or delivering medications.  This article explains how chest tubes work, what to expect during the insertion procedure, and the possible complications.  Doctors insert chest tubes for a variety of conditions, including:  A doctor may also insert a chest tube to perform a procedure known as pleurodesis.  Pleurodesis uses a chest tube to deliver chemicals into the pleural space. These chemicals irritate the lining of the lung and  cause intentional scarring , which keeps fluid from building up in this area.  A doctor will often connect the chest tube to a container that holds the drained fluid. It is possible to hook the container up to a suction device to remove fluid or blood more effectively.  Chest tubes come in several sizes. Manufacturers use a French catheter scale, abbreviated as Fr, to classify the tubes according to their internal diameter. One Fr is one-third of a millimeter and chest tubes are available in sizes ranging from 6–40 Fr.  Doctors can use straight tubes or pigtail tubes, which coil at the end. They will select the size of chest tube that suits the individual's  anatomy  and the procedure.  Chest tubes look like very large, plastic straws. They have three main areas:  Generally, chest tubes divide into two size varieties: large-bore and small-bore.  A large-bore chest tube is  20 Fr or larger , while a small-bore chest tube is smaller than 20 Fr.  Smaller tubes are also available and are known as pleural catheters. Doctors will often tunnel them in a vein or carefully place them under the skin of the chest for long-term use.  A pleural catheter may be necessary for a person who has a continual buildup of pleural fluid due to chronic infection,  cancer , or liver disease.  A doctor may put a person under general anesthesia for a chest tube insertion. Alternatively, they will use a local anesthetic to numb the area before inserting the tube and will also provide the person with sedation and pain medications.  There are different incision approaches for inserting the chest tube, but the procedure will follow the same essential steps:  A chest X-ray can also help to confirm the tube's placement.  During a chest tube insertion, the doctor must work around several major organs, including the lungs and heart.  Potential complications include:  A doctor should carefully explain these risks to the individual before the procedure.  Ideally, they will avoid putting a chest tube in someone who is taking blood thinners due to the risk of bleeding. However, inserting the chest tube can sometimes be a life-saving, emergency procedure.  Doctors remove chest tubes when they are no longer necessary, for example when the tube is no longer draining blood or fluid.  They will also remove the tube if it becomes blocked or is not working correctly.  According to the  Chest Foundation , most people need to keep the chest tube in for a few days. When removing a chest tube, a doctor will cut the sutures holding the tube in place and gently pull it out. The procedure can be uncomfortable, but should not be painful.  Ideally, a person's symptoms will improve following the use of a chest tube.  People should monitor the incision site for signs of infection while it heals, and inform their doctor as soon as possible if the wound swells, turns red, or starts oozing  pus . It is likely that a small scar will remain at the insertion site.  A chest tube can be a relatively non-invasive way to access the pleural space to drain fluid or administer medication.  Sometimes, if the chest tube does not resolve a person's problem, they may need more invasive surgery.  After chest tube removal, a person should follow a doctor's recommendations on how to care for the incision site.    
 Chest tube placement (thoracostomy) and pleurodesis. (2018, February 14).  Chest tube placement (thoracostomy) and pleurodesis. (2018, February 14).  Chest tube procedure: What is a chest tube? (2018, January).  Chest tube thoracostomy. (2013).  American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine ,  170 , 3–4.  Cooke, D. T., &amp; David, E. A. (2013, February). Large-bore and small-bore chest tubes: Types, function, and placement.  Thoracic Surgery Clinics ,  23 (1), 17–24.  Fortin, M., &amp; Tremblay, A. (2015, June). Pleural controversies: Indwelling pleural catheter vs. pleurodesis for malignant pleural effusions.  Journal of Thoracic Disease ,  7 (6), 1052–1057.  Mahmood, K., &amp; Wahidi, M. M. (2013, March). Straightening out chest tubes: What size, what type, and when [Abstract].  Clinics in Chest Medicine ,  34 (1), 63–71.  Mohammed, H. M. (2015, October). Chest tube care in critically ill patient: A comprehensive review.  Egyptian Journal of Chest Diseases and Tuberculosis ,  64 (4), 849–855.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Chest tube insertion: Procedure, complications, and removal."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322161.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, June 16). "Chest tube insertion: Procedure, complications, and removal."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  