 In this article, we look at why people need  magnesium , what magnesium deficiency means, and what the main symptoms of deficiency are. We also cover diagnosis, recommended dietary allowance (RDA), foods to eat, tips for improving absorption, and magnesium supplements.  Magnesium is an essential mineral and electrolyte that plays a role in many bodily processes, including:  As such, it is vital that people are getting enough magnesium in their diet each day to stay healthy.  The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) of 2005–2006 found that the majority of people in the United States were  not getting enough magnesium in their diet.   However, the body can retain good levels of magnesium, so it is quite rare for a person to experience deficiency symptoms.  Certain factors can, however, increase a person's risk of developing magnesium deficiency symptoms. These include:  Long-term magnesium deficiency may have adverse effects on:  Loss of bone density can be of particular concern. In younger people, magnesium deficiency may prevent bone growth. It is vital to get enough magnesium during childhood when the bones are still developing.  In older people, magnesium deficiency may increase the risk of  osteoporosis  and  bone fractures .  Early signs of magnesium deficiency may include:  As deficiency progresses, people may experience:  Prolonged magnesium deficiency can have an adverse impact on a person's long-term health and increase the risk of chronic diseases, including:  Anyone who experiences any of the above symptoms should see a doctor for tests to establish the cause.  Diagnosis of magnesium deficiency varies between different countries. This is because it is difficult to accurately measure the amount of magnesium in a person's body. In the United States, doctors estimate a person's dietary intake to establish their magnesium status.  According to the  National Institutes of Health , the RDA for people between the ages of 19 and 30 years old is:  For people aged 31 years or older, the RDA is:  Requirements are higher in teenagers aged between 14 and 18 years old, as well as for those who are pregnant. Younger children require less magnesium than teenagers and adults.  It is possible to reach the RDA for magnesium by eating foods that contain high levels of magnesium, such as green vegetables, fruit, whole grains, cereals, and legumes.  Some foods high in magnesium, listed from highest to lowest magnesium content,  include :  Other foods containing magnesium include:  When magnesium levels are low, the body absorbs extra magnesium from the small intestine, while reducing the amount that is excreted by the kidneys.  Certain nutrients and conditions can affect how much magnesium a person absorbs. People wanting to increase their magnesium levels by improving absorption could try:  A doctor may recommend magnesium supplements for people who have poor magnesium absorption or an underlying health condition that may prevent sufficient magnesium intake. Doctors might recommend that people over 60 years of age take a magnesium supplement, as absorption decreases with age.  Anyone considering taking a supplement should speak to a doctor first to ensure the supplement does not interfere with any medications they may be taking.  A doctor can also advise on whether a person needs to take a magnesium supplement.  Some studies  have suggested that taking  vitamin  and mineral supplements when unnecessary may have no effect or even be harmful.  Magnesium supplements are available in a variety of formulations, such as:  A person's body absorbs the magnesium from the citrate and chloride formulations more efficiently than the oxide form.  Exceeding the recommended dose of magnesium can cause  diarrhea , cramping, and nausea. Infants, older adults, and people with reduced renal function are at increased risk of magnesium toxicity and should avoid high-dose supplements.  Many people are not getting enough magnesium in their diet. However, for people without an underlying health condition, it is unusual to experience symptoms of magnesium deficiency.  Most people can increase their magnesium levels by eating more magnesium-rich foods. Anyone experiencing symptoms of deficiency should see a doctor.    
 Blumberg, J. B., Cena, H., Barr, S. I., Biesalski, H. K., Dagach, R. U., Delaney B., … Li, D. (2016, April). The use of multivitamin/multimineral supplements: A modified Delphi consensus panel report.  Clinical Therapeutics ,  40 (4), 640–657.  Blumberg, J. B., Cena, H., Barr, S. I., Biesalski, H. K., Dagach, R. U., Delaney B., … Li, D. (2016, April). The use of multivitamin/multimineral supplements: A modified Delphi consensus panel report.  Clinical Therapeutics ,  40 (4), 640–657.  Jenkins, D. J. A., Spence, J. D., Giovannucci, E. L., Kim, Y.-i., Josse, R., Vieth, R., … Sievenpiper, J. L. (2018, June 5). Supplemental vitamins and minerals for CVD prevention and treatment.  Journal of American College of Cardiology ,  71 (22), 2570–2584.  Magnesium fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Mann, J., &amp; Truswell, S. (2017, April 13).  Essentials of Human Nutrition . Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.  Schwalfenberg, G. K., &amp; Genius, S. J. (2017, September 28). The importance of magnesium in clinical healthcare.  Scientifica ,  2017 , 41279326.  VanPutte, C. L., Regan, J. L., Russo, A. F., &amp; Seeley, R. (2017).  Seeley's Anatomy &amp; Physiology . New York, N.Y.: McGraw-Hill Education. Available from:  https://www.mheducation.com/highered/product/seeley-s-anatomy-physiology- vanputte -regan/M0077736222.html   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "How can I tell if I have low magnesium?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322191.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, June 20). "How can I tell if I have low magnesium?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  