 Epsom salt is a crystallized form of  magnesium  sulfate. People who use Epsom salt as a home remedy believe that their body absorbs some of these minerals.  In this article, learn about the benefits of taking an Epsom salt bath during pregnancy, as well as the possible risks.  As long as pregnant people do not ingest Epsom salt or overheat in the bathtub, they can use Epsom salt baths to get relief from a variety of symptoms.  Most of the evidence about the benefits of Epsom salt baths for pregnancy-related discomforts is anecdotal.  However, doctors and researchers generally agree that they are a safe way to seek relief as long as people take proper precautions.  There are many potential benefits of taking Epsom salt baths during pregnancy. These include the following:  Sore muscles, round ligament pain, and  leg cramps  are all common during pregnancy. While there is little scientific evidence that magnesium sulfate eases pain, the heat from a warm bath can help to relax the muscles.  Soaking in a warm bath can help to relieve  stress .  Research on an animal model  suggests that magnesium may also be a natural stress reliever and  antidepressant .   Constipation  is common during pregnancy. Alongside the weight of the uterus and developing baby, this can increase the likelihood of  hemorrhoids .  Hemorrhoids are swollen veins around the anus that can itch or hurt. Soaking in a warm bath may help relieve the discomfort that hemorrhoids cause, while the anti-inflammatory properties of Epsom salts may help to shrink the veins.  When a person is pregnant, their need for magnesium increases.  In fact, research has shown that a  magnesium deficiency  is common in many women of childbearing age.  Although there is not yet scientific proof, soaking in an Epsom salt bath may allow the body to absorb magnesium.  Pregnant people often experience itching as their skin stretches to accommodate the growing fetus.  An Epsom salt bath may soothe itching. Applying moisturizer after the bath should help to provide long-lasting relief.  To make an Epsom salt bath, fill a tub with warm water and mix in 2 cups of Epsom salt until it completely dissolves.  Pregnant people should limit the time they spend in the tub to 12–15 minutes to minimize the risk of overheating.  Doctors generally consider it safe to soak in an Epsom salt bath.  However, consuming excess Epsom salt could result in poisoning or a magnesium sulfate overdose, which is harmful to a person and their fetus.  Epsom salt baths also pose the risk of a person overheating. If a pregnant person's body temperature rises too much, it may harm the fetus. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommend maintaining a core body temperature  below 102.2°F  during pregnancy.  Epsom salt baths can provide welcome relief from several symptoms during pregnancy.  However, it is essential for anyone who is pregnant and taking an Epsom salt bath to avoid ingesting the Epsom salt or letting their body overheat.  Epsom salts are widely available in grocery stores, pharmacies, and  online .    
 Dalton, L. M.,  Ní Fhloinn, D. M., Gaydadzhieva, G. T., Mazurkiewicz, O. M., Leeson, H., &amp; Wright, C. P. (2016, September 1). Magnesium in pregnancy.  Nutrition Reviews ,  74 (9), 549–557.  Dalton, L. M.,  Ní Fhloinn, D. M., Gaydadzhieva, G. T., Mazurkiewicz, O. M., Leeson, H., &amp; Wright, C. P. (2016, September 1). Magnesium in pregnancy.  Nutrition Reviews ,  74 (9), 549–557.  Kumar, M., Talwar, N., Goyal, R., Shukla, U., &amp; Sethi, A. K. (2012, January–March). Effect of magnesium sulfate with propofol induction of anesthesia on succinylcholine-induced fasciculations and myalgia.  Journal of Anaesthesiology Clinical Pharmacology ,  28 (1), 81–85.  Palagini, L., Gemignani, A., Banti, S., Manconi, M., Mauri, M., &amp; Riemann, D. (2014, August). Chronic sleep loss during pregnancy as a determinant of stress: Impact on pregnancy outcome [Abstract].  Sleep Medicine ,  15 (8), 853–859.  Pochwat, B., Szewczyk, B., Sowa-Kucma, M., Siwek, A., Doboszewska, U., Piekoszewski, W., ... Nowak, G. (2014, March). Antidepressant-like activity of magnesium in the chronic mild stress model in rats: Alterations in the NMDA receptor subunits.  International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology ,  17 (3), 393–405.  Ravanelli, N., Casasola, W., English, T., Edwards, K. M., &amp; Jay, O. (2018, March 1). Heat stress and fetal risk. Environmental limits for exercise and passive heat stress during pregnancy: A systematic review with best evidence synthesis [Abstract].  British Journal of Sports Medicine , [Epub ahead of print].  Risks and safety concerns of using hot tubs while pregnant. (n.d.).  Yamasaki, M. (2012, August). Magnesium and pregnancy [Abstract].  Clinical Calcium ,  22 (8), 1205–1210.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Are Epsom salt baths safe during pregnancy?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322278.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, June 27). "Are Epsom salt baths safe during pregnancy?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  