 There are several ways to use humidifiers in the home or office, but there are also some risks.  In this article, learn about the benefits of humidifiers, how to use them correctly, and precautions to take.  Dry air can cause moisture to evaporate from the skin and respiratory symptoms to worsen over time. Adding moisture to the air with a humidifier can counteract these problems.  Humidifiers can help people who experience:  Some people experience respiratory symptoms in the summer months, when the weather is hot, and the air contains more allergens. Air conditioners and fans can circulate dry air through the room, and air conditioners remove any moisture from the air. A humidifier may be beneficial during this season.  However, people are more likely to benefit from a humidifier in the cold months, when cold air dries out the lungs, nose, and lips. Also, some types of central heating can dry out the air indoors.  Benefits of a humidifier may include:  Authors of one  study  noted that humidifiers might reduce the risk of catching the  flu . After adding the  influenza  virus to the air with a simulated cough, researchers found that humidity levels above 40 percent rapidly deactivated virus particles, making them much less likely to be infectious.  Dry air can cause a person to have a dry, unproductive cough. Adding humidity to the air can get more moisture into the airways, which can make a cough more productive. A productive cough releases trapped or sticky phlegm.  Increasing the amount of moisture in the air can also reduce snoring. If the air is dry, a person's airways are less likely to be sufficiently lubricated, which can make snoring worse.  Adding humidity to the air by running a humidifier at night may help to relieve some symptoms.  Some people notice that their skin, lips, and hair become dry and fragile in the winter.  Many types of heating units pump hot, dry air through the house or office, which can make the skin dry, itchy, or flaky. Cold air outside can also dry out the skin.  Using a humidifier to add moisture to the indoor air may help to reduce the occurrence of dry, cracked skin.  Using a humidifier correctly can also be a good way to reduce allergy and  asthma  symptoms.  People with dry sinuses or airways who are prone to allergic reactions may find that a humidifier relieves their issues.  Authors of a  study  in the  International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health  found that teachers exposed to too high or too low levels of humidity in their classrooms had an increased risk of asthma-like symptoms. This increased risk was small, however.  Moisture from a humidifier can be helpful around the home. Any moisture-loving houseplants may become more vibrant, and wood floors or furniture may last longer. Humidity can also help to prevent wallpaper from cracking and static electricity from building up.  Humid air can also feel warmer than dry air, which could help a person to save money on utility bills in winter months.  While most humidifiers have the same basic function, to add moisture to the air, many types are available:  Sizes can vary. Console humidifiers are large enough to add moisture to an entire house or office, while personal humidifiers are portable and easy to carry.  A humidifier can be a great way to add moisture to the air, but there are some risks to consider.  Humidifiers turn water into breathable vapor in the air. If the unit's water tank is dirty, the vapor a person breathes will also be dirty.  A dark, humid tank is an environment that fosters germs, but regular cleaning can help to prevent any issues.  Always clean a humidifier thoroughly as directed by the manufacturer. Water should not sit in the humidifier for too long. If the humidifier has a filter, be sure to replace it often.  Some humidity in the air can be a good thing, but excessive levels can make breathing difficult and some allergy symptoms worse. For example, common allergens, including dust mites, mold, and mildew, thrive in damp environments.  According to the  United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) , indoor humidity levels should be between 30 and 50 percent. Humidity levels above 60 percent are too high.  Anyone using a humidifier should also have a humidity meter, or hygrometer, in the room. Some humidifiers have built-in ways to measure humidity, while others require a standalone meter.  Many manufacturers recommend using only pure, clean water in their humidifiers. There are a few reasons for this.  Unfiltered tap water can contain higher levels of minerals and other particles than purified or distilled water.  Minerals from hard tap water can build up in the machine, causing it to wear down faster than expected.  The humidifier can also push these minerals into the air, and a person may inhale them. The particles may also settle around the room as dust.  Some other risks associated with using a humidifier include steam burns from units that use heat and the growth of mold where moisture has accumulated on walls and ceilings.  Anyone using a humidifier should avoid getting too close to the machine. When using a humidifier in a room with a child, it is important to supervise them.  Basic tips for using a humidifier include:  Humidifiers can benefit people with skin issues or respiratory problems who live in areas with low humidity.  It is essential to remember that humidifiers cannot treat underlying conditions, such as asthma. They may be beneficial, but they should not replace medical treatment.  Anyone experiencing new or worsened symptoms when using a humidifier should turn it off and contact a doctor.  Humidifiers are available in many department stores and  online .  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Angelon-Gaetz, K. A., Richardson, D. B., Lipton, D. M., Marshall, S. W., Lamb, B., &amp; LoFrese, T. (2016, December 1). The effects of building-related factors on classroom relative humidity among North Carolina schools participating in the 'Free to Breathe, Free to Teach' study.  Indoor Air ,  25 (6), 620–630.  Angelon-Gaetz, K. A., Richardson, D. B., Lipton, D. M., Marshall, S. W., Lamb, B., &amp; LoFrese, T. (2016, December 1). The effects of building-related factors on classroom relative humidity among North Carolina schools participating in the 'Free to Breathe, Free to Teach' study.  Indoor Air ,  25 (6), 620–630.  Angelon-Gaetz, K. A., Richardson, D. B., Marshall, S. W., &amp; Hernandez, M. L. (2017, July 1). Exploration of the effects of classroom humidity levels on teachers' respiratory symptoms.  International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health ,  89 (5), 729–737.  Mold course chapter 2: Why and where mold grows. (n.d.).  Noti, J. D., Blachere, F. M., McMillen, C. M., Lindsley, W. G., Kashon, M. L., Slaughter, D. R., &amp; Beezhold, D. H. (2013, February 27). High humidity leads to loss of infectious influenza virus from simulated coughs.  PLoS One ,  8 (2), e57485.  Wolkoff, P. (2018, April). Indoor air humidity, air quality, and health — an overview.  International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health ,  221 (3), 376–390.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Benefits of using a humidifier."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322228.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, June 23). "Benefits of using a humidifier."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  