 Stretch marks, which the medical community calls striae distensae, are common and may affect up to  88 percent  of people.   Puberty , pregnancy, and other periods of pronounced growth are the most common causes of stretch marks. The marks tend to lighten over time. They may eventually seem to disappear, or they may be permanently visible.  In this article, we describe what stretch marks are and who tends to get them. We also look at ways to diminish their appearance, including home and natural remedies. Finally, we explore the evidence behind these methods.  The skin is elastic, but when it stretches or shrinks quickly, this can interrupt the body's production of two important proteins:  collagen  and elastin. This disruption sometimes leads to the scarring known as stretch marks.  Stretch marks tend to first appear as discolored lines in the skin, sometimes with a red or purple tinge. They are sometimes itchy and may have a different texture from the surrounding skin. Over time, they usually become lighter. In many people, they seem to disappear.  Stretch marks can appear in people of all ages. They often develop the buttocks, hips, thighs, or breasts. The marks are most likely to appear during:  Some people may also get stretch marks after using creams or ointments that contain steroids for extended periods. The marks are also associated with Cushing's disease and  Marfan syndrome .  Stretch marks tend to become less noticeable over time. However, because they are a type of scar, they never disappear completely.  A dermatologist can prescribe tretinoin, a type of retinoid. Several  studies  have found that tretinoin can reduce the early appearance of stretch marks, but that the medication has less of an effect on mature marks.  Dermatologists can use several techniques to reduce the appearance of stretch marks. These include:  No single method works for everybody. Dermatologists may recommend a combination of the techniques listed above.  A variety of home and natural remedies can minimize the appearance of stretch marks. The American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) has  reviewed  the evidence that supports many of them.  The AAD advises anyone who is pregnant or breast-feeding to check with a doctor before using treatments for stretch marks. This is because some products contain ingredients that could harm the baby, such as retinol.  Popular home and natural remedies that may be effective include:  There are many creams, lotions, and gels that claim to treat stretch marks. However, according to the AAD, researchers have found that no single product works for everyone and that many do not work at all.  A person may have the best results if they use these products as soon as stretch marks appear and apply them daily for several weeks. It is important to massage the products thoroughly into the area with marks.  Many of these products can be  purchased online .  According to the AAD, there is currently no evidence that massaging cocoa butter, olive oil, almond oil, or  vitamin  E oil into stretch marks makes them fade. However, these products are generally safe, and some people may benefit from them.  Stretch marks do not tan, and when a person gets a tan, the marks can become more noticeable.  Using a self-tanning lotion, however, can help to disguise stretch marks. A wide variety of these lotions are available for  purchase online .  When applying a self-tanner, the following  steps  can help to achieve better results:  Hyaluronic acid occurs naturally in the skin. Results of some  studies  suggest that it makes early stretch marks less noticeable.  This acid may appear on ingredients lists as sodium hyaluronate, and a range of serums, lotions, and moisturizers contain it. Many can be  purchased online .  Hyaluronic acid does not work for everyone. A person is likely to see the best results if they use it over a long period.  Some proponents suggest that applying products such as almond oil, cocoa butter, olive oil and vitamin E to the skin may prevent stretch marks, but the AAD  reports  that no studies support these claims.  There is some evidence that skin care products containing hyaluronic acid or the herb centella may help to prevent stretch marks. However, genetic makeup may simply make some people more prone to them than others.  It is worth remembering that while stretch marks are permanent, they tend to fade over time. In many cases, they can seem to disappear.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 How to apply self-tanner. (n.d.).  How to apply self-tanner. (n.d.).  Stretch marks. (2014, June).  Stretch marks: Why they appear and how to get rid of them. (n.d.).  Ud-Din, S., McGeorge, D., &amp; Bayat, A. (2016, February). Topical management of striae distensae (stretch marks): Prevention and therapy of striae rubrae and albae.  Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology ,  30 (2), 211–222.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "Which treatments work for stretch marks?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322231.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, June 22). "Which treatments work for stretch marks?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  