 According to a 2018 report,  fatigue  affects over  90 percent  of people with major depressive disorder.  In this article, learn about the link between  depression  and fatigue, as well as how to cope.  People with depression are more likely to experience fatigue, and people with chronic fatigue are more likely to become depressed, creating a cycle that can be hard to break.  Potential causes of depression fatigue include sleep problems, diet,  stress , and even the medications used to treat depression.  Learn more about each cause below:  Sleep is essential for regenerating the body and replenishing energy. Lack of sleep alone may not cause depression, but it does increase risk and can make existing depression symptoms worse.  Even if a person with depression is getting enough sleep, they may not wake up feeling refreshed because the quality of sleep is often lower than that experienced by a person who does not have depression.   Research  shows that many people with depression and other  mental health  conditions, such as  bipolar disorder , experience both  insomnia  and hypersomnia.  Insomnia means having trouble falling asleep or staying asleep. Hypersomnia refers to excessive sleepiness.   Obstructive sleep apnea  is another sleep disorder that has links with depression. One  2015 study  found that depression is common in people with sleep apnea and that it affects the severity of sleep apnea.  Furthermore, the study found that treating the sleep apnea improved depression symptoms.  Researchers have long speculated about whether diet affects mental health. One  recent meta-analysis  looked at multiple studies for a link between diet and depression risk.  The report found some evidence that higher quality diets, such as those that include anti-inflammatory foods, may lower some people's risk for depression. However, more research needs to be done  A second meta-analysis also associated specific diet patterns with an increased risk for depression. In particular, researchers found that Western-style diets containing red meat, processed meats, refined grains, sweets, and other unhealthful foods  may increase the risk  for symptoms of depression in some people.  Stress can affect levels of  serotonin  and dopamine, which are chemicals in the brain that play an essential part in regulating mood and energy.   Research  indicates that stressful life events can significantly increase a person's risk of developing major depressive disorder.  These stressful life events can include the end of a relationship or close friendship, death of a loved one, significant financial loss, job changes, and health-related events, such as a  cancer  diagnosis.  The same research suggests that stress can also cause  inflammation  in the body, which can lead to hypersomnia and fatigue. It may also cause a person to withdraw from social activities and have problems thinking clearly.   Antidepressants  work by acting on the brain's neurotransmitters to help them do a better job of regulating a person's mood. Some antidepressants, however, can cause significant fatigue.  Chronic fatigue can lead to a more prolonged, severe depression and increased medical costs, according to a  2015 study . The study surveyed 1,982 people with depression, 653 of whom had significant fatigue.  The people with fatigue had greater severity of depression, pain, sleep problems, and  anxiety . People with fatigue also reported using more medication, and their socioeconomic status appeared to be lower compared to those without fatigue.  Ways to help manage depression fatigue include:  The best way to help deal with depression and fatigue is to speak with a doctor. While other coping methods can help, proper diagnosis and treatment are essential.  A doctor can also help determine whether the fatigue is due to another medical condition, or whether it is a side effect of medications used to treat depression.  If depression medication is the source of fatigue, switching to another antidepressant may help.  Being active can reduce fatigue by promoting better sleep. One  meta-analysis  found that doing over 20 minutes of low to moderate intensity exercise can increase energy and reduce fatigue.  Practicing good sleep hygiene can help a person manage depression fatigue. Good sleep hygiene means having certain habits that promote quality sleep.  These habits include:  It can be challenging to eat well if a person is dealing with low motivation and lack of appetite. However, eating foods high in fat and sugar can make symptoms worse by causing blood sugar rushes and disturbing sleep.  Eating foods that promote a good mood and increase energy can help reduce fatigue. Foods that may help include:  People struggling with prolonged fatigue due to depression should talk to their doctor.  Untreated fatigue can cause a variety of complications over time, including withdrawing from social and work commitments.  Doctors can help treat both depression and fatigue. They can also help a person make lifestyle changes to reduce their symptoms.    
 Brody, D. J., Pratt, L. A., &amp; Hughes, J. P. (2018, February). Prevalence of depression among adults aged 20 and over: United States, 2013–2016.  Brody, D. J., Pratt, L. A., &amp; Hughes, J. P. (2018, February). Prevalence of depression among adults aged 20 and over: United States, 2013–2016.  Depression. (2018, February).  Edwards, C., Mukherjee, S., Simpson, L. Palmer, L. J., Almeida, O. P., &amp; Hillman, D. R. (2015). Depressive symptoms before and after treatment of obstructive sleep apnea in men and women.  Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine ,  11 (9), 1029–1038.  Fatigue. (2018, April 2).  Ghanean, H. Centi, A.K., &amp; Kennedy, S. H. (2018, January 30). Fatigue in patients with major depressive disorder: Prevalence, burden and pharmacological approaches to management [Abstract].  CNS Drugs ,  32 (1), 65–74.  Li, Y., Lv., M.-R., Wei, Y.-J., Sun, L, Zhang, J.-X., Zhang, H.-G., &amp; Li, B. (2017, July). Dietary patterns and depression risk: A meta-analysis.  Psychiatry Research ,  253 , 373–382.  Loy, B. D., O'Connor, P. J., &amp; Dishman, R. K. (2013, October 11). The effect of a single bout of exercise on energy and fatigue states: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  Fatigue: Biomedicine, Health &amp; Behavior ,  1 (4), 223–242.  Molendijk, M., Molero, P., Ortuño Sánchez-Pedreño, F., Van der Does, W., &amp; Angel Martínez-González, M. (2018, January). Diet quality and depression risk: A systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies [Abstract].  Journal of Affective Disorders ,  226 , 346–354.  Pillai, V., Kalmbach, D. A., &amp; Ciesla, J. A. (2011, November 15). A meta-analysis of electroencephalographic sleep in depression: Evidence for genetic biomarkers.  Biological Psychiatry ,  70 (10), 912–919.  Robinson, R. L., Stephenson, J. J., Dennehy, E. B., Grabner, M., Faries, D., Palli, S. R., &amp; Swindle, R. W. (2015, May–June). The importance of unresolved fatigue in depression: Costs and comorbidities [Abstract].  Psychosomatics ,  56 (3), 274–285.  Slavich, G. M., &amp; Irwin, M. R. (2014, May 1). From stress to inflammation and major depressive disorder: A social signal transduction theory of depression.  Psychological Bulletin ,  140 (3), 774–815.  Sleep hygiene. (n.d).  Soehner, A. M., Kaplan, K. A., &amp; Harvey, A. G. (2015, October 1). Prevalence and clinical correlates of co-occurring insomnia and hypersomnia symptoms in depression.  Journal of Affective Disorders ,  167 , 93–97.  Targum, S. D., &amp; Fava, M. (2011, October). Fatigue as a residual symptom of depression.  Innovations in Clinical Neuroscience ,  8 (10), 40–43.  Yang, L., Zhao, Y. Wang, Y., Liu, L., Zhang, X, Li, B., &amp; Cui, R. (2015, July). The effects of psychological stress on depression.  Current Neuropharmacology ,  13 (4), 494–504.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "Why does depression make you feel tired?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322264.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, June 26). "Why does depression make you feel tired?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  