 In this article, we examine the potential benefits and risks of  ginger , and some of the scientific evidence for these, as well as how to make ginger water at home.  Although there are studies that support the potential health benefits of ginger, there is limited research on drinking ginger water specifically. Most studies do not indicate whether the participants took ginger in capsule form, added it to food, or drank it as ginger water or tea.  However, ginger and ginger water may be helpful for the following conditions:   Pain   Ginger water may help decrease some types of pain. In a  study  that involved 60 adults with  migraine  pain, researchers found using ginger as an add-on therapy was better than taking painkillers alone.   Nausea   People have long used ginger as a herbal treatment for nausea. In a  2015 review , researchers looked at nine studies in which people used ginger for postoperative nausea,  chemotherapy  side effects, viral nausea, and  morning sickness . The studies, although not always clinically watertight, all indicated that ginger provided a reduction in nausea and vomiting.   Cholesterol levels    One study  in rats suggests that ginger might reduce  cholesterol  levels. The rats ate a high-cholesterol diet, which increased their total cholesterol, triglycerides, and low-density lipoproteins. The researchers then found that also feeding the rats supplements containing ginger prevented high cholesterol in the bloodstream.  However, more research is needed to determine if ginger would have the same effects on cholesterol levels in humans.   Blood sugar control   Ginger water may help control fasting blood sugar levels in people with  type 2 diabetes .  In one  12-week study , researchers divided 41 people with type 2 diabetes into two groups. One group took 2 grams of a ginger powder supplement each day, while the second group received a  placebo  drug. The people who took the ginger experienced a significant reduction in fasting blood sugar.   Weight loss   In another  study , researchers divided 10 men into two groups. One group drank hot ginger water after eating breakfast. The other group did not. The men who drank the ginger water reported greater feelings of fullness.  Although the study was small, and additional studies are necessary, it suggests that ginger water might have a role in weight management.  Drinking ginger water appears to be safe for most people. However, there may be some situations when it is best to consult a doctor first.  According to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health, there are some  concerns  that ginger may interfere with blood-thinning medication. Although research is inconclusive, people who take blood thinners should speak with their doctor before drinking ginger water.  People who drink ginger water in excess may experience mild side effects, including:   One study , which used data from 1,020 women, reviewed the safety of ginger during pregnancy. The researchers found that using ginger during pregnancy to treat nausea and vomiting did not increase the risk of:  However, although no studies have concluded that ginger causes harm in pregnancy, it is still best to talk with a doctor before drinking ginger water while pregnant.  Ginger water is available as herbal water, tea, and juice. It can be drunk either hot or cold. People can buy any of these products  online .  Alternatively, a person can make ginger water at home. The best way to make it is by using fresh ginger root, which people can find in grocery stores in the fresh produce section.  A common way to make ginger water is as follows:  Ginger has a strong taste. For some people, adding a flavoring, such as honey or lemon, may improve the taste.  Research is not conclusive that drinking ginger water improves a person's health. However, limited studies do show some possible benefits. Since drinking ginger water appears to have few risks for most people, it may be worth a try. It may also encourage drinking more water, which is a good way to stay well hydrated.  It is relatively easy to make ginger water at home. As with all health supplements or remedies, it is best to talk with a doctor before trying ginger water.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Akinyemi, A. J., Oboh, G., Ademiluyi, A. O., Boligon, A. A., &amp; Athayde, M. L. (2016, April). Effect of two ginger varieties on arginase activity in hypercholesterolemic rats [Abstract].  Journal of Acupuncture and Meridian Studies ,  9 (2), 80–87.  Akinyemi, A. J., Oboh, G., Ademiluyi, A. O., Boligon, A. A., &amp; Athayde, M. L. (2016, April). Effect of two ginger varieties on arginase activity in hypercholesterolemic rats [Abstract].  Journal of Acupuncture and Meridian Studies ,  9 (2), 80–87.  Ginger. (2016, September).  Heitmann, K., Nordeng, H., &amp; Holst, L. (2013, February). Safety of ginger use in pregnancy: Results from a large population-based cohort study [Abstract].  European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology ,  69 (2), 269–277.  Khandouzi, N., Shidfar, F., Rajab, A., Rahideh, T., Hosseini, P., &amp; Taheri, M. M. (2015, winter). The effects of ginger on fasting blood sugar, hemoglobin A1c, apolipoprotein B, apolipoprotein A-I and malondialdehyde in type 2 diabetic patients.  Iranian Journal of Pharmaceutical Research ,  14 (1), 131–140.  Mansour, M. S., Ni, Y.-M., Roberts, A. L., Kelleman, M., RoyChoudhury, A., &amp; St-Onge, M.-P. (2012, October). Ginger consumption enhances the thermic effect of food and promotes feelings of satiety without affecting metabolic and hormonal parameters in overweight men: A pilot study.  Metabolism ,  61 (10), 1347–1352.  Martins, L. B., Rodrigues, A. M. D. S., Rodrigues, D. F., Dos Santos, L. C., Teixeira, A. L., &amp; Ferreira, A. V. M. (2018, January 1). Double-blind placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial of ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.) addition in migraine acute treatment [Abstract].  Cephalalgia .  Marx, W., Kiss, N., &amp; Isenring, L. (2015, June). Is ginger beneficial for nausea and vomiting? An update of the literature [Abstract].  Current Opinion in Supportive and Palliative care ,  9 (2), 189–195.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  de Pietro, MaryAnn. "Is drinking ginger water good for health?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322257.php&gt;    APA  de Pietro, M. (2018, June 25). "Is drinking ginger water good for health?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  