 Eating healthfully also means avoiding foods with high amounts of added salt and sugar.  In this article, we look at the top 10 benefits of a healthful diet, as well as the evidence behind them.  Losing weight can help to reduce the risk of chronic conditions. If a person is overweight or obese, they have a higher risk of developing several conditions, including:  Whole vegetables and fruits are lower in  calories  than most processed foods. A person looking to lose weight should reduce their calorie intake to no more than what they require each day.  Determining an individual's calorie requirements is easy using  dietary guidelines  published by the United States government.  Maintaining a healthful diet free from processed foods can help a person to stay within their daily limit without having to count calories.  Fiber is one element of a healthful diet that is particularly important for managing weight. Plant-based foods contain plenty of dietary fiber, which helps to regulate hunger by making people feel fuller for longer.  In 2018, researchers found that a diet rich in fiber and lean proteins resulted in  weight loss  without the need for counting calories.  An unhealthful diet can lead to  obesity , which may  increase  a person's risk of developing cancer. Weighing within a healthful range may reduce this risk.  Also, in 2014, the American Society of Clinical Oncology  reported  that obesity contributed to a worse outlook for people with cancer.  However, diets rich in fruits and vegetables may help to protect against cancer.  In a separate study from 2014, researchers found that a diet rich in fruits  reduced  the risk of cancers of the upper gastrointestinal tract. They also found that a diet rich in vegetables, fruits, and fiber lowered the risk of  colorectal cancer  and that a diet rich in fiber reduced the risk of  liver cancer .  Many phytochemicals found in fruits, vegetables, nuts, and legumes act as  antioxidants , which protect cells from damage that can cause cancer. Some of these antioxidants include  beta-carotene , lycopene, and  vitamins  A, C, and E.  Trials in humans have been inconclusive, but results of  laboratory and animal studies have linked  certain antioxidants to a reduced incidence of free radical damage associated with cancer.  Eating a healthful diet can help a person with diabetes to:  It is essential for people with diabetes to limit their intake of foods with added sugar and salt. It is also best to avoid fried foods high in saturated and trans fats.  According to figures published in 2017, as many as  92.1 million people in the U.S.  have at least one type of cardiovascular disease. These conditions primarily involve the heart or blood vessels.  According to the Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada, up to  80 percent  of cases of premature heart disease and  stroke  can be prevented by making lifestyle changes, such as increasing levels of physical activity and eating healthfully.  There is  some evidence  that vitamin E may prevent blood clots, which can lead to  heart attacks . The following foods contain high levels of vitamin E:  The medical community has long recognized the link between trans fats and heart-related illnesses, such as  coronary heart disease .  If a person eliminates trans fats from the diet, this will reduce their levels of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol. This type of cholesterol causes plaque to collect within the arteries, increasing the risk of heart attack and stroke.  Reducing blood pressure can also be essential for heart health, and limiting salt intake to 1,500 milligrams a day can help.  Salt is added to many processed and fast foods, and a person hoping to lower their blood pressure should avoid these.  Children learn most health-related behaviors from the adults around them, and parents who model healthful eating and exercise habits  tend to pass these on .  Eating at home may also help. In 2018, researchers found that children who regularly had meals with their families ate  more vegetables  and fewer sugary foods than their peers who ate at home less frequently.  In addition, children who participate in gardening and cooking at home may be more likely to make healthful dietary and lifestyle choices.  A diet with adequate  calcium  and  magnesium  is necessary for strong bones and teeth. Keeping the bones healthy is vital in preventing  osteoporosis  and osteoarthritis later in life.  The following foods are rich in calcium:  Also, many cereals and plant-based milks are fortified with calcium.  Magnesium is abundant in many foods, and the best sources are leafy green vegetables, nuts, seeds, and whole grains.  Emerging evidence suggests a close relationship between diet and mood.  In 2016, researchers  found  that a diet with a high glycemic load may cause increased symptoms of  depression  and  fatigue .  A diet with a high glycemic load includes many refined  carbohydrates , such as those found in soft drinks, cakes, white bread, and biscuits. Vegetables, whole fruit, and whole grains have a lower glycemic load.  While a healthful diet may improve overall mood, it is essential for people with depression to seek medical care.  A healthful diet may help prevent  dementia  and cognitive decline.  A  study  from 2015 identified nutrients and foods that protect against these adverse effects. They found the following to be beneficial:  Among other diets, the  Mediterranean diet  incorporates many of these nutrients.  The colon is full of naturally occurring bacteria, which play important roles in metabolism and digestion.  Certain strains of bacteria also produce vitamins K and B, which benefit the colon. These strains also help to fight harmful bacteria and viruses.  A diet low in fiber and high in sugar and fat alters the gut microbiome, increasing  inflammation  in the area.  However, a diet rich in vegetables, fruits, legumes, and whole grains provides a combination of prebiotics and probiotics that help good bacteria to thrive in the colon.  Fermented foods, such as yogurt, kimchi, sauerkraut, miso, and kefir, are rich in probiotics.  Fiber is an easily accessible prebiotic, and it is abundant in legumes, grains, fruits, and vegetables.  Fiber also promotes regular bowel movements, which can help to prevent bowel cancer and  diverticulitis .  A variety of factors, including sleep apnea, can disrupt sleep patterns.  Sleep apnea occurs when the airways are repeatedly blocked during sleep. Risk factors include obesity, drinking alcohol, and eating an unhealthful diet.  Reducing the consumption of alcohol and caffeine can help to ensure restful sleep, whether or not a person has sleep apnea.  There are plenty of small, positive ways to improve the diet, including:  A person may also benefit from taking a cooking class, and learning how to incorporate more vegetables into meals.  A doctor or dietitian can also provide tips on eating a more healthful diet.    
 A good night's sleep. (2016, May 1).  A good night's sleep. (2016, May 1).  Antioxidants and cancer prevention [Fact sheet]. (2017, February 6).  Benjamin, E. J., Blaha, M. J., Chiuve, S. E., Cushman, M., Das, S. R., Deo, R. … Muntner, P. (2017, March 7). Heart disease and stroke statistics – 2017 update: A report from the American Heart Association.  Circulation ,  135 (10), e146–e603.  Bradbury, K. E., Appleby, P. N., &amp; Key, T. J. (2014, July). Fruit, vegetable, and fiber intake in relation to cancer risk: Findings from the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC).  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  100 (Supp1), 394S–398S.  Breymeyer, K. L., Lampe, J. W., McGregor, B. A., &amp; Newhouser, M. L. (2016, December 1). Subjective mood and energy levels of healthy weight and of overweight/obese healthy adults on high- and low-glycemic load experimental diets.  Appetite ,  107 , 253–259.  Calcium [Fact sheet]. (2017, March 2).  Coronary heart disease risk factors [Fact sheet]. (n.d.).  Diabetes diet, eating, &amp; physical activity. (2016, November).  Gangwisch, J. E., Hale, L., Garcia, L., Malaspina, D., Opler, M. G., Payne, M. E., … Lane, D. (2015, August 1). High glycemic index diet as a risk factor for depression: Analysis from the Women's Health Initiative.  The American Journal of Nutrition ,  102 (2), 454–463.  Get healthy / healthy eating. (n.d.).  Ligibel, J. A., Alfano, C. M., Courneya, K. S., Denmark-Wahnefried, W., Burger, R. A., Chelebowski, R. T., … Hudis, C. A. (2014, November 1). American Society of Clinical Oncology position statement on obesity and cancer.  Journal of Clinical Oncology ,  32 (31), 3568–3574.  Magkos, F., Fraterrigo, G., Yoshino, J., Luecking, C., Kirbach, K., Kelly, S. C., … Klein, S. (2016, April 12). Effects of moderate and subsequent progressive weight loss on metabolic function and adipose tissue biology in humans with obesity.  Cell Metabolism ,  23 (4), 591–601.  Magnesium [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Metabolic syndrome. (n.d.).  Mozaffarian, D., Katan, M. B., Ascherio, A., Stampfer, M. J., &amp; Willett, W. C. (2006, April 13). Trans fatty acids and cardiovascular disease.  New England Journal of Medicine ,  354 (15), 1601–1613.  Oyebobe, O., Gorden-Dseauga, V., Walker, A., &amp; Mindell, J. S. (2014, March 31). Fruit and vegetable consumption and all-cause, cancer and CVD mortality: Analysis of health survey for England data.  Journal of Epidemiology &amp; Community Health ,  68 (9), 856–862.  Rea, D., Coppola, G., Palma, G., Barbieri, A., Luciano, A., Del Prete, P., … Arra, C. (2018, April 3). Microbiota effects on cancer: From risks to therapies.  Oncotarget ,  9 (25), 17915–17927.  Sleep apnea. (n.d.).  Strasser, B., &amp; Fuchs, D. (2015, September). Role of physical activity and diet on mood, behavior, and cognition.  Neurology, Psychiatry and Brain Research ,  21 (3), 118–126.  Suggs, L. S., Della Bella, S., Rangelov, N., &amp; Marques-Vidal, P. (2018, February 1). Is it better at home with my family? The effects of people and place on children's eating behaviour.  Appetite ,  121 , 111–118.  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. (n.d.).  2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans: Appendix 2. Estimated calorie needs per day, by age, sex, and physical activity level  (8th ed.).  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. (n.d.).  2015–2020 Dietary Guidelines for Americans: Key Recommendations: Components of healthy eating patterns  (8th ed.).  Vitamin E [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Zhang, L., Pagoto, S., Olendzki, B., Persuitte, G., Churchill, L., Oleski, J., &amp; Yunsheng, M. (2018, October). A nonrestrictive, weight loss diet focused on fiber and lean protein increase.  Nutrition ,  54 , 12–18.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "What are the benefits of eating healthy?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322268.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, June 26). "What are the benefits of eating healthy?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  