 However, the medical community is still unsure about how much of an influence water consumption has on weight loss.  In this article, learn six reasons that drinking water may help a person to lose weight. We also look at how much water a person should drink each day.  Researchers are still unsure why drinking more water helps a person to lose weight, but many studies show some positive correlation between increased water consumption and weight loss.  Below are six reasons that water may help with losing weight.  When the stomach senses that it is full, it sends signals to the brain to stop eating. Water can help to take up space in the stomach, leading to a feeling of fullness and reducing hunger.  A person may also think that they are hungry when they are actually thirsty. Drinking a glass of water before reaching for something to eat can help to curb unnecessary snacking.  In a  2014 study , 50 overweight females drank 500 milliliters (mL) of water 30 minutes before breakfast, lunch, and dinner, in addition to their regular water consumption, for 8 consecutive weeks.  The participants experienced a reduction in  body weight , body fat, and body mass index. They also reported appetite suppression.  A  study  from the previous year had yielded similar results.  Some research indicates that drinking water can help to burn  calories .  In a  2014 study , 12 people who drank 500 mL of cold and room temperature water experienced an increase in energy expenditure.  They burned between 2 and 3 percent more calories than usual in the 90 minutes after drinking the water.  Water may also temporarily increase the body's resting energy expenditure, or the number of calories burned while resting.  Drinking cold water may further enhance water's calorie-burning benefits, because the body expends energy, or calories, by heating up the water for digestion.  When the body is dehydrated, it cannot correctly remove waste as urine or feces.  Water helps the kidneys to filter toxins and waste while the organ retains essential nutrients and electrolytes. When the body is dehydrated, the kidneys retain fluid.   Dehydration  can also result in hard or lumpy stools and  constipation . Water keeps waste moving by softening or loosening hardened stools.  Water also helps the body to recover from digestive problems, such as  diarrhea  and  indigestion .  When waste builds up in the body, people may feel bloated, swollen, and tired. Bloating can add inches to a person's waist.  Staying hydrated is a good way to avoid retaining waste, which may add a few extra pounds.  It is easy to accumulate liquid calories by drinking soda, juice, or sweetened  coffee  or tea.  Most people also ignore how many calories they consume in sports drinks or alcoholic beverages.  Replacing even a few high-calorie drinks each day for water or other no-calorie beverages, such as herbal tea, may have long-term weight loss benefits.  Authors of a  2012 study  found that replacing two or more high-caloric beverages for non-caloric drinks every day for 6 months resulted in an average weight loss of between 2 and 2.5 percent in a group of females with  obesity .  In a  study  from 2015, female participants drank 250 mL of water after lunch each day while attending a 24-week weight loss program. They lost 13.6 percent more weight than women in the same program who drank the same volume of diet beverages after lunch.  Results of a large-scale  study  showed that men and women who replaced one serving of a sugar-sweetened beverage for water or a low-calorie drink every day for 4 years gained 0.49 fewer kilograms (kg) than a similar group who had made no changes.  The same study found that adults who replaced at least one serving of fruit juice with water or a low-calorie drink gained 0.35 kg less than their counterparts.  Without water, the body cannot properly metabolize stored fat or  carbohydrates .  The process of metabolizing fat is called lipolysis. The first step of this process is hydrolysis, which occurs when water molecules interact with triglycerides (fats) to create glycerol and fatty acids.  Drinking enough water is essential for burning off fat from food and drink, as well as stored fat.  A  mini-review  from 2016 found that increased water intake led to increased lipolysis and a loss of fat in animal studies.  One of the most important components of any weight loss plan is exercise.  Water helps muscles, connective tissues, and joints to move correctly. It also helps the lungs, heart, and other organs to work effectively as they ramp up activity during exercise.  Being hydrated reduces the risk of things that can get in the way of a good workout, such as muscle cramps and  fatigue .  Always drink water before, during, and after exercise to avoid dehydration.  Keeping water close at hand is essential, especially if exercising in hot, humid, or very sunny conditions.  There is no standard recommendation for how much water to drink. Some people require more or less water, depending on a variety of factors, including:  Most health authorities suggest ranges for daily water intake. The following water intake recommendations are from the National Academy of Medicine (NAM) in the United States:  A  2013 study  of results from the National Health and Nutritional Examination Survey 2005–2010 found that most adolescent males drink more water than NAM recommends each day.  However, results showed that many adults, especially older adults, did not drink enough water to meet NAM's guidelines.  Of the individuals aged 20–50, 42.7 percent of males and 40.6 percent of females did not meet NAM recommendations. Of those 71 years of age or older, 94.7 percent of males and 82.6 of females did not meet the guidelines.  The following tips can help to increase water intake:    
 Drewnowski, A., Rehm, C. D., &amp; Constant, F. (2013, November 12). Water and beverage consumption among adults in the United States: Cross-sectional study using data from NHANES 2005–2010.  BMC Public Health ,  13 (1), 1,068.  Drewnowski, A., Rehm, C. D., &amp; Constant, F. (2013, November 12). Water and beverage consumption among adults in the United States: Cross-sectional study using data from NHANES 2005–2010.  BMC Public Health ,  13 (1), 1,068.  Girona, M., Grasser, E. K., Dulloo, A. G., &amp; Montani, J. P. (2014, June). Cardiovascular and metabolic responses to tap water ingestion in young humans: Does the water temperature matter?  Acta Physiologica ,  211 (2), 358–370.  Madjd, A., Taylor, M. A., Delavari, A., Malekzadeh, R., Macdonald, I. A., &amp; Farshchi, H. R. (2015, December 1). Effects on weight loss in adults of replacing diet beverages with water during a  hypoenergetic  diet: A randomized, 24-wk clinical trial.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  102 (6), 1305–1312.  Pan, A., Malik, V. S., Hao, T., Willett, W. C., Mozaffarian, D., &amp; Hu, F. B. (2014, April 1). Changes in water and beverage intake and long-term weight changes: Results from three prospective cohort studies.  International Journal of Obesity ,  37 (10), 1,378–1,385.  Tate, D. F., Turner-McGrievy, G., Lyons, E., Stevens, J., Erickson, K., Polzien, K., ... Popkin, B. (2012, February 1). Replacing caloric beverages with water or diet beverages for weight loss in adults: Main results of the Choose Healthy Options Consciously Everyday (CHOICE) randomized clinical trial.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  95 (3), 555–563.  Thornton, S. N. (2016, June 10). Increased hydration can be associated with weight loss.  Frontiers in Nutrition ,  3 , 18.  Vij, V. A., &amp; Joshi, A. S. (2013, September 10). Effect of "water induced thermogenesis" on body weight, body mass index and body composition of overweight subjects.  Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research: JCDR ,  7 (9), 1,894–1,896.  Vij, V. A. K., &amp; Joshi, A. S. (2014, July–December). Effect of excessive water intake on body weight, body mass index, body fat, and appetite of overweight female participants.  Journal of Natural Science, Biology and Medicine ,  5 (2), 340–344.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Can water help you lose weight?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322296.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, June 28). "Can water help you lose weight?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  