 Including healthful fats in a meal also creates a sense of fullness, slows down the digestion of  carbohydrates , and adds flavor to food.  The most healthful fats are monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats, which include  omega-3  and omega-6 fatty acids.  Read on to discover the best sources of these fats and learn the difference between healthful and unhealthful fats.  One  201 gram (g)  avocado contains approximately 29 grams (g) of fat and 322  calories . It is high in a monounsaturated fatty acid called oleic acid, which is believed to provide several health benefits.   Research  suggests that oleic acid acts as an anti-inflammatory and may  play a role  in  cancer  prevention. Studies on animals  indicate  that avocado oil protects against  heart disease  and  diabetes .  Avocados are high in fiber, with one fruit providing  13.5 g  of the recommended  25 grams for females and 38 grams for males  per day. Avocados also contain a substance called lutein, which may be necessary for eye health and are a rich source of  potassium .   How can I add avocado to my diet?   Although they are small in size, chia seeds are rich in several nutrients. One ounce (oz) of the seeds contains  8.71 g  of fat, much of which is made up of omega-3 fatty acids. Chia seeds are, in fact, one of the best plant-based sources of omega-3.  Omega-3 can relieve  rheumatoid arthritis  symptoms and reduce triglycerides in the blood, according to the  National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health .  A  2014 study  suggests that chia seed flour can lower  blood pressure  in people with  high blood pressure .  Chia seeds also provide  antioxidants , fiber, protein, iron, and  calcium .   How can I add chia seeds to my diet?   Eating just  1 oz  of dark chocolate can be enough to stave off sweet cravings, while providing a good amount (9 g) of healthful fat, as well as other nutrients, such as potassium and calcium. Dark chocolate also contains 41 milligrams (mg) of  magnesium , which is approximately 13 percent of the  recommended dietary allowance (RDA)  for adult females.  Dark chocolate is also very rich in flavonoid antioxidants, with  one test  reporting that cocoa powder contains even more antioxidants than blueberry powder.  Some  research  suggests that eating dark chocolate lowers the risk of heart disease in people in the United States. Participants who ate chocolate 5 or more times a week had the lowest risk of all those studied of developing cardiovascular disease.  According to a  2012 study  carried out on older people with mild cognitive difficulties, eating dark chocolate may also improve brain function.   How can I add dark chocolate to my diet?   Eggs are a popular source of protein, especially for vegetarians. Traditionally, people believed that egg whites were the more healthful part, but the egg yolk actually contains several important nutrients. Each  50 g  hard-boiled egg boasts 5.3 g of fat, 1.6 of which are saturated, and just 78 calories.  The yolk also contains  vitamin D  and choline, a B  vitamin  that supports the function of the liver, brain, nerves, and muscles. The yolk also contains other phytonutrients, including lutein.  While older studies have suggested that eggs increase  cholesterol , newer research disputes this. A  2018 study  carried out on Chinese adults, for example, reported that up to 1 egg a day might lower the risk of cardiovascular disease.   How can I add eggs to my diet?   Fatty fish are packed with unsaturated and omega-3 fatty acids that play an important role in heart and brain health. The  American Heart Association  recommend that people eat 2 servings of fatty fish each week. Options include:  For example,  1 oz  of mackerel contains approximately 15 g of fat and 20 g protein.  Avoid high-mercury fish, such as shark, swordfish, King mackerel, and tilefish. To avoid overexposure, stick to 12 ounces (2 average meals) of fish and shellfish weekly.   How can I add fatty fish to my diet?   Flaxseeds provide omega-3 fatty acids and a healthful dose of fiber at the same time. Each  2-tablespoon  serving contains almost 9 g of fat, which is almost entirely unsaturated, and 5.6 g fiber.  The fiber content can increase the feeling of fullness and may reduce cholesterol. Flaxseeds are also very rich in lignans, a type of plant compound that has  estrogen  and antioxidant effects.   Research  suggests that high intakes of dietary lignans may decrease cardiovascular disease risk in some people, but more research is needed to confirm it.   How can I add flaxseeds to my diet?   Nuts have many benefits, according to several studies. They are rich in healthful fats, protein, fiber, vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, and phytosterols that  may help prevent  cardiovascular disease and  type 2 diabetes .  A  5-year study  of more than 373,000 people, published in the  European Journal of Nutrition , reported that people who eat nuts regularly are less likely to gain weight or become overweight or obese in the longer term.  There is approximately  14 g of fat  in 1 oz of almonds,  19 g  in Brazil nuts, and  18.5 g  in walnuts. It is best to eat a variety of unsalted nuts to reap the benefits, as each type of nut has a slightly different nutrient profile.   How can I add nuts to my diet?   Enjoy the benefits of nuts and seeds in a spreadable form by using nut butter. Each serving provides a healthful amount of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats.  These delicious spreads can be high in calories, however, so try not to eat more than 2 tablespoons per serving.   How can I add nut butters to my diet?   A staple of the  Mediterranean diet , black olives provide  6.67 g of fat  per 100 g, mainly monounsaturated, along with 13.3 g of fiber.   Recent research  reports that a compound in olives called oleuropein may help prevent diabetes. Researchers found that Oleuropein helped the body secrete more  insulin , while also purifying a molecule called amylin that contributes to diabetes development.  Olives can be high in sodium, though, so 5 large or 10 small olives are considered a standard portion.   How can I add olives to my diet?   Extra-virgin olive oil is full of monounsaturated fats that are good for heart health. It also contains vitamin E, vitamin K, and potent antioxidants. Extra-virgin olive oil has  associations with  a lower risk of heart disease and death in those with a high risk of developing cardiovascular disease.   How can I add olive oil to my diet?   Tofu is a complete plant protein and a good source of monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats. A  100 g  serving of firm tofu provides just over 4 g of fat. This amount of tofu also provides one-quarter of a person's daily calcium intake, along with 11 g of protein.   How can I add tofu to my diet?   Full-fat natural yogurt contains good probiotic bacteria to support gut function. Regularly eating yogurt may reduce weight gain and  obesity  and improve heart health, according to  observational studies .   Research  published in 2016 found that consuming yogurt five or more times a week may reduce high blood pressure in women by 20 percent.  Choose full-fat natural or Greek yogurt and avoid those that have added sugar.   How can I add yogurt to my diet?   Monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are healthful fats that  might :  MUFAs and PUFAs also fight  inflammation .  The two most well-known PUFAs are omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids. These are essential fats that people must get from the food they eat because the body is unable to make them. Studies have linked omega-3 fats to many health benefits, especially the prevention of heart disease and  stroke .  As a general rule of thumb, healthful fats — such as olive oil — are liquid at room temperature.  Saturated fats and trans fats, on the other hand, are considered unhealthful fats. Foods rich in these substances, such and butter and lard, are often solid at room temperature.  Older research reported that saturated fat had a negative impact on cholesterol levels and heart health, but  newer studies  suggest it is not as bad as once thought. However, most health organizations still recommend limiting saturated fat in the diet and replacing them with MUFAs and PUFAs.  Always avoid trans fats. Artificial trans fats, listed on labels as partially hydrogenated oils, are extremely unhealthful. They trigger inflammation that may increase the risk of:  Even just 2 percent of calories from trans fats daily can increase the risk of heart disease by  23 percent .  The following foods contain trans fats:  Fat is one of the three essential macronutrients the body needs, along with carbohydrates and protein. A balanced diet should include healthful monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats.  Some of the best sources of these fatty acids include avocados, olive oil, nuts, seeds, and fatty fish. People should also be sure to limit the amount of saturated fat in the diet and avoid even small intakes of trans fats.    
 Astrup, A. (2014, April 2). Yogurt and dairy product consumption to prevent cardiometabolic diseases: Epidemiologic and experimental studies [Abstract].  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  99 (5), 1235S–1242S.  Astrup, A. (2014, April 2). Yogurt and dairy product consumption to prevent cardiometabolic diseases: Epidemiologic and experimental studies [Abstract].  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  99 (5), 1235S–1242S.  Basic report: 01129, egg, whole, cooked, hard-boiled. (n.d.).  Basic report: 09037, avocados, raw, all commercial varieties. (n.d.).  Basic report: 12006, seeds, chia seeds, dried. (n.d.).  Basic repot: 12061, nuts, almonds. (n.d.).  Basic report: 12078, nuts, Brazil nuts, dried, unblanched. (n.d.).  Basic Report: 12155, nuts, walnuts, English. (n.d.).  Basic report: 12220, seeds, flaxseed. (n.d.).  Basic report: 15047, fish, mackerel, Atlantic, cooked, dry heat. (n.d.).  Basic report: 16126, tofu, firm, prepared with calcium sulfate and magnesium chloride (nigari). (n.d.).  Basic report: 19902, chocolate, dark, 45- 59% cacao solids. (n.d.).  Carrillo, C., Cavia, M. Del. M., &amp; Alonso-Torre, S. (2012, July–August). Role of oleic acid in immune system; mechanism of action; a review [Abstract].  Nutricion Hospitalaria ,  27 (4), 978–990.  Carrillo, C., Cavia, M. Del. M., &amp; Alonso-Torre, S. (2012, Nov-Dec). Antitumor effect of oleic acid; mechanisms of action; a review [Abstract].   Nutricion Hospitalaria ,  27 (6), 1860-1865.  Carvajal-Zarrabal, O., Nolasco-Hipolito, C., Aguilar-Uscanga, M. G., Melo-Santiesteban, G., Hayward-Jones, P. M., &amp; Barradas-Dermitz, D. M. (2014, February 25). Avocado oil supplementation modifies cardiovascular risk profile markers in a rat model of sucrose-induced metabolic changes [Abstract].  Disease Markers ,  2014 .  Crozier, S. J., Preston, A. G., Hurst, J. W., Payne, M. J., Mann, J., Hainly, L., &amp; Miller, D. L. (2011, February 7). Cacao seeds are a "super fruit": A comparative analysis of various fruit powders and products.  Chemistry Central Journal ,  5 (5), 5.  Desideri, G., Kwik-Uribe, C., Grassi, D., Necozione, S., Ghiadoni, L., Mastroiacovo, D., ... &amp; Ferri, C. (2012, August 15). Benefits in cognitive function, blood pressure, and insulin resistance through cocoa flavanol consumption in elderly subjects with mild cognitive impairment: The Cocoa, Cognition, and Aging (CoCoA) study [Abstract].  Hypertension ,  60 , 794–801.  Djoussé, L., Hopkins, P. N., North, K. E., Pankow, J. S., Arnett, D. K., &amp; Ellison, R. C. (2011, April). Chocolate consumption is inversely associated with prevalent coronary heart disease: The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Family Heart Study.  Clinical Nutrition ,  30 (2), 182–187.  Fish and omega-3 fatty acids. (2016, October 6).  Freisling, H., Noh, H., Slimani, N., Chajès, V., May, A. M., Peeters, P. H., ... Fagherazzi, G. (2017, July 21). Nut intake and 5-year changes in body weight and obesity risk in adults: Results from the EPIC-PANACEA study [Abstract].  European Journal of Nutrition ,  1–10 .  Full report (all nutrients): 45140104, extra virgin olive oil, UPC: 071072001011. (n.d.).  Full report (all nutrients): 45268354, black olives, UPC: 736211718631. (n.d.).  Good fats and bad fats: The facts on healthy fats. (2017, June 15).  Guasch-Ferré, M., Hu, F. B., Martínez-González, M. A., Fitó, M., Bulló, M., Estruch, R., ... Salas-Salvadó, J. (2014, May 13). Olive oil intake and risk of cardiovascular disease and mortality in the PREDIMED study.  BMC Medicine ,  12 , 78.  Hooper, L., Martin, N., Abdelhamid, A., &amp; Davey Smith, G. (2015, June 10). Reduction in saturated fat intake for cardiovascular disease.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  2015 (6).  Jackson, C. L., &amp; Hu, F. B. (2014, July). Long-term associations of nut consumption with body weight and obesity [Abstract].  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  100 (suppl_1), 408S–411S.  Magnesium [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Omega-3 supplements: In depth. (2018, May 8).  Peterson, J., Dwyer, J., Adlercreutz, H., Scalbert, A., Jacques, P., &amp; McCullough, M. L. (2011, October 1). Dietary lignans: Physiology and potential for cardiovascular disease risk reduction.  Nutrition Reviews ,  68 (10), 571–603.  Qin, C., Lv, J., Guo, Y., Bian, Z., Si, J., Yang, L., ... &amp; Li, L. (n.d.). Associations of egg consumption with cardiovascular disease in a cohort study of 0.5 million Chinese adults.  Heart .  Rough up your diet: Fit more fiber into your day. (2010, August).  The truth about fats: the good, the bad, and the in-between. (2017, August 22).  Toscano, L. T., da Silva, C. S., Toscano, L. T., de Almeida, A. E., Santos, A. C., &amp; Silva, A. S. (2014, December). Chia flour supplementation reduces blood pressure in hypertensive subjects [Abstract].  Plant Foods for Human Nutrition ,  69 (4), 392–398.  Virginia Tech biochemists dip into the health benefits of olives and olive oil. (2017, September 12).  Yogurt may protect women from developing high blood pressure. (2016, March 3).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What are the most healthful high-fat foods?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322295.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, June 28). "What are the most healthful high-fat foods?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  