 Symptoms of restricted blood flow to the back of the brain, also called vertebrobasilar insufficiency, include dizziness and slurred speech.  If something stops or disrupts blood flow to an area of the body, it is known as ischemia. When this happens to the brain, it can damage brain cells and result in health problems.  In this article, we look at vertebrobasilar circulatory disorders, how to spot telltale symptoms, and what causes these conditions.  There are various reasons why a person might not have enough blood reaching their brain. Causes include:   Atherosclerosis  is a common cause of narrow or blocked blood vessels. Atherosclerosis is the medical term for a buildup of a fatty substance, known as plaque, in the arteries.  Plaque is mostly made up of  cholesterol  and  calcium , which cause the arteries to harden. This hardening and buildup of plaque happen gradually over time.  As well as narrowing blood vessels, plaque can break away and travel in the blood to block a vein or artery elsewhere in the body.  Symptoms of reduced blood flow to the brain can be similar to those of  stroke .  A person should seek immediate medical attention if they experience these symptoms. Quick treatment may reduce the damage done and can help with recovery.  Key symptoms include:  These symptoms may be ongoing or last only briefly.  Narrow or blocked blood vessels do not always present symptoms.  Reduced blood flow to the brain may cause the following complications:  Brain cells do not get the nutrients they need if blood flow to the brain is reduced or stopped. This can prevent them from working correctly.  Blood flow that stops for long enough can damage or kill brain cells. This can cause a stroke.  A blood clot or a piece of plaque that has come away from the artery wall can block a blood vessel. If this happens briefly and the blockage dislodges, it may cause a  transient ischemic attack  (TIA).  A TIA does not leave lasting damage, but it is a critical warning sign for stroke. The symptoms only last for a few minutes. A person may have sudden mental confusion, sudden weakness or numbness, sudden loss of balance, or a sudden and severe  headache .  Blood vessels in the brain can weaken and swell. When this happens, it is known as a cerebral  aneurysm .  High blood pressure , narrowed arteries, or a head injury can be the cause.  If a blood vessel in the brain breaks or bursts, it can cause bleeding in the brain that can damage or destroy brain cells.  It is not always possible to prevent vertebrobasilar circulatory disorders. Some risk factors are unavoidable, and others are related to lifestyle.  Risk factors include:  A person who has a vertebrobasilar condition may choose to make specific lifestyle changes to reduce their risk of stroke.  Quitting smoking , eating a healthful diet to lower cholesterol, and doing regular exercise can all help.  A doctor may also prescribe medication to help lower cholesterol or control high blood pressure.  Multiple imaging tests allow doctors to look inside the body at the arteries and brain. Alongside asking questions about symptoms and medical history, a doctor may consider these tests the best way to diagnose vertebrobasilar circulatory disorders.  Imaging tests include:  An  ultrasound  is often the preferred method for looking at the arteries, as it is noninvasive. This means that it does not break the skin or affect the inside of the body.  A medical professional will put a clear gel on the skin, then gently move a handheld device over it. This device sends out sound waves that bounce off the arteries to produce an image. This image can often show if a person has a blocked artery or a blood clot.  An  MRI  can show a clear picture of the brain. A doctor can recommend this test to check if a person has had a stroke or similar medical condition in the past.  The MRI may be used to create a magnetic resonance angiogram. This gives an image of the vertebral and basilar arteries, which can help to show an aneurysm or blockage.  Arteries do not usually show up in X-ray pictures. To see if an artery is damaged or blocked, a doctor can inject a harmless dye into an artery in the neck area. The dye will show up on an X-ray. This test is called an angiogram.  There are several possible treatment options for vertebrobasilar circulatory disorders. These include:  Despite the occasional use of surgery, studies show mixed results, regarding its benefits in vertebrobasilar insufficiency.  The main aim of medication to treat a narrowing or stenosis of a blood vessel is to reduce the risk of stroke. A doctor can prescribe medication to:  People who have vertebrobasilar circulatory disorders have a higher risk of stroke. A person who has had a previous stroke or TIA is more likely to experience one again. For this reason, lifestyle changes and preventive medication are crucial.  Vertebrobasilar circulatory disorders mostly affect older adults. Being aware of the symptoms, as a person ages, can be lifesaving.    
 About stroke. (2018, May 3).  About stroke. (2018, May 3).  Blood vessels of the brain. (n.d.).  Cerebrovascular disease. (n.d.).  Lima Neto, A. C., Bittar, R., Gattas, G. S., Bor-Seng-Shu, E., Oliveira, M. de L., Monsanto, R. da C., ... Bittar, L. F. (2017, July). Pathophysiology and diagnosis of vertebrobasilar insufficiency: A review of the literature.  International Archives of Otorhinolaryngology ,  21 (3), 302–307.  Recovering from stroke. (2018, March 27).  Stents. (n.d.).  Vertebrobasilar insufficiency. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "What to know about reduced blood flow to the brain."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322275.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2018, June 27). "What to know about reduced blood flow to the brain."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  