 This kind of drug is known as a diuretic.  Chlorothiazide is a prescription drug available in the form of a tablet or solution to be taken by mouth. It may also be taken as an injection.  The oral tablets are only available as a generic drug, whereas the oral suspension can be purchased as a brand-name drug called Diuril.  Chlorothiazide may be taken as part of combination therapy with other classes of medication used to control  high blood pressure  or  edema .  Chlorothiazide belongs to a class of drugs called thiazide diuretics. These work in the kidneys to remove sodium and water from the body.  This helps to reduce  blood pressure , as well as to decrease fluid build-up and swelling.  The common side effects of chlorothiazide include:  The body may lose fluid or electrolytes while taking chlorothiazide. Electrolytes need to operate at balanced levels to function correctly. This drug may cause low sodium, low chloride, and low  potassium  levels in the blood.  Symptoms include:  Chlorothiazide may raise blood sugar levels. People with  diabetes  may need to test blood sugar more regularly, and the doctor overseeing diabetes treatment may adjust medications.   Call a doctor if symptoms of high blood sugar become clear, including:   Milder side effects of chlorothiazide should resolve without treatment. More severe effects may require intervention from a doctor or pharmacist.  More severe side effects and complications include:  See a doctor immediately on noticing any of these symptoms. If the drug causes breathing or swallowing difficulties, swelling of the throat or tongue, or  hives  on the skin, you are experiencing a severe allergic reaction to chlorothiazide that requires emergency treatment.  People with the following conditions should take chlorothiazide with caution and discuss the risks with their personal doctor:  Extra monitoring may be required.  Studies have also shown adverse effects in women who are pregnant, and there is insufficient evidence to confirm whether the medications affect the development of a fetus.  Talk to your doctor when taking chlorothiazide during pregnancy. The benefits of doing so must outweigh any potential fetal risk.  Drinking alcohol while taking chlorothiazide can make the effects of dizziness or faintness worse and is not advised.  Types of medication to use cautiously during a course of chlorothiazide include:  In some cases, the dosage of the above medications may require adjustment.   Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen, can reduce the effectiveness of chlorothiazide, and corticosteroids, including betamethasone and budesonide, can further impact potassium levels.  The dose of chlorothiazide will vary depending on the following factors:  The strength of each dose will be dictated by the product and what you're taking it for. The usual dosing ranges for treating high blood pressure are as follows:  Note that doses for children are based on weight.  Doctors may prescribe a lower starting dose for people over the age of 65 years. The doctor who prescribed the medicine will monitor symptoms and side effects and adjust the dose where necessary.  Be sure not to exceed the recommended dosage, as this may increase the risk of unwanted side effects.  If you stop this medication your symptoms may return or your blood pressure may not be adequately controlled.  Here are several extra considerations to bear in mind when transporting, acquiring, or storing chlorothiazide:  Contact a healthcare professional if you start to notice side effects or note that symptoms are not resolving.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.   Article last updated by Adam Felman on Tue 17 July 2018.  Visit our  Pharmacy / Pharmacist  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Pharmacy / Pharmacist.   
		Chlorothiazide tablet. (2006, March).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Felman, Adam. "What is chlorothiazide?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322280.php&gt;   APA  Felman, A. (2018, July 17). "What is chlorothiazide?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  