 Staying out in the sun too long without sunscreen or other forms of protection is also a frequent cause of first-degree burns. Researchers report, however, that  80 percent  of burns affecting young children are due to accidental scalding with hot liquids or objects.  Most first-degree burns are not very big, and usually present as a red, dry area of skin.  Typically, first-degree burns do not break the skin or cause blisters to form.  The best-known and most common symptom of a first-degree burn is red skin.  Other symptoms include:  Doctors define first-degree burns as superficial burns because they only affect the top layer of the skin.  First-degree burns vary from more severe burns in that they do not penetrate deep into the skin and other tissues.  Other burns have the following characteristics:  Home treatment is the most common way to treat a first-degree burn.  Even though most first-degree burns do not require treatment by a medical professional, it is still crucial to treat these injuries carefully.  Make sure to keep the wounds clean, protected, and free of infection.  Steps for treating a first-degree burn at home:  If the burn does not show signs of healing within 48 hours, or if it seems to be getting worse, seek prompt medical care.  Most of the time, first-degree burns do not require medical attention.  However, seek medical care immediately if:  Any time the skin is damaged, even if the injury is a small scratch or a mild  sunburn , the body cannot defend itself against infection as well as it usually can.  Always pay close attention to first-degree burns and watch for signs of possible infection, such as:  The  National Institute of General Medical Sciences  say it takes about a week for a first-degree burn to heal. Other experts say it usually takes  5 to 10 days  for an individual to recover from a first-degree burn.  Scarring is not usually a problem with a first-degree burn.  Scars only form when the lower layer of the skin is damaged, and first-degree burns do not usually penetrate that far into the skin. They also tend to heal in less than 10 days, and, according to the  Phoenix Society for Burn Survivors , burns which heal that rapidly do not usually leave scars.  However, always take extra care with sensitive, damaged skin. If skin in the affected area begins to peel, leave it to shed naturally, as pulling it off might be painful and cause scarring.  Most first-degree burns heal entirely within 10 days.  Some people may find that the healed skin may be darker or lighter in color than the skin in other areas.  Sometimes, the burned area can itch during recovery. Although the itching might be uncomfortable, it is a regular part of healing. Skin moisturizers and OTC antihistamines, such as Benadryl, can help reduce the discomfort.  Minimizing exposure to direct sunlight and following standard sun safety practices can help prevent further damage to the skin.    
 Burns. (2015, September).  Burns. (2015, September).  Burns. (2018, January 26).  Canon, M. (2015, April 20). How to manage first degree burns.  Classification of burns. (n.d.).  Hall, S., Kowalske, K., &amp; Holavanahalli. (2011). Wound care and scar management after burn injury.  How to treat a first-degree, minor burn. (n.d.).  Initial first aid treatment for burns. (n.d.).  Lloyd, E. C. O., Rodgers, B. C., Michener, M. M., &amp; Williams, M. S. (2012, January 1). Outpatient burns: Prevention and care.  American Family Physician ,  85 , (1), 25–32.  Pencle, F. J. &amp; Waseem, M. (2017, June 27). First degree burn.  Sepsis and burns. (2017, December 13).  Wolff, S. E., (2016, October). Burns.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "What is a first-degree burn?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322281.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, June 27). "What is a first-degree burn?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  