 Also known as  hypertension ,  high blood pressure  affects  1 in 3 adults  in the United States.  Medications, dietary changes, and other lifestyle modifications can reduce high blood pressure while lowering the risk of associated conditions. Having high blood pressure increases a person's risk of  heart disease ,  stroke , and kidney disease.  In this article, we discuss foods that can help to reduce high blood pressure and provide the scientific evidence.  Many researchers have found that certain foods can lower high blood pressure. We look at which foods work and how to incorporate them into a healthful diet.   Blueberries  and strawberries contain  antioxidant  compounds called anthocyanins, a type of flavonoid.  Researchers conducted a  large study  with more than 34,000 people with hypertension.  They found that those with the highest intake of anthocyanins — mainly from blueberries and strawberries — had an 8 percent reduction in the risk of high blood pressure, compared to those with a low anthocyanin intake.  Enjoy berries as a snack or sweet treat after meals, or add them to smoothies and oatmeal.   Bananas  contain plenty of  potassium , a mineral that plays a vital role in managing hypertension.  According to the American Heart Association, potassium  reduces  the effects of sodium and alleviates tension in the walls of the blood vessels.  Adults should aim to consume 4,700 milligrams (mg) of potassium daily. Other potassium-rich foods include:  People with kidney disease should speak to their doctors about potassium, as too much can be harmful.  Drinking beet juice can reduce  blood pressure  in the short and long terms.  In 2015, researchers  reported  that drinking red beet juice led to lower blood pressure in people with hypertension who drank 250 milliliters, about 1 cup, of the juice every day for 4 weeks. The researchers noticed some positive effects within 24 hours.  In this study, those who drank 1 cup of the beet juice every day had an average drop in blood pressure of around 8/4 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). For many, this change brought their blood pressure within the normal range. On average, a single blood pressure medication reduces levels by 9/5 mm Hg.  The researchers suggested that beet's high levels of inorganic nitrate caused the reduction in blood pressure.  It may help to drink a glass of beet juice each day, add beets to salads, or prepare the vegetables as a healthful side dish. Beetroot juice products are available for  purchase online .  This sweet treat may lower blood pressure. A  review  of 15 trials suggests that cocoa-rich chocolate reduces blood pressure in people with hypertension or prehypertension.  Choose high-quality chocolate that contains a minimum of 70 percent cocoa, and consume a single square, or a piece measuring about 1 ounce, each day.  A range of dark chocolate is available for  purchase online .  A daily serving of kiwi can reduce blood pressure in people with mildly elevated levels, according to results of  one study .  The researchers compared the effects of apples and kiwis on people with slightly high blood pressure.  They found that eating three kiwis a day for 8 weeks resulted in a more significant reduction in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure, compared with eating one apple a day for the same period. The authors suspect that the bioactive substances in kiwis caused the reduction.  Kiwis are also rich in  vitamin  C, which may significantly  improve  blood pressure readings in people who consumed around 500 mg of the vitamin every day for about 8 weeks.  Kiwis are also easy to add to lunches or smoothies.  Watermelon contains an amino acid called citrulline, which may help to manage high blood pressure.  Citrulline helps the body to produce nitric oxide, a gas that relaxes blood vessels and encourages flexibility in arteries. These effects aid the flow of blood, which can lower high blood pressure.  In  one study , adults with  obesity  and prehypertension or mild hypertension who took watermelon extract showed reduced blood pressure in the ankles and brachial arteries. The brachial artery is the main artery in the upper arm.  Researchers have also found that animals given a diet rich in watermelon had better heart health. In  one study , mice who drank a solution containing watermelon juice had 50 percent less plaque in their arteries than the control group.  The mice who drank the solution also had 50 percent less low-density lipoprotein  cholesterol , which many describe as bad cholesterol, and they showed 30 percent less weight gain than the control animals.  To boost watermelon intake, add the fruit to salads and smoothies, or enjoy it in a chilled watermelon soup.  Oats contain a type of fiber called beta-glucan, which may  reduce  blood cholesterol levels. Beta-glucan may also lower blood pressure, according to some research.  A  review of 28 trials  concluded that higher consumption of beta-glucan fiber may lower both systolic and diastolic blood pressure. Barley also contains this fiber.  Start the day off with a bowl of oatmeal, or use rolled oats instead of breadcrumbs to give texture to meat or vegetarian burger patties.  Oats are available to  purchase online .  Leafy green vegetables are rich in nitrates, which help to manage blood pressure. Some  research  suggests that eating 1–2 servings of nitrate-rich vegetables every day can reduce hypertension for up to 24 hours.  Examples of leafy greens include:  To consume a daily dose of green vegetables, stir spinach into curries and stews, sauté Swiss chard with garlic for a tasty side dish, or bake a batch of kale chips.  Garlic is a natural  antibiotic  and antifungal food. Its main active ingredient, allicin, is often responsible for associated health benefits.  Some  research  suggests that garlic increases the body's production of nitric oxide, which helps the smooth muscles to relax and the blood vessels to dilate. These changes can reduce hypertension.  One  study  reported that garlic extract reduced both systolic and diastolic blood pressure in hypertensive people.  Garlic can enhance the flavor of many savory meals, including stir-fries, soups, and omelets. Using garlic instead of salt can further promote the health of the heart.  Fermented foods are rich in probiotics, which are beneficial bacteria that play an important role in maintaining gut health. Eating probiotics can have a modest effect on high blood pressure, according to  a review  of nine studies.  The researchers reported more enhanced effects when study participants consumed:  Fermented foods to add to the diet include:  Some people prefer to take concentrated probiotic supplements every day. Probiotic supplements are available for  purchase online .   Lentils are a staple of many diets around the world, as they are an excellent source of vegetarian protein and fiber.  In 2014, researchers who studied the effects of a diet rich in pulses on rats reported  decreased levels  of blood pressure and cholesterol. A total of 30 percent of the rats' diet comprised pulses, including beans, peas, lentils, and chickpeas.  Lentils are very versatile. Many people use them as a vegetarian alternative to minced beef or to add bulk to salads, stews, and soups. A range of lentils is available for  purchase online .  The America Heart Association has  reported  that yogurt may reduce the risk of high blood pressure in women.  The researchers found that middle-aged women who consumed five or more servings of yogurt each week for 18–30 years showed a 20 percent reduction in the risk of hypertension when compared to similarly aged women who rarely ate yogurt.  The men in the study did not appear to have the same benefits, but their yogurt intakes tended to be lower.  It is important to note that the National Dairy Council in the U.S. funded this research.  Unsweetened yogurts, such as natural or Greek yogurts, tend to have more benefits. Enjoy them with fruit, nuts, or seeds for a healthful snack or dessert.  Drinking 1 cup of pomegranate juice daily for 28 days can lower high blood pressure in the short term, according to the findings of a  study  from 2012. The researchers attributed this effect to the fruit's antioxidant content.  While pomegranates can be enjoyed whole, some people prefer the juice. When buying pre-packaged pomegranate juice, check to ensure that there is no added sugar.   Cinnamon  may also help to reduce blood pressure, at least in the short-term.  An  analysis  of three studies showed that cinnamon decreased short-term systolic blood pressure by 5.39 mm Hg and diastolic blood pressure by 2.6 mm Hg. However, more research is needed.  Add cinnamon to the diet by sprinkling it over oatmeal or freshly chopped fruit, as an alternative to sugar. Cinnamon is available to  purchase  in various forms.  Pistachios are healthful nuts that may decrease hypertension.  One  study  reported that including pistachio nuts in a moderate-fat diet may reduce blood pressure during times of  stress . This may be because a compound in the nuts reduces the tightness of blood vessels.  It is important to note that the California Pistachio Commission of Fresno and the American Pistachio Growers funded this small-scale study.  Other studies have found that other nuts, such as  almonds , had a similar effect.  Snack on plain pistachios, toss them into salads, or blend them into pestos. Unsalted nuts are more healthful and available to  purchase online .  While some foods may relieve hypertension, others can cause substantial increases in blood pressure.  People can prevent or reduce high blood pressure by avoiding the following:  Sodium can significantly raise blood pressure. According to the findings of a  review  from 2013, lowering salt intake by 4.4 grams daily substantially reduced systolic and diastolic blood pressure.  The caffeine in  coffee , tea, cola, and energy drinks can cause short-term spikes in blood pressure.  A  review  of five trials found that drinking up to 2 cups of strong coffee can increase both systolic and diastolic blood pressure for 3 hours after consumption.  These findings do not suggest that coffee increases blood pressure or the risk of cardiovascular disease in the long term.  Consuming moderate amounts of red wine may have some health benefits, but larger amounts of alcohol can cause  dramatic increases  in blood pressure.  Heavy alcohol use also increases the risks of  heart failure , stroke,  cancer , and obesity.  A healthful diet and lifestyle can help to reduce the risk of hypertension.  Foods that may lower blood pressure include fruits, vegetables, oats, nuts, lentils, herbs, and spices.  Incorporate these into a balanced diet and engage in adequate physical activity to treat hypertension and improve overall health.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Akilen, R., Pimlott, Z., Tsiami, A., &amp; Robinson, N. (2013, October). Effect of short-term administration of cinnamon on blood pressure in patients with prediabetes and type 2 diabetes [Abstract].  Nutrition ,  29 (10), 1,192–1,196.  Akilen, R., Pimlott, Z., Tsiami, A., &amp; Robinson, N. (2013, October). Effect of short-term administration of cinnamon on blood pressure in patients with prediabetes and type 2 diabetes [Abstract].  Nutrition ,  29 (10), 1,192–1,196.  Ashraf, R., Khan, R. A., Ashraf, I., &amp; Qureshi, A. A. (2013, September). Effects of Allium sativum (garlic) on systolic and diastolic blood pressure in patients with essential hypertension [Abstract].  Pakistan Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences ,  26 (5), 859–863.  Cassidy, A., O’Reilly, É. J., Kay, C., Sampson, L., Franz, M., Forman, J. P., ... Rimm, E. B. (2011, February 1). Habitual intake of flavonoid subclasses and incident hypertension in adults.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  93 (2), 338–347.  Common high blood pressure myths. (2018, May 4).  Daily beetroot juice lowers blood pressure, scientists find. (2015, January 19).  Evans, C. E., Greenwood, D. C., Threapleton, D. E., Cleghorn, C. L., Nykjaer, C., Woodhead, C. E., ... Burley, V. J. (2015, May). Effects of dietary fibre type on blood pressure: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of healthy individuals [Abstract].  Journal of Hypertension ,  33 (5), 897–911.  Figueroa, A., Sanchez-Gonzalez, M. A., Wong, A., &amp; Arjmandi, B. H. (2012, June 1). Watermelon extract supplementation reduces ankle blood pressure and carotid augmentation index in obese adults with prehypertension or hypertension.  American Journal of Hypertension ,  25 (6), 640–643.  Hanson, M. G., Zahradka, P., &amp; Taylor, C. G. (2014, February). Lentil-based diets attenuate hypertension and large-artery remodelling in spontaneously hypertensive rats [Abstract].  British Journal of Nutrition ,  111 (4), 690–698.  He, F. J., Li, J., &amp; MacGregor, G. A. (2013, April). Effect of longer term modest salt reduction on blood pressure: Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials [Abstract].  BMJ ,  346 , 1,325.  High blood pressure frequently asked questions (FAQs). (2016, November 30).  How potassium can help control high blood pressure. (2018, January 29).  Jenkins, D. J. A., Kendall, C. W. C., Faulkner, D. A., Kemp, T., Marchie, A., Nguyen, T. H., … Singer, W. (2008). Long-term effects of a plant-based dietary portfolio of cholesterol-lowering foods on blood pressure.  European Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  62 , 781-788.  Juraschek, S. P., Guallar, E., Appel, L. J., &amp; Miller III, E. R. (2012, May). Effects of vitamin C supplementation on blood pressure: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials [Abstract].  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  95 (5), 1,079–1,088.  Kapil, V., Khambata, R. S., Robertson, A., Caulfield, M. J., &amp; Ahluwalia, A. (2014, November 24). Dietary nitrate provides sustained blood pressure lowering in hypertensive patients: A randomized, phase 2, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.  Hypertension .  Khalesi, S., Sun, J., Buys, N., &amp; Jayasinghe, R. (2014, July 21). Effect of probiotics on blood pressure.  Hypertension ,  2014 .  Lynn, A., Hamadeh, H., Leung, W. C., Russell, J. M., &amp; Barker, M. E. (2012, September). Effects of pomegranate juice supplementation on pulse wave velocity and blood pressure in healthy young and middle-aged men and women [Abstract].  Plant Foods for Human Nutrition ,  67 (3), 309–314.  Mesas, A. E., Leon-Muñoz, L. M., Rodriguez-Artalejo, F., &amp; Lopez-Garcia, E. (2011, October). The effect of coffee on blood pressure and cardiovascular disease in hypertensive individuals: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  94 (4), 1,113–1,126.  Nitrates found in green veg and beetroot help tackle high blood pressure. (2013, April 16).  Othman, R. A., Moghadasian, M. H., &amp; Jones, P. J. (2011, June). Cholesterol-lowering effects of oat β-glucan [Abstract].  Nutrition Reviews ,  69 (6), 299–309.  Ried, K., Sullivan, T., Fakler, P., Frank, O. R., &amp; Stocks, N. P. (2010, June 28). Does chocolate reduce blood pressure? A meta-analysis.  BMC Medicine ,  8 (1), 39–49.  Svendsen, M., Tonstad, S., Heggen, E., Pedersen, T. R., Seljeflot, I., Bøhn, S. K., ... &amp; Klemsdal, T. O. (2015, February). The effect of kiwifruit consumption on blood pressure in subjects with moderately elevated blood pressure: A randomized, controlled study [Abstract].  Blood Pressure ,  24 (1), 48–54.  Tabassum, N., &amp; Ahmad, F. (2011, January-June). Role of natural herbs in the treatment of hypertension.  Pharmacognosy Review ,  5 (9), 30–40.  Watermelon shown to boost heart health, control weight gain in mice. (2012, October 2).  West, S. G., Gebauer, S. K., Kay, C. D., Savastano, D. M., Diefenbach, C., Bagshaw, D. M., &amp; Kris-Etherton, P. M. (2012, July). Diets containing pistachios reduce systolic blood pressure and peripheral vascular responses to stress in adults with dyslipidemia [Abstract].  Hypertension ,  60 (1), 58–63.  Yogurt may protect women from developing high blood pressure. (2016, March 3).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Fifteen good foods for high blood pressure."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322284.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, June 27). "Fifteen good foods for high blood pressure."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  