 Safflower oil is a popular cooking oil that comes from the seeds of the safflower plant. Some research suggests it may have some health benefits when people use it in the diet and on the skin.  Safflower oil may be a more healthful option than olive oil when cooking at high temperatures, thanks to its high smoke point and neutral flavor.  In this article, we list the top health benefits of safflower oil. We also discuss the effects of safflower oil for weight loss.  Safflower oil offers a variety of potential benefits. Below, we discuss the evidence behind six key benefits of safflower oil:  Safflower oil is a rich source of unsaturated fatty acids, including monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats.  The body needs these fats to function. Experts generally  consider  unsaturated fatty acids to be more healthful than saturated fats.  Fats in the diet, such as those found in safflower oil, are essential for hormone regulation and memory. They are vital in allowing the body to absorb fat-soluble  vitamins  A, D, E, and K. Eating some fat with meals may also help a person to feel fuller.  Safflower oil is  lower  in saturated fats, which are often considered "bad" fats, than olive oil, avocado oil, and sunflower oil.  A diet high in "good" fats and low in "bad" fats has many health benefits, including reducing  inflammation  and improving heart health.  There are two types of safflower oil: high-oleic and high-linoleic. Both contain unsaturated fatty acids.  Like olive oil, the high-oleic variety of safflower oil contains monounsaturated fats and is a good option for cooking at high temperatures.  High-linoleic safflower oil contains higher quantities of polyunsaturated fats. It is not suitable for heating but is ideal for use in salad dressings.  A systematic review of studies from  2016  suggests that eating a diet high in unsaturated fats can improve a person's blood glucose control.  The study found that replacing some sources of  carbohydrate  or saturated fats with unsaturated fatty acids, especially polyunsaturated fats, had a beneficial effect on blood sugar levels, as well as  insulin resistance  and  insulin  secretion.  A  2011 study  suggested that consuming 8 grams (g) of safflower oil daily for 4 months may reduce inflammation while improving blood sugar in some people with  type 2 diabetes .  It is important to note that the participants in this study were women with type 2 diabetes who also had  obesity  and were past the stage of  menopause .  The researchers suggest that people might use quality dietary fats alongside  diabetes  treatments to reduce complications associated with the condition.  The same  2011 study  also reports that participants' blood  cholesterol  levels improved following 4 months safflower oil use.  These findings support the American Heart Association's  suggestion  that unsaturated fats may lower low-density lipoprotein (LDL) or "bad," cholesterol in the blood. High cholesterol is a risk factor for  heart disease .  Safflower oil may contribute to heart health in other ways too.  The unsaturated fats in safflower oil can thin the blood and make platelets less sticky. This might help prevent blood clots that can lead to  heart attack  and  stroke . Safflower oil might also affect blood vessels by relaxing them and reducing  blood pressure .  Safflower oil may also have anti-inflammatory properties.  According to a study in   Clinical Nutrition  , Safflower oil and the unsaturated fatty acids in safflower oil improved markers of inflammation. This may help with several conditions, including diabetes and heart disease.  Applying safflower oil topically to dry or inflamed skin may help soothe it and give the skin a soft and smooth appearance. Although most of the research on safflower oil for the skin is anecdotal, it is a common ingredient in cosmetics and skin care products.  Safflower oil contains vitamin E, which may be responsible for some of its skin benefits. Vitamin E has been an important ingredient in dermatological products for decades.  Some  research  suggests that vitamin E protects the skin from the effects of sunlight and from free radicals, which are harmful molecules that damage cells in the body and contribute to disease.  Before using safflower oil on the skin, perform a patch test. Rub a drop of the oil into the arm and wait for 24 hours. If no reaction develops, it is probably safe to use.  Not all oils are safe to use for frying. This is because overheating delicate oils can create free radicals.  High-oleic safflower oil is safe to cook with at high temperatures. In fact, this monounsaturated oil has a higher smoke point than many other oils, including:  Safflower also has a milder flavor than other oils, including olive and coconut, which makes it an excellent choice for deep frying, pan frying, or baking.  People should not heat polyunsaturated safflower oil, however. Save it for drizzling over steamed vegetables and making vinaigrettes. Keep the oil in the refrigerator to prevent it from turning rancid.  Some people consider safflower oil to be a weight loss aid, but there is little research in this area.  Some studies, including a  2011 study , report that safflower oil has no significant effects on weight or body fat.  At  120 calories  per tablespoon, safflower oil is not a low-calorie food. Eating too many  calories , regardless of their source, can adversely affect weight-loss efforts.  But adding a small amount of this oil to food may improve its flavor, increase the feeling of being full, and balance blood sugar — all of which can have a beneficial effect on weight management.  When trying to lose weight, it may be helpful to limit the intake of oils to recommended amounts and to focus on eating whole foods, such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and lean protein sources.  The 'Choose my Plate' initiative  recommend  the following intake of oils by teaspoon (tsp) each day:  However, the  Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2015–2020  states that most oils consumed in the United States are in the form of processed foods, such as:  When calculating daily oil intake, remember to include these fats, as well as healthful sources of fats, such as those found naturally in nuts, seeds, and fish.  Most people will not have any adverse reaction to safflower oil, as long as they consume it in the recommended daily amounts.  As safflower can thin the blood, it may slow down the clotting of the blood, which may increase the risk of bleeding in:  Safflower oil contains healthful fats called unsaturated fatty acids.  When consumed in moderation, it may offer health benefits, such as blood sugar control, better heart health, and lower levels of inflammation.  People can use it topically to treat dry skin, and it is safe to use when cooking at high temperatures.  Safflower oil is available to buy from health food stores, some supermarkets, and  online .  As with all oils, safflower is high in calories and low in many nutrients. Therefore, people should use it sparingly and as part of a balanced diet.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Asp, M. L., Collene, A. L., Norris, L. E., Cole, R. M., Stout, M. B., Tang, S. Y., ... Belury, M. A. (2011, August). Time-dependent effects of safflower oil to improve glycemia, inflammation and blood lipids in obese, post-menopausal women with type 2 diabetes: A randomized, double-masked, crossover study [Abstract].  Clinical Nutrition ,  30 (4), 443–449.  Asp, M. L., Collene, A. L., Norris, L. E., Cole, R. M., Stout, M. B., Tang, S. Y., ... Belury, M. A. (2011, August). Time-dependent effects of safflower oil to improve glycemia, inflammation and blood lipids in obese, post-menopausal women with type 2 diabetes: A randomized, double-masked, crossover study [Abstract].  Clinical Nutrition ,  30 (4), 443–449.  Basic report: 04511, oil, safflower, salad or cooking, high oleic (primary safflower oil of commerce). (2018, April).  Dietary fats. (2017, March 24).  Dietary guidelines for Americans 2015-2020. (2015, December).  Imamura, F., Micha, R., Wu, J. H. Y., de Oliveira Otto, M. C., Otite, F. O., Abioye, A. I., &amp; Mozaffarian, D. (2016, July 19). Effects of saturated fat, polyunsaturated fat, monounsaturated fat, and carbohydrate on glucose-insulin homeostasis: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled feeding trials.  PLoS Medicine ,  13 (7), e1002087.  Keen, M. A., &amp; Hassan, I. (2016, July–August). Vitamin E in dermatology.  Indian Dermatology Online Journal ,  7 (4), 311–315.  Pfeuffer, M., Fielitz, K., Laue, C., Winkler, P., Rubin, D., Helwig, U., ... Schrezenmeir, J. (2011, February). CLA does not impair endothelial function and decreases body weight as compared with safflower oil in overweight and obese male subjects.  Journal of the American College of Nutrition ,  30 (1), 19–28.  What are "oils"? (2016, July 26).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Six health benefits of safflower oil."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322245.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, June 25). "Six health benefits of safflower oil."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  