 Nut butters often contain unsaturated fats, which are healthful fats that the body needs. This makes them a great addition to most diets.  When comparing products, it is most useful to compare the same serving size. Serving sizes  are standardized  to make reading and comparing  nutrition  labels easier.  Here, we compare one tablespoon (16g) of  almond butter  with the same amount of  peanut butter .  Both almond and peanut butter contain about the same amount of protein. Although nut butters are a source of protein, they are not a complete protein.  This means they do not contain all the essential proteins or amino acids that the body requires.  Eating a variety of legumes, vegetables, seeds, nuts, and whole-grains will provide all the essential proteins and amino acids a person needs.  Almond butter has double the amount of fiber that peanut butter does.  Fiber is especially important for:  The fat content between different nuts varies significantly. Some people may consider almond butter a better option than peanut butter as it contains less saturated fats and more unsaturated fats.  Almond butter has roughly 50 percent less sugar than peanut butter, even in unsweetened varieties. However, peanut butter also has low sugar content.  When purchasing almond butter and peanut butter, it is essential to check the nutrition label and buy products with no added sugar or salt whenever possible.  Almond butter contains a higher amount of  magnesium , phosphorous,  potassium , and  calcium .  The body  could not produce energy without  magnesium. It is also vital for bone health.  Potassium is an essential electrolyte that the body requires for normal function.  Both almond butter and peanut butter are good sources of  vitamin  E. Vitamin E reduces  inflammation  and the risk of  heart disease .  Unsaturated fats are beneficial for general health. There are two different families of unsaturated fats: omega-3s and omega-6s.  The human body cannot make omega-3s and omega-6s on its own, so it is necessary to get them through foods.  Many people do not get enough omega-3s in their diet. Eating enough unsaturated fats is associated with proper growth, development, and anti-inflammatory properties.  Almond butter has a slightly higher amount of unsaturated fats.  Peanuts belong to the legume family, just like peas and beans. Peanuts grow underground and may become contaminated with  aspergillus  mold, which is highly toxic.  Fortunately, peanut butter has a  significantly lower risk  of contamination than peanuts because the manufacturing process removes a lot of the mold.  Nuts are also common allergens. People should use caution when trying new nut butters and avoid any known allergens.  There are many ways to use nut butter, including:  Almond butter and peanut butter are spreads. People can use them in the following ways:  Try adding nut butter to sauces and dressings for a nutty flavor.  For example, satay can be made using almond butter instead of peanut butter.  Alternatively, try this recipe for a Thai dressing:  Combine all ingredients in a bowl or blender, and use on noodle dishes and salads.  Adding nut butters, such as almond butter, to smoothies is an excellent way to incorporate more nutrients into the diet.  Unless a person has allergies, nuts can be a healthful part of their diet in every life stage.  It may be easier for people to incorporate more nuts into their diet by using nut butters, including peanut and almond butter.  Almond butter does have certain health advantages over peanut butter.  However eating many different foods, including a variety of nuts, can help the body get all of the essential nutrients it needs.  Peanut butter and almond butter are available in many grocery stores or online:  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Abel, S., Riedel, S., &amp; Gelderblom, W. C. A. (2014, May 22). Dietary PUFA and cancer.  Proceedings of the Nutrition Society ,  73 , 361–367.  Abel, S., Riedel, S., &amp; Gelderblom, W. C. A. (2014, May 22). Dietary PUFA and cancer.  Proceedings of the Nutrition Society ,  73 , 361–367.  Basic report: 12195, Nuts, almond butter, plain, without salt added. (2018, April).  Basic report: 16398, Peanut butter, smooth style, without salt. (2018, April).  FODMAPs and irritable bowel syndrome. (n.d.).  Global almond butter market and nut butter market: 2018–2025 consumption analysis, trends, demand growth, production and supply chain. (2018, June 4).  How to understand and use the nutrition facts label. (2018, January 3).  Macagnan, F. T., da Silva, L. P., &amp; Hecktheuer, L. H. (2016, July). Dietary fibre: The scientific search for an ideal definition of methodology of analysis, and its physiological importance as a carrier of bioactive compounds [Abstract].  Food Research International ,  85 , 144–154.  Mackie, A., Bajka, B., &amp; Rigby, N. (2016, October). Roles for dietary fibre in the upper GI tract: The importance of viscosity [Abstract].  Food Research International ,  88 (Part B), 234–238.  Magnesium [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Mann, J., &amp; Truswell, S. (2017, April 13).  Essentials of Human Nutrition (5th ed) . Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. Available from  https://global.oup.com/academic/product/essentials-of-human-nutrition-9780198752981?cc=gb&amp;lang=en&amp;   Omega-3 fatty acids [Fact sheet]. (2018, June 6).  Potassium [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 21).  Siwela, A. H., Mukaroa, K. J, &amp; Nziramasanga, N. (2011, April). Aflatoxin carryover during large scale peanut butter production (Abstract).  Food and Nutrition Sciences ,  2 (2), 105–108.  Vitamin E [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "Almond butter vs. peanut butter: Which is healthier?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322212.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, June 21). "Almond butter vs. peanut butter: Which is healthier?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  