 Doctors may recommend gastrectomy as a treatment for  stomach cancer , which is also called gastric cancer. The procedure can also treat  diabetes , gastroparesis, and  obesity .  After surgery, a person will digest foods differently, but they will still be able to eat and drink. It may take some time to recover and get used to a new diet and way of eating.  In this article, we look at the uses of gastrectomy, what to expect before, during, and after the procedure, and possible complications.  There are three main types of gastrectomy:  The procedure will vary, depending on the health issue and personal factors.  A doctor may recommend gastrectomy to treat the following conditions:   Gastric cancer   Doctors usually recommend gastrectomy to treat stomach cancer in people who are sufficiently healthy. The surgeon will leave as much stomach as possible, which will  vary , depending on the type and stage of  cancer .  The  effectiveness  of the surgery depends on the stage of cancer at diagnosis. To ensure the best results, a treatment plan may include a gastrectomy and  concurrent   chemotherapy , chemoradiotherapy, or perioperative  chemotherapy .   Gastroparesis   Doctors  may consider  using a partial or total gastrectomy to treat gastroparesis, but rarely, and only in carefully selected patients. Researchers must conduct further studies before this becomes a commonplace treatment.   Obesity   Doctors can use gastrectomy to treat obesity, but they only consider it in rare cases when other methods, such as diet, exercise, and designated drugs, have not been effective. The medical community considers the procedure to be  safe and highly effective  in treating obesity.   Diabetes   According to a  2016 review , gastrectomy may also improve the outcome for people with  type 2 diabetes .  Authors of a  2015 review  found that gastric bypass surgery and sleeve gastrectomy were both effective in managing diabetes and obesity.  Surgeons can perform stomach surgeries in two ways:  After a surgeon removes a section of the stomach, they reconstruct the gastric tract. Often, they use a Y-shaped device called a Roux limb to reconnect parts of the digestive system.  Before the procedure, a person may need to restrict the diet, by fasting or avoiding certain foods.  A doctor may also recommend not taking some medications or supplements. Always follow the doctor's instructions.  A person may feel more comfortable thinking about the surgery if are knowledgeable about what will happen. It may be a good idea to discuss the surgery and recovery in detail with the doctor.  Before a gastrectomy, a doctor usually performs routine tests, such as:  They may perform additional tests to better understand the person's condition. These may include:  A person can often consume any food or drink that does not cause discomfort unless a nurse or doctor tells them otherwise.  Speak with a doctor about which foods can be problematic. If some cause discomfort or loose bowel movements, remove them from the diet and reintroduce them after a few weeks.  Below are more tips for a quicker recovery:   Exercise . Keep moving, even in bed, to avoid problems like blood clots and muscle weakness. Rotate the feet, stretch the legs, and wiggle the toes to increase blood circulation and maintain muscle strength   Deep breathing . Lying in bed for long periods  can lead  to  pneumonia . Deep breathing techniques can prevent this type of complication. After surgery, a doctor may give a person an inspirometer, which is a device designed to help with deep breathing.   Pain control . Communicate pain levels to medical staff. Managing pain successfully will help a person return to regular activities more quickly.   Avoid certain activities . Limit the amount of bathing and swimming, heavy lifting, and driving until a doctor recommends resuming them fully.  Typically, a medical professional removes stitches or clips within  7–10 days  of surgery. After this, a person can slowly begin to return to regular activities.  After gastric surgery, a person often has to change their diet, because their stomach is smaller and may be less able to handle certain foods. Many people report being able to eat less, feeling full sooner, and having some digestive complications.  Speak with a doctor about the best foods to eat or avoid after surgery.  Some people experience  nutritional deficiencies after  gastrectomies. Medical professionals should monitor a person's levels of:  The organization  No Stomach for Cancer  provides useful information for those who have had gastric surgery. See  their blog  for stories about living a full life after a gastrectomy.  According to No Stomach for Cancer, up to  75 percent  of people who have had partial or total gastrectomies experience dumping syndrome, which occurs when food passes too quickly into the intestines.  Other  complications  of a gastrectomy can include:  A person may also have difficulties getting enough nutrients. This can result in  anemia , poor bone metabolism from a lack of  calcium  and vitamin D, and weight loss, potentially from poor absorption of  micronutrients .  If a person feels any of the following  symptoms  after a gastrectomy, they should contact a doctor:  A total or partial gastrectomy is an effective treatment for stomach cancer. It can also treat obesity.  Talk to a doctor about what to expect before, during, and after a gastrectomy.  Recovering from this surgery can take some time, but with the support of a medical team, most people go on to make a full recovery and lead regular lives.    
 Acquafresca, P. A., Palermo, M., Duza, G. E., Blanco, L. A., &amp; Serra, E. E. (2015, June). Gastric bypass versus sleeve gastrectomy: Comparison between type 2 diabetes weight loss and complications. Review of randomized control trials.  Acta Gastroenterologia Latinoamericana ,  45 (2), 143–154.  Acquafresca, P. A., Palermo, M., Duza, G. E., Blanco, L. A., &amp; Serra, E. E. (2015, June). Gastric bypass versus sleeve gastrectomy: Comparison between type 2 diabetes weight loss and complications. Review of randomized control trials.  Acta Gastroenterologia Latinoamericana ,  45 (2), 143–154.  A guide to bowel surgery. (2016, April 4).  Beasley, T. (2013, January 30). Postgastrectomy syndromes.  Camilleri, M., Parkman, H. P., Shafi, M. A., Abell, T. L., &amp; Gerson, L. (2013). Clinical guideline: Management of gastroparesis.  The American Journal of Gastroenterology ,  108 , 18–37.  Davis, J. L., &amp; Ripley, R. T. (2017, April). Postgastrectomy syndromes and nutritional considerations following gastric surgery.  Surgical Clinics of North America ,  97 (2), 277–293.  Dumping syndrome. (n.d.).  Haverkamp, L., Brenkman, H. J. F., Seesing, M. F. J., Gisbertz, S. S., van Berge Henegouwen, M. I., Luyer, M. D., … van Hillegersberg, R. (2015, July 29). Laparoscopic versus open gastrectomy for gastric cancer, a multicenter prospectively randomized controlled trial (LOGICA-trial).  BMC Cancer ,  15 , 556.  Hoyuela, C. (2017, April 27). Five-year outcomes of laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy as a primary procedure for morbid obesity: A prospective study.  World Journal of Gastrointestinal Surgery ,  9 (4), 109–117.  Kuo, C.-Y., Chao, Y., &amp; Li, C.-P. (2014, July). Update on treatment of gastric cancer.  Journal of the Chinese Medical Association ,  77 (7), 345–353.  Kushner, R. F., Cummings, S., Herron, D. M. (2018, April 2). Bariatric surgery: Postoperative nutritional management.  Nakada, K., Ikeda, M., Takahsahi, M., Kinami, S., Yoshida, M., Uenosono, Y., … Kodera, Y. (2015, January). Characteristics and clinical relevance of postgastrectomy syndrome assessment scale (PGSAS)-45: Newly developed integrated questionnaires for assessment of living status and quality of life in postgastrectomy patients.  Gastric Cancer ,  18 (1), 147–158.  No stomach for cancer. (n.d.).  Nutrient deficiencies. (n.d.).  Orditura, M., Galizia, G., Sforza, V., Gambardella, V., Fabozzi, A., Laterza, M. M., … De Vita, F. (2014, February 21). Treatment of gastric cancer.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  20 (7), 1635–1649.  Preparing the patient for surgery. (n.d.).  Ramadan, M., Loureiro, M., Laughlan, K., Caiazzo, R., Iannelli, A., Brunaud, L., … Nocca, D. (2016, May 8). Risk of dumping syndrome after sleeve gastrectomy and Roux-en-y gastric bypass: Early results of a multicentre prospective study.  Gastroenterology Research and Practice ,  2016 , 2570237.  Rosania, R., Chiapponi, C., Malfertheiner, P., &amp; Venerito, M. (2016, May). Nutrition in patients with gastric cancer: An update.  Gastrointestinal Tumors ,  2 (4), 178–187.  Stomach cancer survival rates. (2017, December 18).  Surgery for obesity. (2014, August 8).  Surgery for stomach cancer. (2017, December 15).  Switzer, N. J., Prasad, S., Debru, E., Church, N., Mitchell, P., &amp; Gill, R. S. (2016, July). Sleeve gastrectomy and type 2 diabetes mellitus: A systematic review of long-term outcomes.  Obesity Surgery ,  26 (7), 1616–1621.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Stinson, Adrienne. "What to know about gastrectomy, or stomach removal."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322239.php&gt;    APA  Stinson, A. (2018, June 24). "What to know about gastrectomy, or stomach removal."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  