 Obstetricians and midwives routinely caution against the use of hot tubs during pregnancy, so it is understandable that women may worry about other heat sources during pregnancy, including heating pads.  Particularly in the third trimester as ligaments shift and the weight of the uterus increases, many women experience back and abdominal pain. It is usually okay to use a heating pad for brief periods, and it may be safer than other pain relievers,  such as ibuprofen .  In this article, we discuss when it is safe to use a heating pad, where women can use it on their bodies, and the benefits and risks. We also look at other pain relief options that people can use during pregnancy.  Some women worry about using heating pads during pregnancy because a high body temperature can harm the developing baby. When a woman's body temperature increases, the baby's temperature can rise too. Significant increases in temperature can cause birth abnormalities.  As long as a heating pad does not raise the woman's core body temperature, it should be safe to use. People should avoid using heating pads overnight or while sleeping, when they may not notice temperature shifts. Consider using a heating pad for brief periods, such as 10 minutes or less.  A  2011 study  linked the use of hot tubs during early pregnancy to neural tube abnormalities. The neural tube is the structure that eventually forms the brain and spinal cord; any damage to the neural tube can cause brain damage and other serious complications. The study found that regular use of hot tubs was especially dangerous.  Although no large, recent studies have directly tested the safety of heating pads during pregnancy, they are unlikely to raise a person's core body temperature and are a routine part of pain relief during pregnancy.  A  2013 study  concluded that combining several treatments at once, such as aerobic exercise, heating pads, and chiropractic care, was effective for pain relief. The study did not note any adverse outcomes associated with heating pads.  If any form of heat feels painful or uncomfortable, do not use it.  Many women have concerns about using a heating pad on the belly or back, which are typical locations for pain.  There is no evidence to suggest that using heating pads on the belly or back for brief periods is dangerous. Many doctors recommend low heat for back, hip, or pelvic pain. However, always speak to a doctor before applying heat to the belly or back.  To minimize any potential risks to the developing baby:  Heating pads might be a viable alternative to over-the-counter pain relievers. Anyone choosing to use pain relievers during pregnancy should speak to a doctor about the best kinds of medication to use.  Heat can help promote healing of minor injuries. Heat  can also :  Women should avoid using heat if they have an open wound, the area is numb, or during a  fever .  Some women may find more relief by alternating hot and cold packs. Talk to a doctor before applying ice directly to the stomach or back.  Those who get no relief from heating pads can try some other options. Common prescription medications for chronic pain is likely to be safe during pregnancy, according to a review published in  2010 .  Research consistently shows that acetaminophen is safe during pregnancy, but data on other over-the-counter medications are mixed. At different stages of pregnancy, some over-the-counter pain relievers, such as ibuprofen,  may not be safe .  Other pain relief options include:  Anyone considering treatment options such as massage or acupuncture should make sure they thoroughly research practitioners to find someone who is trained in prenatal methods and is comfortable treating women who are pregnant. A doctor may be able to offer recommendations on this.  Every pregnancy is different, so anyone who is concerned about using heat to relieve pain should talk to a doctor or midwife first.  Some women may have other risk factors, such as a high body temperature due to an infection or a risk of preterm labor, which make a heating pad unsafe.  However, in most situations, a heating pad offers safe, quick relief from the aches and pains pregnancy brings.  Is it safe to have a hot bath or hot shower while pregnant?  Generally, recommendations include taking a 'warm' bath or shower to avoid raising your core temperature, which could affect your developing baby. You should feel comfortable while showering or bathing, making sure that the water is not so hot that you feel flushed or begin sweating. Some doctors recommend spending no more than 10 minutes in a hotter-temperature bath.    
 Babb, M., Koren, G., &amp; Einarson, A. (2010, January). Treating pain during pregnancy.  Canadian Family Physician ,  56 (1), 25–27.  Babb, M., Koren, G., &amp; Einarson, A. (2010, January). Treating pain during pregnancy.  Canadian Family Physician ,  56 (1), 25–27.  Baby's best chance: Parent's handbook for of pregnancy and baby care. (2017, September).  Duong, H. T., Hashmi, S. S., Ramadhani, T., Canfield, M. A., Scheuerle, A., &amp; Waller, D. K. (2011, September). Maternal use of hot tub and major structural birth defects [Abstract].  Birth Defects Research Part A: Clinical and Molecular Teratology ,  91 (9), 836–841.  Exercise during pregnancy. (2017, July).  Feldkamp, M. L., Meyer, R. E., Krikov, S., &amp; Botto, L. D. (2010, January). Acetaminophen use in pregnancy and risk of birth defects: Findings from the National Birth Defects Prevention Study [Abstract].  Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology , 115 (1), 109–115.  George, J. W., Skaggs, C. D., Thompson, P. A., Nelson, D. M., Gavard, J. A., &amp; Gross, G. A. (2013, April). A randomized controlled trial comparing a multimodal intervention and standard obstetrics care for low back and pelvic pain in pregnancy.  American Journal of Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  208 (295), e1–7.  Nezvalová-Henriksen, K., Spigset, O., &amp; Nordeng, H. M. (2013, July). Effects of ibuprofen, diclofenac, naproxen, and piroxicam on the course of pregnancy and pregnancy outcome: A prospective cohort study [Abstract].  BJOG ,  120 (8), 948-959.  Treating sports injuries with ice and heat. (2011, November 21).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Can you use a heating pad while pregnant?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322216.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, June 21). "Can you use a heating pad while pregnant?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  