 Symptoms of hypervitaminosis A include vision problems, changes in the skin, and bone pain. Chronic cases of hypervitaminosis A may result in liver damage or pressure on the brain.  Hypervitaminosis A develops when a person has too much  vitamin  A in their system.  The condition is also known as vitamin A toxicity.  Hypervitaminosis A can be an acute or chronic condition.  Acute hypervitaminosis A occurs when a person consumes large quantities of vitamin A over the course of a few hours.  By contrast, chronic hypervitaminosis A occurs when vitamin A levels build up slowly in the body over time.  Hypervitaminosis A has a variety of potential symptoms that may vary depending on whether the condition is acute or chronic.  Both acute and chronic types of hypervitaminosis A cause  headaches  and rashes.  A person with acute hypervitaminosis A may experience one or more of the following symptoms:  A person with chronic hypervitaminosis A may experience one or more of the following symptoms:  For children, additional symptoms may include:  The liver stores vitamin A. Over time, vitamin A levels can build up to unsafe levels, causing chronic hypervitaminosis A.  High levels of vitamin A often result from a person taking too many supplemental vitamins.  A person should talk to their doctor about all the vitamins they are taking to make sure that they are not consuming too much vitamin A.  Sometimes, children experience acute hypervitaminosis A, which often occurs as a result of accidental ingestion of vitamins. It is essential to store multivitamins and vitamin A supplements out of the reach of children.  Long-term use of  acne  medications or creams that contain vitamin A can lead to hypervitaminosis A in some people.  To make a diagnosis, a doctor will carry out a physical examination and ask about the person's symptoms. The doctor will also ask about any vitamins or medications a person is taking.  The doctor may also recommend a blood test, which can help them diagnose abnormally high vitamin A levels.  If a person thinks they may be experiencing a vitamin A overdose, they should seek urgent medical attention.  A person can often reverse hypervitaminosis A by stopping taking excess amounts of vitamin A. This may mean that they can no longer take multivitamins or vitamin A supplements.  If there are no complications, a person will usually recover quickly.  If further complications from vitamin A toxicity have occurred, such as liver or kidney damage, a doctor will treat these separately. Liver damage from hypervitaminosis is  not always reversible , however.  Vitamin A requirements vary depending on a person's age, sex, and whether they are pregnant.  The  National Institutes of Health (NIH)  recommend the following daily intake of vitamin A:  Anyone who is pregnant, may become pregnant, or is thinking of becoming pregnant should consume an appropriate amount of vitamin A before and during the pregnancy. Vitamin A is essential for the development of the fetus, but too much vitamin A may lead to birth abnormalities.  When taking a prenatal vitamin, only take one each day. Anyone who is pregnant should consult a doctor before taking any supplemental vitamins.  As long as a person does not develop any complications from hypervitaminosis A, they can expect to make a full recovery as long as they stop taking vitamin A supplements.  Anyone taking or wanting to take supplements should always discuss it with a doctor first. A doctor or nutritionist can advise a person on proper doses and how to avoid taking excess amounts of vitamin A.   Article last updated by Phil Riches on Fri  9 November 2018.  Visit our  Nutrition / Diet  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Nutrition / Diet.   
 Hammoud, D., El Haddad, B., &amp; Abdallah, J. (2014, November 25). Hypercalcaemia secondary to hypervitaminosis A in a patient with chronic renal failure.  The West Indian Medical Journal ,  63 (1), 105–108.  Hammoud, D., El Haddad, B., &amp; Abdallah, J. (2014, November 25). Hypercalcaemia secondary to hypervitaminosis A in a patient with chronic renal failure.  The West Indian Medical Journal ,  63 (1), 105–108.  Vitamin A [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Vitamin A. (2015, March).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Hypervitaminosis A: What to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Nov. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322238.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, November 9). "Hypervitaminosis A: What to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  