 It is also available as a brand-name drug called Soriatane and as a generic drug.  Acitretin belongs to a class of drugs called retinoids. Retinoids relate to retinol, or  vitamin  A.  Acitretin works by binding to receptors in the body. These receptors help normalize the speed of skin cell growth, reducing the effects of conditions that include  psoriasis .  A doctor will likely only prescribe acitretin if other drugs are not effective for a case of psoriasis or if an individual cannot use other psoriasis drugs.  This drug is used on a long-term basis. If prescribed, it is worth calling the pharmacy ahead of time as not all pharmacies stock this item.  The drug is used to treat severe psoriasis.  Psoriasis is a skin condition that causes cells in the outer layer of the skin to grow faster than normal and build upon the surface of the skin. This leads to  inflammation  and red, thickened areas of skin, often with silvery scales.  Acitretin carries a United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) black box warning. This is the most serious health warning a drug can carry.  The medication carries the following warnings:  Side effects that can occur when taking acitretin include:  The drug can also lead to serious complications in people that may already have a predisposition towards them, including:  People with the following conditions should completely avoid this drug:  Acitretin can interact with other drugs and chemicals in the body to create adverse effects. It is important to know what to take and avoid when on a course of acitretin.  This drug is known to increase the risk of congenital abnormalities, and alcohol can further enhance the duration of this risk to beyond 3 years after stopping acitretin. Avoid alcohol at all costs while taking acitretin.  There are several types of medication to avoid while taking acitretin, including:  Acitretin is available in its generic form in 10-milligram (mg) and as the brand-name drug Soriatane in 10-milligram (mg), 17.5-mg, 22.5-mg, and 25-mg capsules.  A typical starting dose is around 25 to 50 mg once per day, to be taken with the largest meal. The doctor who prescribed the drug will monitor the reaction to this dosage and make changes if side effects are becoming disruptive.  There is no dosage recommended for children under 18 years of age, as they should not take the medication. Adults over the age of 65 years will often start on a lower dose.  If a dose is accidentally missed, do not take a double dose next time. It is vital never to miss a dose, as this can reduce or block the effectiveness of the drug.  Here are several extra considerations to bear in mind when transporting, acquiring, or storing acitretin:    
		Soriatane - acitretin capsule. (2017, October 9).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Felman, Adam. "What's to know about acitretin?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322273.php&gt;    APA  Felman, A. (2018, June 27). "What's to know about acitretin?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  