 However, drinking too much alcohol can indirectly lower the effectiveness of  birth control . Alcohol affects judgment, which in turn can lead to risky sexual behavior. It can also affect a person's ability to use birth control correctly.  In this article, we discuss the risks of drinking alcohol while taking birth control pills.  Alcohol does not affect the functioning of the birth control pill.  According to  Planned Parenthood , the following forms of contraception will continue to work in the same way if a person drinks alcohol:  With correct use, these methods are 91–99 percent effective. The birth control pill would be  99 percent effective  if everyone used it correctly all the time. As they do not, it is about 91 percent effective in reality.  If a person drinks so much alcohol that they vomit within 2 hours of taking their pill, it will be less effective. If this happens, they should take another pill as soon as possible and see a doctor for further advice.  Alcohol can also affect a person's judgment and memory. A person consuming an excessive amount of alcohol may forget to take the pill that day.  Or, if they use the progestin-only pill (POP), they may forget to take it within the proper timeframe. The POP is only effective if an individual takes it within the same 3-hour period every day.  Missing a dose can cause  ovulation , which is when an ovary releases an egg.  The 3 days on which a female is most fertile are the 2 days leading up to ovulation and the day it occurs. If they have sexual intercourse with a male during the most fertile days and do not use contraception, they have a  27–33 percent  chance of becoming pregnant.  If a person misses a birth control pill and wishes to avoid unintended pregnancy, they should use condoms or another form of contraception in addition to the pill for 4 weeks.  People who take birth control pills metabolize, or process, alcohol  more slowly  than those not on the pill. This is because the liver has to metabolize both the alcohol and the hormones in the medication.  As a result, alcohol stays in the body for an extended period, and its effects last longer. People also remain intoxicated for longer during their menstrual periods, when the body releases more hormones.  Females typically tend to get intoxicated more quickly than males. This is because their bodies contain less of the enzyme that breaks down alcohol, which is called alcohol dehydrogenase.  Drinking excessive amounts of alcohol carries other risks, especially concerning sexual behavior.  People who are intoxicated may not use condoms or other contraception to protect themselves against  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs) or unintended pregnancy. Others may regret their choice of sexual partner.  The authors of a  study  from 2015 examined the relationship between alcohol and sexual behavior in adults aged 26, 32, and 38. They found that 13.5 percent of men and 11.9 percent of women aged 38 experienced unwanted outcomes following their behavior while intoxicated.  These outcomes included regretting sex, regretting the choice of sexual partner, and not using contraception.  There is a link between alcohol and sexual assault. A publication released by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) states that approximately  50 percent  of people who report sexual assault say that they were drinking at the time of the assault.  The same report states that men who have been drinking alcohol are responsible for 50 percent of sexual assaults.  It is important to note that even if a person has been drinking before someone sexually assaults them, they are in no way to blame. The fault always lies with the perpetrator.  People who are taking the birth control pill and know that they will be drinking should plan accordingly. They could consider:  Many forms of birth control are available. A doctor can provide advice on which is best for an individual.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimate that  62 percent  of women aged 15–44 in the U.S. were using contraception between 2011 and 2013. The  most common  forms between 2011 and 2015 were:  When choosing a form of contraception, a person should decide which factors are the most important to them.  Factors to consider for each method of birth control include:  In the U.S., the pill is the most common form of birth control. It is easy to use and generally regulates periods and reduces menstrual cramping. It is possible to get pregnant soon after stopping the pill.  However, a person must take the pill every day, and it can cause side effects, such as reduced sexual desire. Certain  antibiotics  and other medications can reduce the pill's effectiveness.  For those who find it difficult to remember to take the pill every day, a long-term contraceptive device may be more suitable. These devices include IUDs, implants, and injections. A doctor can provide more information and advice.  Alcohol does not reduce the effectiveness of birth control pills. However, the pills amplify the effects of alcohol. This can impair judgment and lead to more risky behavior.  If a person forgets to take the pill or vomits within 2 hours of taking it, they may have an increased likelihood of pregnancy.  When drinking, it is best to take extra precautions to avoid unintended pregnancy. These include drinking alcohol in moderation to avoid vomiting and carrying a backup form of birth control. Condoms are the only method that also protects against STIs.  It may help to set a daily reminder to take the pill or to switch to a more convenient form of contraception, such a vaginal ring or an IUD.    
 Abbey, A., Zawacki, T., Buck, P. O., Clinton, A. M., &amp; McAuslan, P. (n.d.). Alcohol and sexual assault.  Abbey, A., Zawacki, T., Buck, P. O., Clinton, A. M., &amp; McAuslan, P. (n.d.). Alcohol and sexual assault.  Alcohol. (n.d.).  Connor, J. L., Kydd, R. M., &amp; Dickson, N. P. (2015, August 12). Alcohol involvement in sexual behaviour and adverse sexual health outcomes from 26 to 38 years of age.  PLoS One ,  10 (8), e0135660.  Daniels, K., Daugherty, J., &amp; Jones, J. (2014, December). Current contraceptive status among women aged 15–44: United States, 2011–2013.  Does drinking alcohol effect how well my birth control works? (2015, June 22).  How effective is the birth control pill. (n.d.).  Key statistics from the national survey of family growth. (2018, March 1).  Men's guide to getting the timing right. (n.d.).  Udoff, L. C. (2012, April). Ten common misconceptions about fertility.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to know about birth control and alcohol."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322259.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, June 26). "What to know about birth control and alcohol."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  