 Pollen is vital to plant growth, but it can cause unpleasant symptoms for people with pollen allergies.  During growing seasons, pollen spreads through the air and fertilizes plants. When people with allergies breathe in this pollen, their body identifies it as a threat, which can trigger an allergic reaction.  In this article, learn about the symptoms of a pollen allergy, such as sneezing, itching, and watery eyes. We also look at some treatment options and home remedies that might bring relief.  Pollen allergy causes a person to experience several of the following symptoms:  Some people with  asthma  may also find a pollen allergy worsens their existing asthma symptoms, which can include wheezing and coughing.  When a person breathes in pollen, the pollen releases water-soluble proteins on the respiratory lining. These proteins are usually harmless, but sometimes a person's body mistakenly recognizes them as harmful substances.  The body reacts to this perceived threat by making and releasing substances known as IgE antibodies.  These IgE antibodies attach to mast cells in the body, which release histamine. Histamine is the main substance responsible for pollen allergy symptoms.  A variety of different pollen types exist, which is why one person's allergy symptoms may be bad when trees are flowering, and another person may have symptoms that worsen when grasses are growing.  People may be allergic to the following pollen types:  According to the  Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America , grasses are the most common pollen allergy.  If a person does not know which pollen they are allergic to, they can see a doctor that specializes in allergies. These specialists are called allergists and immunologists.  Allergists and immunologists can conduct testing to determine what types of pollen a person is sensitive to. This information is helpful because each plant type grows at different times of the year.  Knowing which pollen types a person is allergic to can help them decide when to start taking medications and the best times to avoid the outdoors.  Some people with a pollen allergy find they are also sensitive to certain food types.  For example, people who are allergic to birch tree pollen may also be allergic to raw apples or hazelnuts. This is because the pollen in birch trees is similar to the proteins present in these foods.  A person should talk to their allergist about how pollen allergies might impact what they eat.  Medical treatments, home remedies, and changes in some lifestyle habits can help ease symptoms of pollen allergy.  Treatments for pollen allergies include:  Most treatments only help manage allergy symptoms, but cannot cure them. Immunotherapy may be helpful for long-term allergy management but can take several years to complete.  There is a variety of home remedies and preventative steps that a person can take to reduce their allergy symptoms. Examples of these include:  Many home remedies for allergies are available, but research has not yet proven that they are effective.  One example of a home remedy is eating local or raw honey. Some natural food experts maintain that eating local honey can help reduce pollen allergies in the same way that allergy shots do.  However, the  American College of Allergy, Asthma, &amp; Immunology  have not found any research to confirm that consuming local honey will help reduce allergy symptoms.  Other home remedies that may help fight a pollen allergy include:  The above home remedies are not scientifically proven to be effective, but anecdotal evidence suggests they may help some people.  A pollen allergy is a common but irritating condition. A person may be allergic to certain types of pollen or multiple pollens.  An allergist can help them determine which pollens affect them most.  Medication and at-home treatments are available to reduce symptoms until the pollen season subsides.  The remedies listed in this article are available for purchase online.   Find out how harmless substances can cause the characteristic symptoms of hay fever, eczema, asthma, food allergy, and anaphylaxis.     Dust mites are microscopic parasites that feed on dead skin cells. They are also a common cause of allergic reactions through their waste and remains…    An allergic reaction can result in anaphylactic shock, which can be frightening and dangerous. However, treatments and precautions can ease the…    Hay fever or allergic rhinitis is an allergy that causes sneezing, watery eyes, and itching, often in response to pollen. Find tips here for…    Quinoa is often called a superfood because of its high protein content, and it is popular with vegetarians and vegans. After eating quinoa, people may…  