 Being bloated after a meal is a feeling that most people experience occasionally. It can cause the stomach to feel swollen and uncomfortable, which may be accompanied by  flatulence  or burping.  While bloating after eating is not unusual, there are several ways to avoid it. In this article, we look at 10 ways to prevent bloating.  Bloating occurs in the abdominal area. It happens when large amounts of air or gas build up in the gastrointestinal tract.  Eating is a common cause of bloating because when the body digests food, it produces gas. People also swallow air when eating or drinking, which then enters the gastrointestinal tract. Flatulence and burping usually help to relieve buildups of gas and air in the gut.  Bloating is a symptom of many health conditions, such as  irritable bowel syndrome  or a food intolerance. However, most cases of bloating are avoidable.  The following tips can help reduce or prevent bloating after eating:  Fiber is a  carbohydrate  found in plant-based foods that the body cannot digest. It has some important functions within the body, such as helping to regulate blood sugar levels and sugar consumption.  However, high-fiber foods can cause some people to produce excessive amounts of gas. One  study  found that a reduced-fiber diet helped relieve bloating in people with idiopathic  constipation .  Examples of high-fiber foods include:  Bloating is a typical symptom of a food intolerance or allergy. Intolerances and allergies can cause excessive gas production or gas to become trapped in the gastrointestinal tract. The foods most likely to cause this are wheat or gluten.  No reliable tests exist to identify a specific food intolerance or allergy, so the best way to identify them is through trial and error. It can help to keep a food diary to track which foods are causing symptoms, such as bloating.  Fat is an essential part of any healthful diet and is an important source of energy. The body digests fats slowly because they take longer than most other foods to pass through the digestive tract, and can delay emptying of the stomach. In some people, this can cause bloating to occur.  For people who experience this, avoiding foods that are high in fat might help to reduce bloating. For example, a  study  in people with stomach-emptying problems found that high-fat solid meals caused an increase in symptoms, including bloating.  Drinking or eating too quickly increases the amount of air a person swallows, which can lead to more gas building up in the gastrointestinal tract.  For people who eat or drink quickly, this may be a cause of bloating; slowing down the rate at which they eat might help to reduce the problem.  Carbonated drinks contain carbon dioxide, a gas that can build up in the gastrointestinal tract and cause bloating. This can also occur with diet versions of fizzy drinks.  Still water is the best alternative to carbonated drinks for lowering the risk of bloating.   Ginger  is a traditional remedy for digestive issues. It contains carminative, which is helpful for reducing excessive gas in the gastrointestinal tract.  A  2013 review  suggested that ginger has some health benefits, including alleviating gastrointestinal issues, such as bloating.  Chewing gum causes a person to swallow more air. This air can build up in the gastrointestinal tract and cause bloating in some people.  Light exercise after eating, such as going for a walk, may help reduce bloating for some people.  One  study  found that light physical exercise helps remove gas from the gastrointestinal tract and relieves bloating.  Talking while eating increases the opportunity of swallowing air. This can cause a build-up of air in the gastrointestinal tract, leading to bloating.   Heartburn  occurs when acid from the stomach travels back up the throat, which can cause an uncomfortable burning sensation. It is also a common cause of bloating.  Treating heartburn can be an effective way of reducing bloating for some people. A person can treat heartburn using over-the-counter medications such as antacids.  Bloating after eating is a widespread experience and usually not a cause for concern. People with bloating can often treat their symptoms at home, such as by using one of the methods highlighted in this article.  However, bloating can sometimes also be a symptom of an underlying health condition that may require medical attention.  Anyone with bloating accompanied by other symptoms should see a doctor. These symptoms might include:  People who are experiencing bloating after most meals should also speak to a doctor.    
 Food allergy. (n.d.).  Food allergy. (n.d.).  Gas in the digestive tract. (n.d.).  Haniadka, R., Saldanha, E., Sunita, V., Palatty, P. L., Fayad, R., &amp; Baliga, M. S. (2013, April 23). A review of the gastroprotective effects of ginger ( Zingiber officinale,/em&gt; Roscoe) [Abstract].  Food &amp; Function ,  4 , 845–855.  Ho, K.-S., Tan, C. Y. M., Daud, M. A. M., &amp; Seow-Choen, F. (2012, September 7). Stopping or reducing dietary fiber intake reduces constipation and its associated symptoms.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  18 (33), 4593–4596.  Homko, C. J., Duffy, F., Friedenberg, F. K., Boden, G., &amp; Parkman, H. P. (2015, January 19). Effect of dietary fat and food consistency on gastroparesis symptoms in patients with gastroparesis [Abstract].  Neurogastroenterology &amp; Motility ,  27 (4), 501–508.  Lacy, B. E., Gabbard, S. L., &amp; Crowell, M. D. (2011, November). Pathophysiology, evaluation, and treatment of bloating. Hope, hype, or hot air?  Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  7 (11), 729–739.  Villoria, A., Serra, J., Azpiroz, F., &amp; Malagelada, J.-R. (2006, November 1). Physical activity and intestinal gas clearance in patients with bloating [Abstract].  The American journal of gastroenterology ,  101 (11), 2552–2557.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "How to prevent bloating after a meal."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322200.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, June 21). "How to prevent bloating after a meal."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  