 The results provide information about the condition of a person's immune system and how it responds to diseases and other threats.  In this article, learn more about how doctors use the differential blood test and how they interpret its results.  A doctor will often order this test when trying to confirm a diagnosis.  They may be looking for signs of an acute illness, such as the  flu  or a  urinary tract infection (UTI) .  Or, they may be checking for a chronic condition, such as an autoimmune disorder or one that affects the  bone marrow .  The bone marrow is responsible for producing white blood cells, so changes in white blood cell counts can indicate how well the bone marrow is functioning.  A doctor may order a differential blood test if a person has symptoms, such as:  While a differential blood test can indicate problems with the white blood cells, it will not be the only test that doctors use to make a diagnosis.  To perform the test, a nurse or medical professional draws a blood sample from a vein in the arm or finger. When testing an infant, a doctor will draw blood from the heel.  There is no need to fast or make any special preparations for a differential blood test.  There are five types of white blood cell in the body:  Each type of white blood cell plays an essential role in the immune system.  When a person receives their differential blood test results, they should also get a reference range of normal values from the laboratory.  Looking at this reference range can help a person to tell if their white blood cell levels are low, normal, or high.  Overall, a higher-than-average white blood cell count may indicate the presence of an infection.  Some labs give a percentage of the cells that are present. While different labs have different ranges, the following is an example of a  normal range :  Other labs may give the number of each type of white blood cell present. Labs usually express these figures in the thousands.  Normal values for neutrophils are typically between 2,500 and 6,000 cells. A person with a very low neutrophil count will have fewer than 1,000 of these cells. Doctors call this neutropenia.  Normal levels also depend on gender, age, and pregnancy. For this reason, it is important to examine laboratory results carefully when determining if levels are high or low.  While the results of a differential blood test give information about all five types of white blood cell, a doctor is usually focusing on just one or two types.  Depending on the type of cell, high or low levels can indicate different issues, such as:   Basophils    Eosinophils    Lymphocytes    Monocytes    Neutrophils   A differential blood test is one of many lab tests that a doctor can use to confirm a diagnosis of an infection or illness.  Values can vary from lab to lab, and a person should carefully review their results with the doctor.    
 Riley, L. K., &amp; Rupert, J. (2015, December 1). Evaluation of patients with leukocytosis.  American Family Physician ,  92 (11), 1,004–1,011.  Riley, L. K., &amp; Rupert, J. (2015, December 1). Evaluation of patients with leukocytosis.  American Family Physician ,  92 (11), 1,004–1,011.  Understanding your lab test results. (2016, April 22).  White blood cell (WBC) differential. (2018, June 27).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What is a differential blood test?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322289.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, June 27). "What is a differential blood test?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  