 In Brighton, United Kingdom — home to  Medical News Today 's editorial office — and in other seaside towns and cities across the country, seagulls are a divisive breed.  They steal food from unsuspecting victims, they rummage through trash bags, and, worst of all, it's not uncommon to have one poop on your head.  But, despite their uncouth mannerisms, there is a certain charm about them, and summer at the seaside simply wouldn't be the same without their piercing calls.  Unsurprisingly, not everyone in the  MNT  office agrees, with one editor stating that the one thing she hates about summer in the U.K. is the "increased risk of getting pooped on by seagulls."  But what things do the  MNT  editorial team  enjoy  about British summertime? Light evenings, beer gardens, and Pimm's made the list, as did beach days, and, if we're lucky, sunny weather.  As we greet summer with open arms, the  MNT  team has health at the forefront of its mind. A "run club" has started up in the office, and we'll soon be adding meditation to our already popular lunchtime  yoga  sessions.  However, it seems that you, our wonderful readers, are looking to make some dietary changes for the summer. Our article on  how cheese affects cholesterol levels  proved popular, and you also wanted to learn  how fasting for a day impacts the body .   Cholesterol  was popular within our news content, too; our report on a study that highlighted  four foods that can lower cholesterol  caught your eye, and our story on  how a high-salt diet might destroy "good" gut bacteria  piqued your interest.  You were also interested to know  how harmful eating habits and diabetes might be triggered by poor sleep , and our informative piece on  low blood sugar in the mornings  was widely read.  Is there a topic you'd like us to investigate? Please  get in touch , and we'll get on the case. You can also catch us on  Facebook  and  Twitter .  I'll be back next month with further updates on what's been happening in the  MNT  editorial office (seagull incidents and all), and I'll take a look at the articles that have whet your scientific curiosity.   Until then, have a happy and healthful July!    Honor Whiteman , Managing Editor  