 Most blood disorders decrease the number of cells, proteins, platelets, or nutrients in the blood, or interfere with their function. A majority of blood disorders are caused by mutations in parts of specific genes and can be passed down in families.  Some medical conditions, medications, and lifestyle factors can also cause blood disorders to develop.  A blood disorder is any condition that impacts one or more parts of the blood, usually interfering with its ability to work correctly.  Many blood disorders take their name from the component of the blood they impact.  The following categories describe blood disorders that cause a decrease in blood components or affect their function:  Categories of blood disorders that increase blood components are:  White blood cells help the body to fight infection. They begin life in the  bone marrow  and develop into different types of cells, each having a different immune purpose.  The major types are:  Some white blood cell disorders impact all the different types of white blood cells in the blood, while other disorders only involve one or two specific types. Of the five types of white blood cells, neutrophils and lymphocytes get impacted the most.  Most white blood cell disorders are either a type of  cancer  or proliferative disorders.  Proliferative disorders involve a rapid increase in the number of white blood cells that are circulating in the blood. This mostly occurs because of an infection, although, occasionally, bone marrow cancers may be responsible.  Leukopenia, however, is due to a reduction in the amount of circulating white blood cells. Leukopenia usually occurs because of:  There are three major types of blood cancer that impact white blood cells, and they include the following:   Lymphoma  is a type of cancer that occurs when lymphocytes change and multiply rapidly. There are two major types of lymphoma: Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin lymphoma.  According to the  American Cancer Society , Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is one of the more common types of cancer in the United States, accounting for 4 percent of all cancers. An estimated 74,680 diagnoses will take place in the U.S. in 2018. 70 percent of people diagnosed with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma live at least 5 years after being diagnosed.  Hodgkin's lymphoma is far rarer than non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Again, according to the American Cancer Society, around 8,500 people in the U.S. had the condition in 2018. Of those people diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma, 86 percent will live at least 5 years.  Leukemias involve the build-up of abnormal white blood cells in the bone marrow, which interferes with its ability to produce red blood cells and platelets. Leukemias can be acute and develop quickly, or chronic and develop more gradually over time.   The Leukemia &amp; Lymphoma Society  estimate that 60,300 people will receive a  leukemia  diagnosis in 2018. Between 2007 and 2017, an estimated 63.7 percent of Americans diagnosed with leukemia lived for at least 5 years after being diagnosed.   Myelomas  involve the build-up of plasma cells in the bone marrow, which interferes with the development and function of other blood cells. The most common type of myeloma is  multiple myeloma , where abnormal plasma cells build-up or form a  tumor  in numerous locations in the bone or marrow.  From 2008-2014, around 50.7 percent of people with myeloma lived for at least 5 years after being diagnosed, according to the  National Cancer Institute . Overall, myelomas are quite rare. In 2018, myelomas represented only 1.8 percent of all newly-diagnosed cancer cases.  A doctor usually diagnoses leukemias, lymphomas, and myelomas using:  Blood cell cancers that do not yet cause symptoms may not require treatment aside from monitoring. Doctors usually treat people with aggressive or active blood cancers using some mix of:  Anemias, where there are not enough red blood cells or the cells do not work correctly, are among the most common blood disorders. According to the American Society of Hematology, anemia affects more than  3 million  Americans.  The most common types are:  If the cause of anemia is not apparent, such as injury or infection, or to assess anemia, a doctor will:  Treatment depends on the cause but commonly includes:  Common platelet disorders include:   Hemophilia  is a genetic condition caused by a lack of or defective clotting factors in a person's blood. People with hemophilia bleed longer or more excessively, both externally and internally than people without the condition.  Hemophilia is often passed down from parents to their children, but the  National Hemophilia Foundation  estimate that approximately one-third of cases develop spontaneously. Hemophilia is one of the better-known blood conditions, but it is still quite rare, developing in an estimated 1 in 5,000 live births.  This disease occurs when the body lacks the von Willebrand factor (VWF), a substance that allows platelets to stick together and form clots. Most cases of von Willebrand are relatively mild, and people may only require treatment if they are injured or undergo surgery.  While many platelet disorders involve a reduction in the number of platelets present in the blood or their function, several conditions can cause an excess of platelets.  To diagnose and assess platelet conditions, most doctors will carry out:  Treating blood clotting disorders typically involves replacement therapy, where the doctor gives a person infusions containing the specific clotting factors they are lacking.  Additional therapies include:  Additional treatment options include:  Symptoms depend on what part of the blood or organs is affected, as well as the severity and extent of the condition.  However, the majority of people with significant blood disorders tend to experience a general feeling of being unwell for no apparent reason.  Signs of white blood cell disorders include:  Signs of red blood cell disorders include:  Signs of platelet and clotting disorders include:  Many blood disorders can affect different components of the blood, including the white blood cells, red blood cells, and plasma.  Symptoms vary according to the type of blood disorder a person has, but most include general feelings of being unwell with no apparent cause, unexplained exhaustion, and unexplained weight loss.  Treatments vary depending on the type and severity of the condition but will often include chemotherapy or radiation therapy.    
		Anemia. (n.d.).  Braunstein, E. M. (2017, February). Evaluation of anemia.  Cancer stat facts: Myeloma. (n.d.).  Facts and statistics. (n.d.).  Hemophilia. (n.d.).  Hemophilia A. (n.d.).  Key statistics for Hodgkin lymphoma. (2018, May 1).  Key statistics for non-Hodgkin lymphoma. (2018, January 4).  Survival rates and factors that affect prognosis (outlook) for non-Hodgkin lymphoma. (2016, May 31).  Targeted therapy for acute myeloid leukemia. (2017, November 21).  Thrombocytopenia. (n.d.).  Von Willebrand disease. (n.d.).  White blood cell disorders. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What types of blood disorders are there?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322260.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, June 26). "What types of blood disorders are there?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  