 Evekeo is a trade name for this formulation of amphetamine sulfate. There is no generic name, because the formulation of amphetamine is not currently available as a generic drug.  It is a Schedule II controlled substance because it has the potential for abuse and dependency. Incorrect use can also lead to sudden death or serious heart problems. These  include  increased  blood pressure  and heart rate,  stroke , and  heart attack .  For these reasons, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requires the drug to carry a boxed warning.  The active ingredient in Evekeo is amphetamine sulfate. It is a  white, crystalline substance  and a sympathomimetic amino of the amphetamine group. It is a stimulant drug.  It is a prescription drug and a controlled substance. It acts as a  central nervous system  (CNS) stimulant.  It has been found to help people with narcolepsy, ADHD, and excess weight, but exactly how this happens is unclear.  It is available as an oral tablet. The oral tablet is only available under the brand-name drug Evekeo.  Evekeo is used for the following conditions:   Narcolepsy : It keeps people awake.   ADHD : It increases attention and reduces impulsiveness.   Overweight and obesity : It can help achieve short-term weight loss.  A number of side effects can occur when using Evekeo.  These  include :  Some more serious side effects can develop.  If the person who is using Evekeo experiences any of the following, they should call their doctor right away.  However, if the symptoms may be life-threatening, or if there appears to be a medical emergency, call 9-1-1.  These can result in sudden death. They include stroke, heart attack, and increased blood pressure.  Cardiovascular problems may cause the following symptoms:  They may also cause these serious symptoms, which signal a medical emergency and require urgent help:  Call 9-1-1 if any of these occur.  These may include:  If a person is in danger of harm, or if their life might be at risk, it is important to seek help at once.  Sometimes, new psychotic symptoms may appear in children and teenagers with psychiatric problems.  These include:  Mild side effects may go away within a few days or a couple of weeks. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist if they are more severe or do not go away.  Other risks include:  Evekeo does not cause drowsiness, but it can affect judgment. For this reason, extra care should be taken when driving, using heavy machinery, and similar tasks.  Before using Evekeo, it is important to discuss any other existing medications and supplements with the doctor.  This is because Evekeo can interact with other medications, herbs, or  vitamins . An interaction may involve an increase or a decrease in the action of one or more drugs, or a different and unexpected effect.  The use of antacids, such as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) and H2 receptor antagonists, may lead to higher levels of Evekeo in the blood. This can increase the impact of any side effects.  Proton pump inhibitors:  H2 receptor antagonists:  Combining Evekeo with tricyclic  antidepressants  (TCAs) may increase blood pressure and the risk of heart problems.  These include:  These medications can prevent the body from processing Evekeo correctly, leading to high levels of Evekeo in the blood.  This may increase the risk of extremely  high blood pressure , chest pain, severe headache, and high body temperature.  Evekeo should never be taken within 14 days of using MAOI antidepressants.  Examples of MAOIs are:  In addition to the interactions mentioned above for TCAs and MAOIs, taking serotonergic drugs to treat  depression  alongside Evekeo may increase the risk of  serotonin  syndrome. This can be fatal.  Drugs that can have this effect include:  If a person needs Evekeo while they are taking any of these drugs, the doctor will start them on a lowered dosage of Evekeo and monitor for any signs and symptoms of serotonin syndrome.  Symptoms of serotonin syndrome can include agitation, sweating, muscle twitches, and confusion.  These medications may lower the effects of amphetamine, and this can reduce its effectiveness.  Examples are:  Evekeo may reduce the blood pressure-lowering effects of these medications.  Examples are:  These include:  Evekeo may lower the effect of seizure medications, increasing the risk of seizures.  Some other groups  are advised  not to use Evekeo.  These include those with:  Evekeo is a category C pregnancy drug.  This means that:  1. Animal studies have suggested that if the mother takes this drug, it may have a negative impact on the unborn child.  2. Too few studies have been done in humans to confirm the drug's impact on the unborn child.  When infants are born to mothers who are dependent on amphetamine during pregnancy, there appears to be a higher risk of preterm delivery, a low birth weight, or symptoms of withdrawal.  Anyone who is pregnant or planning to become pregnant should discuss this with their health provider before using Evekeo or if they are already using this drug.  Evekeo should be used during pregnancy only if the possible benefits outweigh the potential risk to the fetus.  During breast-feeding, Evekeo may pass into breast milk, causing side effects in a nursing child.  The doctor should be informed if a mother is breastfeeding before prescribing this drug.  It may be necessary to decide whether to stop nursing or to stop this drug. You should not breastfeed while taking this drug.  This drug is approved for use in children 3 years of age and older with ADHD, and children 12 years of age and older with obesity.  This drug can cause an allergic reaction in some people.  Symptoms may include:  Anyone who has ever had an allergic reaction to this or another stimulant medication should not use it. Taking it again could be fatal.  This drug may be taken short-term or long-term, depending on the condition being treated.  The dose, form, and how often Evekeo should be taken will depend on:  In each case, the doctor will adjust the dose according to how the person responds.    Narcolepsy : The  usual dose  is 5 to 60 milligrams (mg) a day, in divided doses, depending on the individual.  Rarely, narcolepsy affects children under the age of 12 years. The dose would be as follows:   ADHD : In children aged 3 to 6 years, the dose starts at 2.5 mg. The dose for children aged 6 years and older will start at 5 mg once or twice a day. If the dose is given twice per day, allow 4 to 6 hours between doses.    Obesity : The usual dose is up to 30 mg a day, taken in divided doses 30 to 60 minutes before meals. Children aged under 12 years will not use this drug for obesity.  The dose will depend on how each person reacts to the medication. It is essential to follow a doctor's instructions when using this medication.  There may be serious risks if a person does not take this drug as prescribed by the doctor.  Missing a dose can result in a noticeable worsening of symptoms. If a person misses a dose, they should take it as soon as possible or wait for the next dose. Taking a double dose could have serious adverse effects.  Taking too much can lead to serious and life-threatening complications.  Less severe symptoms include:  More severe problems include:  These adverse effects can be severe. It is essential to seek emergency medical attention if anyone takes too much of this drug.  Here are some other points about Evekeo.  A person with narcolepsy may be able to tell if this drug is working if there is an improvement in sleep disturbances.  For ADHD, there may be improvements in mental and behavioral effects, such as increased attention and decreased impulsiveness and hyperactivity.  For obesity, a decrease in appetite may indicate that the drug is working.  When traveling with this medication, it is important to remember to:  Patients should attend all follow-up appointments when using this drug, because the doctor may need to monitor heart rate and blood pressure to ensure no problems are occurring.  In the case of children, they may check their weight and height, as the medication can sometimes affect a child's growth.  If you need this medication but are concerned about the side effects, speak to your doctor. They may be able to offer an alternative.    
 Evekeo is another approach to ADHD therapy. (n.d.).  Evekeo is another approach to ADHD therapy. (n.d.).  Evekeo: Amphetamine sulfate tablet. (2016, September).  Label: Evekeo – Amphetamine sulfate tablet. (2016, October 7).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  University of Illinois-Chicago, Drug Information G. "What is Evekeo?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322209.php&gt;    APA  University of Illinois-Chicago, Drug Information G. (2018, June 20). "What is Evekeo?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  