 In this article, we explore the reasons that newborns grunt. We also discuss accompanying symptoms, home remedies, and when to see a doctor.  When newborns grunt, it can sound like they are in pain, but this is not usually true. Most often, it means that they are learning how to pass stool.  In other cases, the grunting can point to an underlying problem, and it is important to be aware of any other symptoms. The presence of these can help to determine whether the grunting is a cause for concern.  Newborns tend to grunt as they get used to having bowel movements. Doctors sometimes refer to this as grunting baby syndrome.  To pass stool, an adult often relaxes their pelvic floor and uses the stomach muscles to apply pressure which helps to move the stool through the gut.  At first, a newborn's stomach muscles are not strong enough to do this, so they use the diaphragm muscle to move their bowel. As they exercise the diaphragm, it can put pressure on the voice box, resulting in grunting.  Other causes of newborn grunting include:  When a newborn grunts because they are passing stool, they may also:  Grunting baby syndrome is not the same as  constipation . A newborn who grunts usually passes soft stools.  Symptoms of constipation in a newborn can include:  The following strategies can help:  A number of home remedies can help with newborn grunting. Depending on the cause, they include:  When a newborn is learning to pass stools, grunting is usually normal and does not require treatment.  The grunting often stops when the newborn learns to relax their pelvic floor and the stomach muscles strengthen. This usually happens at a few months of age.  If the baby seems to have trouble passing stool, rubbing petroleum jelly on their anus can help. However, doing so too often can prevent the baby from learning to pass stool on their own.  Irregular breathing patterns are not usually a cause for concern, unless the newborn shows signs of breathing difficulties.  A baby monitor can help a caregiver to check for indications of abnormal breathing when the newborn is asleep. Some people also use movement monitors, which sound an alarm if the baby stops moving for longer than usual.  A nasal aspirator can help, if a newborn is grunting because mucus is trapped in their airways.  The following home remedies can help to address GER in newborns:  If these home remedies do not help, the newborn may have a condition called gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ).  Doctors tend to  test for GERD  if the newborn's digestive symptoms show no improvement, if they are not gaining weight, or if they have symptoms that can indicate lung problems. Some of these symptoms are listed below.  Grunting may indicate a problem if the newborn:  These symptoms can indicate difficulty breathing. If the newborn has any of these symptoms, seek urgent medical attention.  The doctor will most likely use an X-ray when making a diagnosis. In 2016, researchers reported that chest radiography is  essential  in determining the cause of respiratory distress in newborns.  Below, we describe other severe issues that can cause newborns to grunt. If a newborn has any of the following symptoms, seek medical attention right away. They may require emergency treatment.  In addition to grunting, symptoms of  meningitis  in a newborn can include:   Sepsis  is commonly described as blood poisoning. In addition to grunting, symptoms in a newborn can include:  In addition to grunting, symptoms of  heart failure  in a newborn can include:  Newborns tend to grunt when they are developing the muscle strength needed to pass stool.  The grunting is usually not a cause for concern. However, if it accompanies certain symptoms, the grunting can indicate an underlying condition.  If a newborn is grunting and has any of the more severe symptoms listed above, seek urgent medical care.    
 Diagnosis of GER &amp; GERD in infants. (2015, April).  Diagnosis of GER &amp; GERD in infants. (2015, April).  Di Lorenzo, C. (2013, December). Other functional gastrointestinal disorders in infants and young children.  Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition ,  57 , 36–38.  Gallacher, D. J., Hart, K., &amp; Kotecha, S. (2016, March). Common respiratory conditions of the newborn.  Breathe ,  12 (1), 30–42.  Oatmeal: The safer alternative for infants &amp; children who need thicker food. (2016, April 18).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Why do newborn babies grunt?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322249.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, June 25). "Why do newborn babies grunt?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  