 A  hangover  is what some people experience the morning after an evening of heavy drinking. Symptoms typically include a  headache ,  dehydration ,  tiredness , and nausea and vomiting.  The severity of a person's hangover can depend on many factors, such as how much and what type of alcohol they drank, how much sleep they got, and whether they had any food or water.  Here, we look at nine ways to prevent or reduce the severity of a hangover.  The best way to avoid a hangover is to drink alcohol in moderation or not at all. The more alcohol someone drinks, the more likely they are to have a severe hangover the next day.  How much is safe for an individual to drink will vary from person to person and depends on many factors, such as how much food they have eaten, how much water they have drunk, and how much sleep they have had.  However, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the 2015–2020  U.S. Dietary Guidelines for Americans   recommend  that only adults of legal age should drink alcohol and they should only consume it in moderate amounts, consisting of:  These guidelines consider a single drink to be  Alcohol is a  diuretic , which means it increases a person's need to urinate and can cause some people to be at a higher risk of becoming dehydrated.  Drinking plenty of water alongside alcoholic beverages can help a person stay hydrated and reduce the symptoms of dehydration, such as thirst, fatigue, and headache.  Drinking a lot of alcohol and going to bed early do not necessarily go hand in hand. However, getting plenty of sleep can help reduce the effects of a hangover the following day.  Alcohol can have a negative impact on both the  quality and duration  of sleep. By getting a good night's sleep, a person can help their body to recover from the night before, so try lying in or going to bed early the next day.  Certain alcoholic beverages contain chemicals known as congeners. These chemicals are impurities and can contribute towards hangover symptoms.  Drinks high in congeners include:  Drinks with low levels of congeners include:  In one  study , the researchers found that congeners affected the severity of hangovers, with people feeling worse after drinking bourbon than with vodka.  Some experts think that some of the symptoms a person experiences when they have a hangover result from low-grade  inflammation . Therefore, some people might benefit from taking supplements of herbs that have anti-inflammatory properties, such as  red ginseng  and  prickly pear  cactus.  People who pace themselves when they are drinking alcohol and drink slowly are less likely to experience severe hangover symptoms the following day.  The average person can process  one standard drink every hour . Drinking slowly also means that a person may drink less overall.  It is crucial for a person to  measure  their drinks and be aware of how much they are drinking. When drinking at home, some people may pour themselves more substantial measures or be less aware of the volumes they are using. This can make it more difficult for an individual to keep track of their alcohol consumption.  It is important for a person to eat a good meal before drinking.  Eating  before or at the time  of drinking can slow down the absorption of alcohol into the bloodstream.  Food can help keep a person's blood alcohol concentration lower and may reduce the effects of a hangover.  Having low blood sugar levels may make a hangover worse. Eating a  good breakfast  can help to maintain blood sugar levels as well as provide the body with the right combination of  vitamins  and minerals to function better.  Drinking in moderation or not at all is the best way to avoid a hangover. However, it is essential to remember that excessive drinking, and even moderate drinking, can have an adverse impact on a person's  short-term or long-term  health.  People who drink more than the recommended amount of alcohol are putting themselves at increased risk of:  The risk of developing these conditions increases over time with the amount of alcohol a person drinks.    
 Alcohol use and your health [Fact sheet]. (2018, January 3). Drink smart. (n.d.).  Alcohol use and your health [Fact sheet]. (2018, January 3). Drink smart. (n.d.).  El-Mostafa, K., El Kharrassi, Y., Badreddine, A., Andreoletti, P., Vamecq, J., El Kabbej, M. S., … Cherkaoui-Malki, M. (2014, September 17). Nopal cactus (Opuntia ficus-indica) as a source of bioactive compounds for nutrition, health and disease.  Molecules ,  19 (9), 14879–14901.  Hangover cures. (n.d.).  How alcohol affects your body. (n.d.).  Lee, M. H., Kwak, J. H., Jeon, G., Lee, J. W., Seo, J. H., Lee, H. S., &amp; Lee, J. H. (2014, March). Red ginseng relieves the effects of alcohol consumption and hangover symptoms in healthy men: A randomized crossover study [abstract].  Food &amp; Function ,  5 (3), 528-534.  Moderate drinking [Fact sheet]. (2016, October 18).  Polhuis, K. C. M. M., Wijnen, A. H. C., Sierksma, W. C., Tieland, M. (July 2017). The diuretic action of weak and strong alcoholic beverages in elderly men: a randomized diet-controlled crossover trial.  Nutrients ,  9 (7), 660.  Rohsenow, J., &amp; Howland, J. (2010, June 2). The role of beverage congeners in hangover and other residual effects of alcohol intoxication: A review [Abstract].  Current Drug Abuse Reviews ,  3 (2), 76–79.  Rohsenow, D. J., Howland, J., Arnedt, J. T., Almeida, A. B., Greece, J., Minsky, S., … Sales, S. (2010, March 2). Intoxication with bourbon versus vodka: Effects on hangover, sleep, and next‐day neurocognitive performance in young adults.  Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research ,  34 (3), 509–518.  Wang, H. J., Zakhari, S., &amp; Jung, M. K. (2010, March). Alcohol, inflammation, and gut-liver-brain interactions in tissue damage and disease development (Abstract).  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  16 (11), 1304–13.  Why we get hangovers. (2017, June 4).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Is it possible to prevent a hangover?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322254.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, June 25). "Is it possible to prevent a hangover?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  