 Eating well also  prevents  pregnancy complications, including preterm birth,  high blood pressure , and  preeclampsia .  During pregnancy, women should ensure they are getting enough  vitamins , minerals, proteins, fats, and  carbohydrates  to encourage healthy growth. However, the body needs slightly more  calories  during the second trimester.  In this article, we list the most important foods to eat during the second trimester and discuss how much weight a woman might gain.  During the second trimester, people should continue eating a balanced diet. The following nutrients are the most important for someone who is pregnant:  Iron helps to carry oxygen around the body. During pregnancy, iron supplies oxygen to the developing baby.  If a diet is lacking in iron, it could cause  anemia , which increases the risk of complications, such as premature birth and  postpartum depression .  The recommended daily iron intake during pregnancy is  27 milligrams (mg) .  Sources of iron include:  The body absorbs iron from animal products more efficiently than iron from plant-based sources.  So, people who do not eat meat can boost absorption rates by eating foods that contain vitamin C at the same time.  Sources of vitamin C include oranges, orange juice, strawberries, and tomatoes.  People should try to avoid eating iron-containing foods and calcium-rich foods or supplements at the same time.  Calcium  reduces iron absorption.  When pregnant, people should aim to eat  75 to 100 grams (g)  of protein each day to help the baby's brain, and other tissue, grow. Protein is also necessary for the growth of the mother's uterus and breasts.  Good sources of protein include:  The  recommended dietary allowance  for calcium during pregnancy is 1,000 mg. Anyone who is less than 18 years old, who is pregnant, should aim to consume 1,300 mg of calcium daily.  Calcium helps the baby's bones and teeth form, and it plays a role in the smooth running of the muscles, nerves, and circulatory system.  Calcium-rich foods include:   Folate  is a B vitamin. The synthetic form of folate is called  folic acid .  Folate is essential during pregnancy as it helps prevent neural tube defects, including spina bifida, and reduces the risk of premature labor.  An  analysis  of 18 studies also suggests that folic acid significantly decreases the risk of  congenital heart defects . However, more research is still needed.  During and before pregnancy, women should consume  400 to 800 micrograms (mcg)  of folate or folic acid daily. The best sources include:  It is a good idea to take a folic acid supplement or prenatal vitamin before and throughout pregnancy, as there is no guarantee that a person can get enough folate from food sources to meet the daily requirements.   Vitamin D  helps build a developing baby's bones and teeth. The recommended intake during pregnancy is  15 mcg  a day.  The body can make vitamin D from the sun, which allows many people to meet some of their needs. However, estimates suggest that more than  40 percent  of the adult population in the United States have vitamin D deficiency due to lack of sun exposure and other factors.  Vitamin D is not present in lots of natural foods, but fortified foods, such as cereal and milk, contain vitamin D.  Food sources of vitamin D include:  Vitamin D supplements are also available and can be important for people who do not live in a sunny climate.  Both mother and baby can benefit from  omega-3  fats in the diet. These essential fatty acids support the heart, brain, eyes, immune system, and  central nervous system . Omega-3  may prevent  early delivery, lower the risk of developing preeclampsia, and decrease the likelihood of postpartum depression.  An adequate daily intake of omega-3 fats during pregnancy is  1.4 g.  Omega-3 fatty acids are present in:  Seeds contain a form of omega-3 that the body needs to convert before it can use it. How well the body can do this varies from person to person.  Vegans and vegetarians may need to take an algae-based supplement to meet their omega-3 requirements during pregnancy.  Pregnant people need more water than those who are not pregnant to stay hydrated. Water helps form the placenta and the amniotic sac.  Dehydration  during pregnancy can contribute to complications, such as neural tube defects and reduced breast milk production.  Anyone who is pregnant should drink at least  8 to 12 glasses  of water a day to prevent dehydration and its complications.  A person should avoid the following foods throughout their pregnancy:  A person should avoid alcohol throughout pregnancy, as there is  no known safe level . All types of alcohol can be harmful and may cause:  FASDs are conditions that cause physical, behavioral, and intellectual disabilities.  Pregnant women can consume caffeine in limited amounts. Experts state that it is safe to consume 150 to 300 mg per day, although the  American Pregnancy Association  suggest that pregnant people avoid caffeine as much as possible.  An 8-ounce cup of  coffee  contains between 95 to 165 mg of caffeine, and a 6-oz serving of black tea contains approximately 45 mg. Cola drinks, chocolate,  green tea , and some medications also contain caffeine.  It is perfectly natural and healthy to gain weight during pregnancy. A person's weight increases due to a higher blood volume in the body, the presence of  amniotic fluid , and the baby's weight.  The body  needs 300 extra calories  each day during the second and third trimesters to manage this weight gain.  The Institute of Medicine recommend the following weight gain:  Those who were an average weight at the beginning of their pregnancy will typically gain  1 to 2 pounds  per week in the second trimester. Gaining more weight than recommended  increases the risk  of complications, such as high blood pressure, a larger baby, and cesarean delivery.  The basic principles of healthful eating are similar whether a person is pregnant or not. But during pregnancy, it is vital to focus on some essential nutrients, including iron, protein, calcium, folate, and omega-3 fats.  Weight gain during pregnancy, especially the second and third trimesters, is typical and healthy. To avoid gaining more weight than recommended, people should not eat more than 300 extra calories per day.    
 Caffeine intake during pregnancy. (2017, December 12).  Caffeine intake during pregnancy. (2017, December 12).  Calcium. (2017, March 2).  Danielewicz, H., Myszczyszyn, G., Dębińska, A., Myszkal, A., Boznański, A., &amp; Hirnle, L. (2017, November 3). Diet in pregnancy — more than food.  European Journal of Pediatrics ,  176 (12), 1573–1579.  Dehydration during pregnancy. (n.d.).  Do obesity &amp; overweight affect pregnancy? (2016, December 1).  Eating for two when over or under weight. (2015, July).  Feng, Y., Wang, S., Chen, R., Tong, X., Wu, Z., &amp; Mo, X. (2015, July 24). Maternal folic acid supplementation and the risk of congenital heart defects in offspring: A meta-analysis of epidemiological observational studies.  Scientific Reports ,  5 , 8506.  Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs). (2018, March 27).  Folic acid. (2018, April 25).  Forrest, K. Y., &amp; Stuhldreher, W. L. (2011, January). Prevalence and correlates of vitamin D deficiency in US adults [Abstract].  Nutrition Research ,  31 (1), 48–54.  Health tips for pregnant women. (2013, June).  Iron. (2018, March 2).  Lane, D. J. R., &amp; Richardson, D. R. (2014, October). The active role of vitamin C in mammalian iron metabolism: Much more than just enhanced iron absorption [Abstract]!  Free Radical Biology and Medicine ,  75 , 69–83.  NICHD research weighs in on weight gain during pregnancy. (2013, August 28).  Omega-3 fatty acids [Fact sheet]. (2018, June 6).  Omega-3 fish oil and pregnancy. (2016, September 2).  Pregnancy nutrition. (2017, May 10).  Vitamin D [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to eat in your second trimester."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322285.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, June 27). "What to eat in your second trimester."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  