 As with all drugs, it may have some adverse effects.  Balsalazide is a prescription drug available as a capsule and film-coated tablet. Both forms are taken by mouth.  These capsules are available under the brand-name drug Colazal. They are also available as a generic drug. In tablet form, these pills are available under the brand-name drug Giazo and as a generic drug. Giazo tablets are only approved for use in males older than 18 years.  Balsalazide belongs to a class of drugs called aminosalicylates.  It is used to treat active, mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis. This is a chronic disease that causes  inflammation  and sores in the colon, or large intestine.  With ulcerative colitis, the body makes more compounds called arachidonic acid metabolites, which are thought to cause the inflammation and sores  Balsalazide appears to decrease these symptoms by stopping production of such compounds in the colon.  Common side effects of taking balsalazide capsules include:  In tablet form, these can cause  anemia , diarrhea,  urinary tract infections , and throat pain.  Balsalazide can also trigger a flare-up of ulcerative colitis at the beginning of treatment. Contact a doctor if these symptoms arise.  The medication can also cause salicylate toxicity, which can be extremely serious if not quickly addressed. The signs of this include:  Balsalazide should be used cautiously or avoided with some other medications. It might increase the side effects of certain drugs, such as:  Be sure to tell your doctor about all the medications you are taking.  Balsalazide may not be safe for people with the following conditions:  Women who are pregnant and breast-feeding should also notify their doctor if balsalazide is required. It is likely that older adults will receive regular blood cell counts during this treatment.  Balsalazide tablets are not approved for children under the age of 18 years. In capsule form, it is approved for children between the ages of 5 and 17 years to take the drug up to a maximum of 8 weeks.  The typical dose of balsalazide is three 750-milligram (mg) capsules taken three times a day for between 8 and 12 weeks. Alternative dosing for tablets is three 1.1 g tablets twice a day for up to 8 weeks. Never take this medication for longer than 12 weeks.  Children aged between 5 and 17 years can take between one and three pills with every dose, although the course should not extend beyond 8 weeks. Doctors may start older adults on a lower dose, as kidney function is often compromised with age.  People on low-sodium diets may wish to speak to their doctor before taking balsalazide. The capsules and pills have a high sodium content and could affect intake.  Different brands may offer pills of different sizes and have different recommended doses. Giazo, for example, is a 1.1 gram (g) dose taken twice daily with or without food.  Always check the packaging for instructions.  Talk to your doctor before suddenly stopping this medication. Stopping the medication might worsen your condition and symptoms.  Here are several extra considerations to bear in mind when transporting, acquiring, or storing acitretin:  For those who have trouble swallowing, balsalazide capsules may be opened, sprinkled on applesauce, and then swallowed immediately.   Article last updated by Adam Felman on Wed 27 June 2018.  Visit our  Pharmacy / Pharmacist  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Pharmacy / Pharmacist.   
 BALSALAZIDE DISODIUM- balsalazide disodium capsule. (2017, November 17).  BALSALAZIDE DISODIUM- balsalazide disodium capsule. (2017, November 17).  Balsalazide drug interactions. (2018, June 5).  Giazo - balsalazide disodium tablet, film coated. (2016, June 22).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Felman, Adam. "What's to know about balsalazide?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322276.php&gt;    APA  Felman, A. (2018, June 27). "What's to know about balsalazide?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  