 This article looks at when  antibiotics  might be needed to treat an ear infection in a baby, and how to treat the symptoms at home while the baby's natural defenses fight the infection.  Treatment for an ear infection in a baby will depend on the type and severity. Doctors may prescribe antibiotic ear drops for some infections, such as acute  otitis externa  (AOE), but in many cases, the baby's immune system will fight the infection on its own. Other infections, such as  otitis media  with effusion (OME), will usually clear up on their own without any antibiotics.  As OME and mild AOE do not usually require treatment, doctors tend to recommend a period of "watchful waiting" before prescribing antibiotics. This is because antibiotics can cause side effects.  According to the  American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) , antibiotics cause  diarrhea  and vomiting in around 15 percent of children. Up to 5 percent may also have an allergic reaction, which can be serious or life-threatening in some children.  Within the first 24 hours, around  60 percent  of children feel better. That figure rises to between 80 and 90 percent of children within a few days.  If there is no improvement or the infection gets worse during this time, a doctor may prescribe antibiotics.  Doctors usually advise caregivers to watch their child for 2 to 3 days to give the baby's immune system the chance to fight off the infection without the need for antibiotics.  During this time, doctors will probably recommend that caregivers treat the symptoms of the infection at home. Remedies may include:  Ear infections, which can affect the ear canal or the middle ear, are common in babies. According to a study in  Pediatrics ,  23 percent  of babies in the United States will experience at least one ear infection by the time they are 12 months old. That figure rises to more than half by the age of 3 years.  Ear infections tend to start either with an unhealthful bacterial growth or a viral infection, such as a common cold.  There most common types of ear infections in babies are:  Babies and children are more prone to ear infections as their Eustachian passages are shorter and narrower that than those of adults. This not only makes it easier for bacteria to reach the middle ear, but it means fluid is more easily trapped.  Because babies and children do not have a fully-developed immune system, it can be harder for them to fight off infections. However, a baby's natural defenses are usually enough to fight off an ear infection.  One of the main signs that a baby has an ear infection is the baby tugging or pulling at their ear. However, the  AAP  points out that this action may be a self-soothing reflex in many young children or may simply be the baby exploring itself.  Other symptoms to look out for include:  It is not always possible to prevent ear infections in babies, but there are some steps caregivers can take to make them less likely:  Second-hand cigarette and tobacco smoke can increase the likelihood of ear infections occurring.  Preventing the spread of germs wherever possible can help reduce the risk of ear infection.  The pneumococcal vaccination protects against  Streptococcus pneumoniae , which is a common bacterial cause of AOM. According to the  National Institutes of Health , studies have shown that children who have had this vaccination experience fewer ear infections.  The annual  flu  vaccination, which is available for babies aged 6 months and over, can also help prevent ear infections that develop after flu.  Breast milk contains substances that help build a baby's immune system. This means that breast-fed babies are less likely to suffer bacterial or viral infections, including ear infections.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  recommend  exclusive breast-feeding for the first six months and then mixed feeding until the child reaches at least 1 year to protect against infections.  Putting things in the baby's ear, such as cotton swabs, can result in cuts and bruises in the ear canal that can get infected.  Caregivers should seek medical attention if the baby has either:  If the symptoms get worse, or last for more than 2 or 3 days, seek medical advice.  Caregivers should also speak to a healthcare professional if the child has symptoms of OME for more than 1 month or is experiencing  hearing loss .    
 Ear infection information. (2013, February 20).  Ear infection information. (2013, February 20).  Ear infections in babies. (2017, August).  Ear infections in children. (2017, May 12).  Kaur, R., Morris, M., Pichichero, M. E. (2017, August). Epidemiology of acute otitis media in the postpneumococcal conjugate vaccine era.  ,  140 (3), e20170101.  Middle ear infections. (2013, February 22).  Treating ear infections. (2017, August).  What is an ear infection? (2017, January 27).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "Can you treat baby ear infection without antibiotics?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322219.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, June 22). "Can you treat baby ear infection without antibiotics?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  