 The slit lamp exam usually forms part of a comprehensive eye exam. The individual will sit in a chair facing the slit lamp with their chin and forehead resting on a support.  The doctor can use this instrument to observe the eyes in detail and determine whether or not there are any abnormalities. They will be able to discuss the results with the person immediately.  Doctors use the slit lamp as part of a complete eye exam to get a better look at the structures within a person's eyes. These include the following:  After an initial look at the eyes, the doctor may apply a special dye called fluorescein to them to make the exam easier. They will administer this as an eye drop or on a small, thin paper strip that touches the white of the eye.  The doctor will then administer a series of eye drops that will dilate the pupils. The dilation will make it easier for the doctor to see the other structures in the eye. It takes about 20 minutes for the drops to work.  Once the individual has dilated pupils, the doctor will repeat the eye exam. This time they will hold a particular lens close to the eye.  The procedure does not hurt, although there may be some brief stinging during the application of the eye drops.  Dilated pupils become very large, which can make the eyes sensitive to light. This can make driving or spending time outside uncomfortable. However, the eye drops should wear off within a couple of hours, and wearing sunglasses should help during this period.  There is no special preparation for this test. If the doctor plans to dilate the pupils, the individual may wish to bring sunglasses and arrange a ride home after the test.  A doctor will be able to detect a range of conditions by carrying out a slit lamp exam. Among many others, they may observe abnormalities such as:  A slit lamp exam is generally very safe, although the drugs that dilate the pupils come with a few risks. They can increase eye pressure, which causes nausea and eye pain.  Anyone experiencing these symptoms should let a doctor know immediately.  Other common eye exams include:  A Wood's lamp shines UV light onto the eye to reveal any abrasions or scratches on the cornea. Doctors may use this if a slit lamp is not available.  During a fundus exam, the doctor will use an ophthalmoscope to look into the eye.  Some will use a direct ophthalmoscope, which is a small, handheld instrument with a light on it. However, most doctors will use an indirect ophthalmoscope as they can wear this on their head, and it gives them a wider field of vision for the examination.  They will ask the patient to stare off into the distance while they use the device to examine the inner structures of the eye.  For this procedure, the doctor will first administer numbing eye drops. The individual will sit with their head resting in the slit lamp microscope, and the doctor will place a special contact lens directly onto the eyeball.  The test should reveal any signs of increased eye pressure, which may indicate glaucoma.  A slit lamp eye exam is a straightforward and painless procedure that doctors use to look closely at the inner structures of a person's eye.  A doctor will decide whether or not a person needs the test, and for what purpose.    
 Bollinger, K. E., &amp; Westafer, M. D. (2017, October 29). Gonioscopy: What is it and why is it needed?  Bollinger, K. E., &amp; Westafer, M. D. (2017, October 29). Gonioscopy: What is it and why is it needed?  Corneal abrasions. (n.d.).  Garrity, J., &amp; MacMillan, B. (n.d.). Structure and function of the eyes.  Porter, D. (2018, April 23). What is a slit lamp?  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "What is a slit lamp exam?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322267.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, June 26). "What is a slit lamp exam?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  