 Foreign objects and debris in the eye usually affect the cornea or conjunctiva. The cornea is a transparent layer that protects the iris and pupil. The conjunctiva is the thin layer covering the inner part of the eyelid and the white part of the eye.  In this article, learn how to get an object out of the eye, as well as when to seek medical help.  Most of the time, a person can easily remove debris from the eye. It is possible, however, to scratch a cornea while attempting to get an object out.  A scratched cornea can take several days to heal and may even require treatment. Therefore, it is vital to be careful and ask for help if necessary.  At first, people should try repeatedly blinking to get the debris out. If blinking does not help, they can try following these instructions:  Take care when removing eye debris by:  Before treatment, a doctor will examine the eye. This examination will include:  A doctor will remove any debris by flushing it out with sterile saline or using a cotton swab. If the doctor is unable to remove the object initially, they may need to use specialized instruments or a needle.  A person may need to take  antibiotic  eye drops to treat corneal scrapes and protect against eye infections. Over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers, such as ibuprofen and acetaminophen, can reduce any pain.  A foreign object penetrating the eye is rare and accounts for only  2 out of every 1,000  emergency room visits in the United States. Many of these incidents are due to work-related accidents.  One  case study  reported on the treatment of a 6-year-old boy who fell on a pencil that penetrated his right eye.  Doctors gave the child a general anesthetic and removed the pencil slowly from the eye. Imaging after the surgery showed no eye or brain damage. After removal, the child's condition improved significantly, and full vision returned.  However,  another case report  of a 30-year-old man found that, after a plant penetrated his eye in a motorcycle accident, his vision did not recover fully. The vision loss was due to an optic nerve injury.  The authors emphasized that the likelihood of permanent injury from foreign objects in the eye varies greatly depending on the location and material of the object.  The most common foreign objects that end up in the eye include:  Dirt, sand, and dust usually enter the eye because of the wind, while metal or glass in the eye usually occurs when people have an accident while working with certain tools or materials.  Any foreign object that enters the eye at an accelerated speed poses a high risk for eye injury.  Having something stuck in the eye may be a mild nuisance or can be very painful. Anyone who experiences severe eye pain or vision changes should see a doctor immediately.  If an object enters the eye at high speed or is large enough to be visible, a trip to the emergency room might be necessary.  A foreign object in the eye can cause the following symptoms:  An object may also cause a subconjunctival hemorrhage, or bleeding in the white part of the eye.  This condition generally does not require medical treatment and resolves on its own within  2–3 weeks , but it is best to see a doctor so that they can rule out any other eye injury.  Most of the time, it is possible to remove a foreign object from the eye at home. However, it is a good idea to see an eye doctor if:  Accidents happen, so it is not always possible to avoid getting foreign objects in the eye during everyday activities.  Certain jobs and activities can put the eyes at risk and allow debris to fly into them. In such cases, using protective eyewear can help prevent injuries.  It is best to wear protective eye gear when:  The outlook following the removal of a foreign object from the eye is generally good. Even if the object caused abrasions, the eye should usually heal within a few days.  Anything sharp, such as metal or glass pieces, or objects that entered the eye at high speed may cause more serious injuries or lead to vision problems.  If symptoms continue after removal, or if it is not possible to remove the object safely at home, a person should seek medical attention.   Article last updated by Phil Riches on Fri  9 November 2018.  Visit our  Eye Health / Blindness  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Eye Health / Blindness.   
 Ahmed, F., House, R. J., &amp; Feldman, B. H. (2015, September). Corneal abrasions and corneal foreign bodies [Abstract].  Primary Care: Clinics in Office Practice ,  42 (3), 363–375.  Ahmed, F., House, R. J., &amp; Feldman, B. H. (2015, September). Corneal abrasions and corneal foreign bodies [Abstract].  Primary Care: Clinics in Office Practice ,  42 (3), 363–375.  Mendelsohn, A. (2018, January 15). Removal of corneal foreign bodies.  Murchison, A. P. (2017, September). Corneal abrasions and foreign bodies.  Rezae, L., Najafi, F., Moradinazar, M., &amp; Ahmadijouybari, T. (2014, January). Case report on the successful removal of an organic penetrating object into the orbit.  Journal of Injury and Violence Research ,  6 (1), 50–52.  Small objects in the eye: Overview. (2018, January 11).  Tarlan, B., &amp; Kiratli, H. (2013, June 12). Subconjunctival hemorrhage: Risk factors and potential indicators.  Clinical Ophthalmology ,  7 , 1163–1170.  Wang, X., Xie, Q., Wang, X., Chen, H., &amp; Sheng, X. (2013, March). Orbital trauma with a large plant foreign body: A case report [Abstract].  Eye Science ,  28 (1), 44–47.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "Foreign object in eye: Treatment and home remedies."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Nov. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322236.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, November 9). "Foreign object in eye: Treatment and home remedies."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  