 Vaginal infections, including yeast infections, are common during pregnancy and are usually not a cause for concern. Uterine infections may produce more complications, however.  This article looks at common infections during pregnancy, how they might affect the baby, and how to prevent them from developing.  Someone who is pregnant might be  more vulnerable  to certain infections and may develop more severe complications if the infections are left untreated. Anyone who has even a minor infection during pregnancy should talk to a doctor or midwife.  Typical vaginal infections during pregnancy include:  Vaginal yeast infections are caused by a fungus called  Candida . These infections tend to occur during pregnancy because of changes in the immune system, increased production of glycogen, and higher  estrogen  levels.  According to a  2015 report , about 20 percent of all women have  Candida , which rises to 30 percent during pregnancy. It appears to be more common during the second and third trimesters.  The most common symptoms of a vaginal yeast infection include:  People can use prescription or over-the-counter medications to treat a vaginal yeast infection. However, anyone who is pregnant should not use these drugs without first talking to a doctor or midwife.  It is essential to get a diagnosis before beginning treatment as other infections, such as  bacterial vaginosis  and  chlamydia , can be confused with yeast infections.  Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is an easily treated bacterial infection in the vagina. Symptoms include:  If BV is left untreated during pregnancy, it might cause preterm labor,  premature birth , and lower birth weight babies.  Group B streptococcus (GBS) is a group of bacteria that come and go in the body but often frequent the vagina and rectum. They do not typically cause symptoms or even an infection. However, women who have GBS in their bodies when they give birth may pass it to their babies.  Mothers who have GBS will pass it on to their babies in  1 to 2 percent  of cases. Although uncommon, GBS in a newborn can be fatal.  Testing late in pregnancy can detect GBS, and is a standard part of most prenatal care.  Treatment with  antibiotics  through a needle in a vein (IV antibiotics) can significantly reduce the risk of a GBS infection passing to the baby.  An infection in the uterus can be dangerous for a variety of reasons. The infection may affect the placenta, harm the developing baby, cause premature labor, or lead to birth abnormalities.  Uterine infections can also make labor more dangerous and difficult. Some individuals experience organ failure and other life-threatening complications.  Uterine infections often develop when bacteria from the vagina travels to the uterus, so an untreated vaginal infection is a risk factor for uterine infections. A person is more susceptible to uterine infections if their membranes rupture during an extended labor.  Treatment includes antibiotics and may require hospitalization. If a  fever  develops during labor, a doctor or midwife will monitor the fetus. If the symptoms are severe, the doctor may recommend a cesarean delivery.  Pregnancy causes many changes in the body, making people more susceptible to complications from many infections.  For example, hormone-related skin changes during pregnancy can cause conditions such as  eczema  or severely dry skin. If the skin cracks open and bleeds, a serious skin infection, such as  cellulitis , can develop. A rare skin disorder called Sweet's syndrome is also  more common  during pregnancy than at other times.  Some other infections that may be more serious during pregnancy  include :  The increased risk of these infections during pregnancy is not well understood but may be due to hormone and other changes that alter the number of blood cells in the body. For example, late in pregnancy, T cells that help fight infection  decrease in number .  Pregnancy also causes increased blood circulation and demands on the heart. These demands can also worsen complications. For example, if a pregnant person develops  pneumonia  from the flu, they may have more difficulty breathing because of the increased demands the fetus places on the heart and lungs.  Some medications that can effectively treat common infections may be less safe during pregnancy. So it is essential that pregnant people who have an infection talk to their doctor or midwife to weigh up the benefits and risks of various treatment options.  Numerous infections can affect the developing baby. However, it is difficult for doctors to tell whether and to what extent a fetus will be affected.  Infections can affect a developing baby in one of three ways:  According to the  National Institutes of Health  (NIH), infections that are known to harm the developing baby include, but are not exclusive to:  Zika infection, which is a disease carried by mosquitoes, may cause  birth abnormalities  and increase the risk for stillbirths and miscarriages in those who have the virus. However, it is unclear why some fetuses are affected, and others are not.  Other infections may also harm a developing baby, depending on the overall health of the pregnant person, when the infection developed, and whether the person has received treatment.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provide some strategies to reduce the risk of developing an infection during pregnancy, including:  Most people who experience an infection during pregnancy will not experience complications. Prompt treatment increases the likelihood of a healthy birth.  Anyone who experiences any unusual symptoms during their pregnancy should talk to their doctor or midwife. Prenatal care is also crucial since it can detect certain infections even before they cause symptoms.    
 10 tips for preventing infections before and during pregnancy. (2018, January 23).  10 tips for preventing infections before and during pregnancy. (2018, January 23).  Aguin, T. J., &amp; Sobel, J. D. (2015, June). Vulvovaginal candidiasis in pregnancy [Abstract].  Current Infectious Disease Reports ,  17 (30).  Bacterial vaginosis and pregnancy. (2018, January).  Kourtis, A. P., Read, J. S., &amp; Jamieson, D. J. (2014, June 8). Pregnancy and infection.  New England Journal of Medicine ,  370 (23), 2211–2218.  Resende, C., Santos, R., Pereira, T., &amp; Brito, C. (2016, January–February). Sweet's syndrome associated with cellulitis — a challenging diagnosis.  Anais Brasileiros De Dermatologia ,  91 (1), 94–96.  Tita, A. T. N., &amp; Andrews, W. W. (2010, June). Diagnosis and management of clinical chorioamnionitis.  Clinics in Perinatology ,  37 (2), 339–354.  Verani, J. R., McGee, L., &amp; Schrag, S. J. (2010, November 19). Prevention of perinatal group B streptococcal disease: Revised guidelines from CDC, 2010.  Viral hepatitis. (2018, May 9).  What infections can affect pregnancy? (2017, January 31).  Zika and pregnancy. (2018, May 22).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Common infections during pregnancy."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322210.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, June 21). "Common infections during pregnancy."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  