 Lower back spasms can happen suddenly, causing intense and even debilitating pain. Often caused by a recent physical injury, they are more likely to occur when a person is pregnant, dehydrated, or has a sedentary lifestyle that leads to weaker back muscles.  In this article, we look at the various long- and short-term treatments for lower back spasms, including home remedies, stretches, and how to prevent spasms from occurring.  Lower back spasms happen when the muscles tense up and contract. The feeling ranges from mildly annoying to intensely painful.  People usually feel muscle spasms in a specific muscle in the lower back. However, the pain may radiate to other areas and cause tension in nearby muscles. Some people who experience  back pain  also develop hip or  leg pain .  Some symptoms of lower back spasms include:  People with lower back spasms often find that their pain gets worse when they do certain things, such as sitting or standing for long periods.  Most lower back spasms fall into one of two categories:  The pain of an acute, sudden back spasm can be intense. Likewise, chronic lower back spasms can make it difficult to work or relax.  The following strategies may help to relieve the pain when it comes on quickly. These include:   Massage   Firm pressure on the affected muscle may help reduce tension and stop the spasm.  To soothe a muscle spasm, press on the affected area for 30–60 seconds, then rub the surrounding area in a circular motion.  Firm massage may be uncomfortable, but should not be painful. If you feel a  pulse  on the area you are massaging, do not apply pressure.   Heat or ice   Both heat and ice can relieve the pain of a muscle spasm. Both treatments can reduce  inflammation  and ease muscle tension. Alternating hot and cold packs can be particularly helpful.  Try applying a hot and then cold pad for 20 minutes at a time, with a 20-minute break in between. A hot water bottle and an ice pack should be effective.  Do not apply very hot or cold packs to the skin. Instead, wrap them in a towel or cloth before pressing them against the back.   Over-the-counter medication    Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen, will not offer instant relief, but they can help slow the spasm within 30–60 minutes.   Muscle relaxants   A doctor can prescribe muscle relaxants when people have extreme spasms that are visible and prominent. People should only use muscle relaxants for up to  72 hours .   Water and electrolytes    Dehydration  can cause muscle spasms, or make existing spasms worse. Continue drinking water, or consider switching to an electrolyte drink.   Use a foam roller   Many people use foam rollers to loosen muscle tension or tightness after exercise. They may also help to relieve muscle spasms in the back.  Always speak to a doctor before using a foam roller, as misusing it could cause back injuries.  Foam rollers are available to purchase in fitness stores or  online .  Stretching reduces muscle tension and can stop muscle spasms. Many people experiencing sudden spasms are reluctant to move, but simply getting up and walking may help.  Some simple stretches for lower back spasms include:  Some people find that experimenting with different stretches or that rolling the painful area on a foam roller offers a better stretch.  The American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP)  recommend  that people avoid prescription drugs, especially opioids, for lower back pain unless other remedies have failed.  A doctor may prescribe muscle relaxants for people to use when chronic back spasms occur.  The AAFP suggest the following long-term treatments for lower back spasms:  A person might need to try several treatments or combine multiple treatments to get the best outcome. If a doctor diagnoses an underlying medical condition, medication for that condition may help.  Lifestyle changes, such as exercising more and avoiding extended periods spent sitting may increase the effectiveness of any medication.  When a person experiences one muscle spasm, they may be more likely to experience another. Maintain good back health to reduce future spasms.  Use the following methods to protect the lower back:  A doctor can help diagnose the cause of lower back spasms. See a doctor within a few days if the spasm gets worse or does not disappear.  A doctor may conduct a physical exam, ask questions about medical history and when the pain began, ask about past pain, and do imaging tests such as X-rays or magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) scans to look at the muscles and spine.  People may mistake other forms of lower back pain for back spasms. When lower back spasms last longer than a few days, or when they go away and come back, it may be because of a chronic medical condition  such as :  Acute lower back pain — the intense kind that appears suddenly —  almost always  goes away on its own without treatment. It is more difficult to treat chronic lower back pain, and this often requires a multifaceted approach.  Talk to a doctor to find out the best ways to manage acute and chronic muscle spasms.    
 Levin, M. C. (2016, July). Muscle cramps.  Levin, M. C. (2016, July). Muscle cramps.  Moley, P. J. (n.d.). Low back pain.  Qaseem, A., Wilt, T. J., Mclean, R. M., &amp; Forciea, M. A. (2017, April 4). Noninvasive treatments for acute, subacute, and chronic low back pain: A clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians.  Annals of Internal Medicine ,  166 (7), 514–530.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "How do you get rid of a lower back spasm?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322369.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, July 4). "How do you get rid of a lower back spasm?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  