  Anemia  occurs when the body does not have enough red blood cells.  In some cases, the body does not produce a sufficient number of these cells. In others, anemia results from an underlying health problem, such as a disease that destroys red blood cells. Significant blood loss can also cause anemia.  A person with anemia may benefit from adding iron-rich foods to the diet. Also, certain foods can help the body to absorb iron, while others can block this process and make anemia worse.  In this article, we explore the foods that can help or harm people with anemia. We also provide sample meal plans designed to boost iron levels, plus other dietary tips.  Anemia can result from many factors, including:  Bleeding in the stomach and intestines can also cause anemia. This type of bleeding is sometimes a side effect of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ). Or, it may result from:  People who are pregnant have an increased risk of developing iron-deficiency anemia, which occurs when iron levels are too low. In these cases, doctors usually advise people to take iron supplements.  The recommended daily allowance (RDA) of iron depends on a person's age and sex. A baby younger than 6 months old only requires  0.27 milligrams (mg)  of iron a day, while a male aged 19–50 years old requires  8 mg  a day, and a female in the same age range needs  18 mg  of iron a day.  During pregnancy, a person should increase their daily iron intake to  27 mg .  People with iron-deficiency anemia need a significant boost and require  150–200 mg  of iron a day.  Adding iron-rich foods to the diet can help to treat anemia. A doctor can advise about the kinds of foods to choose from and other ways to increase iron absorption.  The best diet for a person with anemia includes plenty of foods rich in iron and other foods that help the body to absorb iron. A person should also be aware of foods that can inhibit iron absorption.  The plan below was developed to show what healthful meals for a person with anemia might include:   Option 1   Iron-fortified cereal and a glass of iron-fortified orange juice.   Option 2   Strawberries with low-fat yogurt and a handful of  pumpkin  and sunflower seeds.  Tea and  coffee  inhibit iron absorption, and people should not drink them with meals.   Option 1   A sandwich with roast beef and watercress on iron-enriched bread.   Option 2   A bagel with smoked salmon, cream cheese, and spinach.   Option 1   Lamb chops with boiled potatoes, steamed broccoli, and curly  kale .   Option 2   A stew that includes kidney beans, chickpeas, black-eyed peas, tinned tomatoes,  onions , red peppers, and garlic, topped with vegan or dairy-based cheese and a dollop of yogurt.  Many foods contain high levels of iron. A person may find it easy to combine them and make tasty, nutritious meals that help to boost the intake of iron.   Fruits and vegetables   However, some dark, leafy greens also contain oxalates, which can inhibit iron absorption. Rather than relying solely on vegetables, a person should aim to get iron from a variety of sources.   Nuts and seeds    Meat and Fish    Dairy products    Beans and pulses   Also, it may be a good idea to choose iron-fortified cereals, bread products, orange juice, rice, and pasta.  The following foods can interfere with iron absorption:  The best way to add iron to the diet is to eat more foods that are rich in iron. However, the following strategies can maximize a person's iron intake:  If a person has tried changing their diet and their levels of iron remain low, they should speak with a doctor or dietician, who may recommend a supplement.  Doctors often recommend choosing a supplement containing  ferrous salts  such as ferrous fumarate, ferrous gluconate, or ferrous sulfate. These formulations all contain anywhere from 15–106 mg of elemental iron in a tablet or oral solution.  People with iron-deficiency anemia can benefit from adding iron to their diet. The foods and strategies listed above can help a person to manage the condition.  Eating certain dark, leafy greens, seafood, beans, nuts, and seeds can help a person to boost their iron intake. It may also be a good idea to use a cast-iron skillet, and cooking meals for shorter periods, when possible.  Iron supplements can benefit people who do not receive enough iron from their diets. It is essential to follow dosage instructions carefully. An excess of iron can cause iron toxicity. This can be dangerous and, on rare occasions, fatal.    
 Calcium content of common foods. (n.d.).  Calcium content of common foods. (n.d.).  Diseases of iron metabolism. (n.d.).  Does cooking with cast iron pots and pans add iron to our food? (2015, April 21).  Folate-deficiency anemia. (n.d.).  Geerligs, P. D., Brabin, B. J., &amp; Omari, A. A. (2003, August). Food prepared in iron cooking pots as an intervention for reducing iron deficiency anaemia in developing countries: A systematic review [Abstract].  Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics ,  16 (4), 275–281. Iron [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Iron and the body. (n.d.).  Iron deficiency anaemia. (2018, January 12).  Iron deficiency anemia. (n.d.).  Iron-deficiency anemia. (n.d.).  Iron-deficiency anemia. (2018, April 25).  Iron-deficiency anemia [Fact sheet]. (2017, May 3).  Johnson-Wimbley, T. D., &amp; Graham, D. Y. (2011, March 21). Diagnosis and management of iron deficiency anemia in the 21st century [Abstract].  Therapeutic Advances in Gastroenterology ,  4 (3), 177–184.  Santiago, P. (2012, May 2). Ferrous versus ferric oral iron formulations for the treatment of iron deficiency: A clinical review.  The Scientific World Journal ,  2012 , 846824.  Yan, L. (2016, August 13). Dark green leafy vegetables.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Foods and meal plans for iron deficiency."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322336.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, July 2). "Foods and meal plans for iron deficiency."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  