 Doctors can sometimes detect cystic hygromas using  ultrasounds  during pregnancy. They can also diagnose them after the baby is born. Some cystic hygromas may not appear until the child is a bit older.  In this article, learn more about the causes and symptoms of cystic hygromas, as well as the treatment options.  According to  The Fetal Medicine Foundation , cystic hygromas affect 1 in 800 pregnancies and 1 in 8,000 live births.  In  80 percent of cases , cystic hygromas appear on the face, including the head, neck, mouth, cheek, or tongue.  The growths can also occur in other areas of the body, including the armpits, chest, legs, buttocks, and groin. There may be one more than one growth, which can also grow over time.  Cystic hygromas that are present at birth or develop after birth are usually benign, meaning they are not harmful. However, they can be disfiguring, grow to be very large, and affect a child's breathing and ability to swallow.  Sometimes, cystic hygromas detected early in pregnancy go away before birth. A fetal cystic hygroma can be a risk factor for miscarriage.  Cystic hygromas usually affect children, but there have been rare  cases  of them appearing in adulthood.  A  2016 case study  reported on a 32-year-old man with a cystic hygroma on his neck. The hygroma appeared 8 months before diagnosis.  The man was experiencing pain and swelling in the right lower region of his face extending to his neck. Doctors took a biopsy and were able to confirm that it was adult-onset cystic hygroma.  Both environmental and genetic factors can contribute to the formation of cystic hygromas. Causes may include:  More often, cystic hygromas are due to genetic conditions. In fact, chromosomal abnormalities account for  50 percent of cases .  Genetic conditions that cause cystic hygromas include:  Cystic hygromas can also occur  without a known cause .  Symptoms of a cystic hygroma vary depending on the location of the  cysts . Some children may not experience any symptoms other than the growth.  If a child has symptoms, they may include:  In rare cases, the hygromas may bleed or become infected.  Doctors usually diagnose cystic hygromas when the fetus is still in the womb, often during a routine abdominal ultrasound.  Doctors may also detect it during a blood test carried out at 15 to 20 weeks. If the blood test shows high levels of alpha-fetoproteins, it  might indicate  a possible cystic hygroma.  Ultrasound images may indicate the possible location and size of a cystic hygroma, but doctors will require more information. They will want to know the depth and severity of the growth and if there are any obstructions, including those that could indicate breathing problems.  Doctors may do additional tests, including:  A doctor will use computed tomography (CT) scans, X-rays, and ultrasounds to make a diagnosis if they find a cystic hygroma after a child is born.  A cystic hygroma might not need treatment if it is not causing any problems.  One treatment option is sclerotherapy. During sclerotherapy, a specialist injects a  chemotherapeutic agent called bleomycin  into the growth.  Bleomycin shrinks the growth, although it may take several therapy sessions for this to happen. A cystic hygroma can also grow back.  A doctor may consider surgery to remove the cystic hygroma, but will often wait until the child is a bit older. Surgery can cause significant scarring.   Possible complications  of surgical removal include damage to nerves, arteries, blood vessels, and structures near the cystic hygroma.  Both sclerotherapy and surgery are performed under general anesthesia, meaning the individual will be asleep and unable to feel pain during the procedure.  In some cases, a baby or child may need both treatments to remove or shrink the cystic hygroma completely.  The long-term outlook for cystic hygromas depends on the size and location of the growth.  Some cases of cystic hygromas have associations with other genetic conditions that may impact a child's development.  Cystic hygromas can return even after treatment or multiple treatments, especially if doctors cannot remove all the tissue.    
 Bahl, S., Shah, V., Anchilla, S., &amp; Vyas, S. (2016, March 29). Adult-onset cystic hygroma: A case report of rare entity.  Indian Journal of Dentistry ,  7 (1), 51–54.  Bahl, S., Shah, V., Anchilla, S., &amp; Vyas, S. (2016, March 29). Adult-onset cystic hygroma: A case report of rare entity.  Indian Journal of Dentistry ,  7 (1), 51–54.  Cystic hygroma. (2017, August 15).  Cystic hygroma. (n.d).  Fetal cystic hygroma. (n.d).  Fouedjio, J. H., Fouelifack, F. Y., &amp; Ebune, L. J. (2011, July 25). Antenatal diagnosis and management of nuchal cystic hygroma: A case report in the Yaounde Central Maternity, Cameroon.  Clinics in Mother and Child Health ,  8 (1), 1–3.  Mirza, B., Ijaz, L., Saleem, M., Sharif, M., &amp; Sheikh, A. (2010, September–December). Cystic hygroma: An overview.  Journal of Cutaneous and Aesthetic Surgery ,  3 (3), 139–144.  Noonan syndrome. (2018, July 3).  Phookan, J., &amp; Chatterjee, P. (2016, March). Cystic hygromas — Our experience.  IOSR Journal of Dental and Medical Sciences ,  15 (3), 42–46.  Turner syndrome. (2016, December 1).  Veeraraghavan, G., Denny, C., &amp; Lingappa, A. (2009, December 1). Cystic hygroma in an adult: A case report.  Libyan Journal of Medicine ,  4 (4), 160–161.  Wittners, G., Van Robays, J., Willekes, C., Coumans, A., Peeters, H., Gyselaers, W., &amp; Fryns, J. P. (2011). Trisomy 13, 18, 21, triploidy and Turner syndrome: The 5T's. Look at the hands.  Facts, Views &amp; Vision in ObGyn ,  3 (1), 15–21.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "Everything you need to know about cystic hygroma."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322385.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, July 5). "Everything you need to know about cystic hygroma."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  