 This article explains three ways of switching  birth control  pills. It also discusses what to consider when switching pill brands or changing between the combined pill and minipill.  It is possible to switch between birth control pills safely. Below are three ways to do this:  It is vital that a person does not leave a gap between ending one pill pack and starting another.  When switching, there is no need to complete the current pack. It is possible to start the new pack immediately by taking the first pill from it.  Leaving a gap between pill packs when switching birth control pills may lower protection from pregnancy.  When switching to birth control pills from a different method of contraception, the doctor may recommend overlapping both forms of protection initially.  This ensures that a person is protected by the original method while the new birth control pills take effect.  It is best to speak with a doctor to find out whether or not this is necessary.  The safest way of switching any birth control method is to use backup protection.  If there is a chance that a person could become pregnant, they may wish to use condoms for the first week or month of a new pill, depending on what the doctor advises.  Using backup protection ensure that a person remains protected from unintended pregnancy while the body adjusts to the new method of birth control.  For most people, using backup protection is not strictly necessary, but it is a good way to reduce  anxiety  about accidental pregnancy when switching pills.  Condoms are a form of backup protection, and they are available at many grocery stores, pharmacies, and  online .  If a person experiences side effects for more than 3 months after starting a new pill, the doctor may suggest switching to another brand.  People may also switch brands with the aim of:  Switching between the combined pill and the minipill is straightforward.  A person should start the first pill of the new pack straight away. There is no need to complete the existing pack. It is vital not to leave a gap between the old and new packs.  Using a backup method, such as condoms or another form of barrier protection, during the first pack of the new pill ensures protection from unintended pregnancy.  A person switching to the minipill should discuss with their doctor whether or not they need to use condoms as well, as the minipill is less effective than combined pills at preventing unintended pregnancy.  Side effects of the birth control pill may include:  It is not uncommon to experience side effects during the first 3 months of taking a new pill. These effects usually become milder over time as the body adjusts to the extra hormones.  Many people find that one type or brand of birth control pill suits them better than others.  No one should feel obliged to continue with a birth control method that does not suit them.  Many people experience mood changes when taking birth control pills. Over time, this may affect their well-being.  Researchers do not fully understand how birth control pills affect mood. However,  one study  found that the risk of a depression diagnosis increased in adolescents during their first 6 months of taking hormonal birth control.  A  2015 study  found that contraceptive pills might alter parts of the brain that play a role in:  The effect on these parts of the brain may help to explain why birth control pills increase the risk of depression, but more research is necessary to understand this link.  If people experience mood changes or symptoms of depression when they are on birth control, they should speak with a doctor about switching pills or trying a non-hormonal birth control method instead.  Birth control pills are very effective when people take them correctly. However, human error can increase the risk of unintended pregnancy.  Birth control pills often work by preventing  ovulation . If a person does ovulate, there is a chance that they may become pregnant.  Ovulation is more likely to occur if a person delays or misses a dose of the pill. Therefore, it is best to take the pill at the same time every day.  Setting a daily alarm on a clock or cell phone can remind a person to take the pill at the same time each day.  If people miss a dose, they should use backup contraception, such as a condom. Taking the emergency contraceptive pill is an option if a person has sex before realizing that they missed a dose.  There is a small risk of the birth control pill causing  high blood pressure  and benign liver tumors.  A  2017 study  found that taking hormonal contraceptives also raises the risk of  breast cancer , although the increase in risk is minimal.  However, risks for other types of  cancer , including ovarian and uterine, is  reduced  in people taking birth control pills. Anyone with concerns should talk with their doctor to weigh up the risks and benefits.  Doctors advise that people with certain conditions do not take birth control pills containing  estrogen , as these can increase the risk of  stroke  and other complications.  People who should avoid taking pills containing estrogen  include  those who have:  It is a good idea to discuss any existing health conditions with a doctor before starting birth control pills.  The birth control pill does not protect against  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs). Therefore, it is essential to use condoms or another form of barrier protection with new or casual partners.  There are many different brands of birth control pill. Across all brands, most pills are one of two types.  The two main types of birth control pill are:  On the combination pill, a person takes pills for 3 weeks out of every month and takes no pills or pills without hormones for 1 week.  Combination pills are also available as continuous cycle pills, meaning that a person takes hormonal pills continuously with no breaks.  When using the minipill, a person takes the same hormonal pill each day with no breaks.  The minipill will reduce or even eliminate a person's periods. A doctor may prescribe these pills for people with heavy periods or an underlying health condition, such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) or  endometriosis .  Birth control pills prevent pregnancies by:  If a person decides that birth control pills are not right for them, there are many other ways to prevent pregnancy.  Other birth control options include:  People should discuss these options with a doctor to determine which is most suitable for them.  Switching birth control pills can be straightforward. If a woman follows the methods above, the risk of unintended pregnancy is very low.  Although it is not always necessary, using backup protection is the safest way to prevent pregnancy during the process of switching birth control pills.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Contraception: Do hormonal contraceptives cause weight gain? (2017, June 29).  Contraception: Do hormonal contraceptives cause weight gain? (2017, June 29).  Iversen, L., Sivasubramaniam, S., Lee, A. J., Fielding, S., &amp; Hannaford, P. C. (2017, June). Lifetime cancer risk and combined oral contraceptives: The Royal College of General Practitioners' oral contraception study [Abstract].  American Journal of Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  216 (6), 580.e1–580.e9.  Mørch, L. S., Skovlund, C. W., Hannaford, P. C., Iversen, L., Fielding, S., &amp; Lidegaard, O. (2017, December 7). Contemporary hormonal contraception and the risk of breast cancer.  The New England Journal of Medicine ,  377 , 2,228–2,239.  Peterson, N., Touroutoglou, A., Andreano, J. M., &amp; Cahill, L. (2015, April 2). Oral contraceptive pill use is associated with localized decreases in cortical thickness [Abstract].  Human Brain Mapping ,  36 (7).  Ross, R. A., &amp; Kaiser, U. B. (2016, December 8). The emotional cost of contraception.  Nature Reviews: Endocrinology ,  13 (1), 7–9.  Summary chart of U.S. medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use. (2017).  Whiteman, D. C., Webb, P. M., Green, A. C., Neale, R. E., Fritschi, L., Bain, C. J., … Carey, R. N. (2015, October 6). Cancers in Australia in 2010 attributable to modifiable factors: Summary and conclusions.  Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health ,  39 (5), 477–484.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "How to switch birth control pills properly."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322356.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, July 4). "How to switch birth control pills properly."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  