 Though common across the globe, the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  (CDC) state that ascariasis is not common in the United States.  Read on to learn more about the causes, symptoms, treatment, and outlook for an ascariasis infection.  Ascariasis is a common infection in developing countries that lack widespread, modern sanitation.  A roundworm called  Ascaris lumbricoides  infects a person's small intestine and acts as a parasite, getting nutrients from its host's intestinal tract.   Ascaris lumbricoides , along with whipworm and hookworm, is a type of parasite known as a soil-transmitted helminth (STH).  The roundworm lays eggs, which then pass in the person's stool, or poop. It can spread when an infected person defecates near farmland or crops.  When people do not wash crops or cook them thoroughly, the roundworm can enter a new host, and start its life cycle again.  Many people with ascariasis do not experience any symptoms until the infection has become severe.  Ascariasis may not cause symptoms at first. However, as the infestation inside the small intestine grows, a person may start to notice symptoms, including:  In more advanced infestations, the worms can travel to the lungs. If this occurs, a person may also experience symptoms, including:  In rare cases, a person may experience a complication known as aspiration  pneumonia .  If a person ingests the eggs of  Ascaris lumbricoides , the roundworm will progress through its life cycle within the host's body.  The stages of a roundworm's life are as follows:  Human feces can cause contamination if an infected person defecates near a farming field or water source, or if they use untreated feces as a fertilizer for crops.  A person can contract ascariasis by eating or drinking contaminated food or water, especially if they do not adequately wash the food or their hands.  Children may be contaminated by playing with soil or plants and putting their hands in their mouths.  Roundworms live in areas all across the world but are  most common  in subtropical and tropical settings.  They are also much more prevalent in parts of the world where sanitation is below modern standards.  Ascariasis is  uncommon  in the U.S., so the environmental risk factors are low.  Risk factors for developing ascariasis include:  The most common method of diagnosis involves a stool sample. Using a microscope, a doctor can look for the parasite's eggs in a person's stool.  It can be difficult for a doctor to diagnose early infestations, as the eggs may not be present.  A doctor may also order imaging tests to help them determine how many worms are inside the person and to locate them.  Some imaging techniques a doctor may use include:  A doctor will treat most cases of ascariasis with antiparasitic drugs. They may consider additional treatment options for severe infestations.  A doctor may not aim to cure the infestation but simply  reduce the number  of worms and eggs in a person to relieve their symptoms.  A doctor may suggest surgery to help remove large numbers of worms. Surgery is also a good option if the infestation blocks a portion of the intestine.  In most cases, ascariasis has mild or no symptoms and no further complications.  If the infestation becomes too large or severe, a person is at risk of complications.  Some complications include:  People living in places with modern sanitation have a very low risk of ascariasis. However, it is essential to wash food properly and wash hands after using the bathroom.  People should also wash any utensils and cooking surfaces after each use.  When visiting a region with a lack of sanitary facilities, a person should take the following precautions to help avoid infection:  People can take steps to avoid ascariasis infections by practicing safe food handling techniques, using modern sanitation equipment, and avoiding travel to places where it is common.  A person may not realize they have ascariasis until the infestation becomes very large or severe. Once identified, a person can often expect a full recovery after treatment.    
 Bethony, J. M., Brooker, S. J., Albonico, M., Geiger, S. M., Loukas, A., Diemert, D. J., &amp; Hotez, P. J. (2006). Soil-transmitted helminth infections: Ascariasis, trichuriasis, and hookworm.  The Lancet ,  367 (9521), 1521–1532.  Bethony, J. M., Brooker, S. J., Albonico, M., Geiger, S. M., Loukas, A., Diemert, D. J., &amp; Hotez, P. J. (2006). Soil-transmitted helminth infections: Ascariasis, trichuriasis, and hookworm.  The Lancet ,  367 (9521), 1521–1532.  Parasites – Ascariasis: Biology. (2018, February 14).  Parasites — Ascariasis. (2018, February 15).  What is ascariasis and trichuriasis? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Everything you need to know about ascariasis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322340.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, July 3). "Everything you need to know about ascariasis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  