 Omega-3s have been shown to have various health benefits, which include improving skin conditions and boosting heart health.  In this article, we look at the research behind the benefits of omega-3s for  psoriasis  symptoms. We also discuss what dosages, sources, and supplements are best.  Research has suggested that omega-3s may improve various signs and symptoms of psoriasis.  A comprehensive review of scientific studies, published in the   Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology  , shows that  omega-3  improved people's psoriasis symptoms in 12 out of 15 trials.  The benefits included improvements in skin reddening, itching, scaling, and  inflammation .  The researchers suggest that when taken orally, omega-3 was most effective over a period of 3 months or longer.  Along with the external symptoms, omega-3 can also help with long-term health risks. People with psoriasis are  more likely  to develop  heart disease , and omega-3s may  reduce the risk  of cardiac death and heart disease.  The United States government's current   Dietary Guidelines for Americans   says that including seafood in the diet is associated with a reduced risk of heart disease. Also, people may have a reduced risk of  obesity  when they consume seafood. However,  not all studies agree .  It is also important to note that many research studies give participants high omega-3 doses, or administer omega-3s via injections or intravenous drips (IVs). Consequently, the results do not always reflect what people may experience in their daily lives.  To get the benefits of omega-3s, people should make sure their supplements contain a balance of EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) and DHA (docosahexaenoic acid). These are present in most fish oil supplements.  The   Dietary Guidelines for Americans   says that eating around 8 ounces of fish or other seafood per week, or about 250 milligrams (mg) of EPA and DHA, can reduce the risk of cardiac deaths.  Speaking to the  National Psoriasis Foundation , Wilson Liao, M.D., a dermatologist at the University of California, San Francisco, recommends that people should start slowly when they begin taking omega-3 supplements.  "If [people] want to try supplements I advise one gram of EPA and half a gram DHA daily for eight weeks to see if they notice improvements in their skin," he said.  People should take omega-3 supplements during or right after a meal for the best effects.  Before taking omega-3s for psoriasis, they should talk to a doctor. High doses of the supplement can cause nausea,  diarrhea , or other digestive issues. If these do occur side effects, they are usually mild.  Research is still underway regarding the best sources of omega-3s.  Supplements are a more convenient option for omega-3s, particularly when someone does not eat fish or seafood.  However, omega-3s  may be  better absorbed by the body when obtained from dietary sources than when taken as supplements.  There are plenty of ways to  get omega-3s into the diet . Specific products have different ingredients, so people should read the  nutrition  labels to learn more about what each supplement contains.  Some healthy food sources for omega-3s include:  There is no current research to suggest that one source of omega-3 is better than another for psoriasis.  Depending on a person's preference, they can choose from a range of popular sources of omega-3 supplements. People can find them in many health food supermarkets.  Below is a list of omega-3 supplements with links to where people can buy them online:  Doctors and scientists still do not know which supplements are best for improving psoriasis symptoms, but research is underway.  One  review study  suggests that fish oil supplements show better results for people with psoriasis when compared with three other supplements:  vitamin D ,  vitamin  B-12, and  selenium .  Natural remedies that may help, according to the  National Psoriasis Foundation , include:  To date, studies have revealed minimal or no benefit for other popular supplements for psoriasis, including milk thistle and evening primrose oil.  Other home remedies that can help with the external symptoms of psoriasis  include :  There is very little comprehensive research about the effectiveness of supplements for psoriasis, so people should be wary of any products that make big claims.  Some people with psoriasis may benefit from omega-3s. However, these supplements may not work for everybody, and researchers are still working out the best sources of omega-3s, and how they affect psoriasis symptoms.  Eating fish is likely to be better nutritionally than taking supplements, but supplements can also be effective.  There is some evidence that omega-3 supplements can improve cardiovascular health, which is a concern for people with psoriasis, and it is normally safe to use omega-3 supplements under a doctor's supervision.  There appears to be no significant risk with omega-3 intake. According to  one review , most common side effects observed in those with psoriasis were nausea,  indigestion , diarrhea, and a fishy taste in the mouth.  People taking the blood-thinning drug warfarin should not take omega-3 supplements, as they can increase the risk of bleeding.   What other dietary choices can improve symptoms of psoriasis?   What other dietary choices can improve symptoms of psoriasis?   Psoriasis is a condition that is frustrating because it is difficult to treat. Changing habits, such as what you eat, is something that is within your power. Since psoriasis is an inflammatory condition, it makes sense to eat a diet that is thought to reduce inflammation. People can try the following: 
 
 Eat cold water fish. 
 Avoid fats from meat and milk. 
 Avoid red meat and refined sugar. 
 Work on getting to within a healthy weight for your age and height. 
 Eat whole foods rather than processed or prepared foods. 
 Test out going gluten free for 2 weeks and see if that helps. 
 
 Keep a food journal and reward yourself for good progress with a movie or massage. You should feel the difference a healthy diet makes and that will motivate you to continue.   Psoriasis is a condition that is frustrating because it is difficult to treat. Changing habits, such as what you eat, is something that is within your power. Since psoriasis is an inflammatory condition, it makes sense to eat a diet that is thought to reduce inflammation. People can try the following:  Keep a food journal and reward yourself for good progress with a movie or massage. You should feel the difference a healthy diet makes and that will motivate you to continue.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Delzell, E. (May 6, 2015). Fish oil: Does it really help psoriasis?.  Delzell, E. (May 6, 2015). Fish oil: Does it really help psoriasis?.  Dietary guidelines for Americans 2015–2020. Eighth edition. (n.d.).  Herbal and natural remedies. (n.d.).  Leavitt, M. (2015, August 10). Risk for heart disease tied to psoriasis severity.  Millsop, J. W., Bhatia, B. K., Debbaneh, M., Koo, J., &amp; Liao, W. (2014, September 1). Diet and Psoriasis: Part 3. Role of Nutritional Supplements.  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  71 (3), 561–569.  Omega-3 fatty acids [Fact sheet]. (2018, June 8.).  Roncaglioni, M. C., Tombesi, M., Avanzini, F., Barlera, S., Caimi, V., Longoni, P., … Marchioli, R. (2013, May 9). n–3 fatty acids in patients with multiple cardiovascular risk factors.  New England Journal of Medicine ,  368 , 1800–1808.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Harris, Scott. "Does taking omega-3 help with psoriasis?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322302.php&gt;    APA  Harris, S. (2018, June 28). "Does taking omega-3 help with psoriasis?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  