 In this article, learn about the uses of a bone graft, the different types, and the possible risks.  A person may need a bone graft if their body is unable to produce enough new bone in certain situations.  Bone grafts can help in the treatment of:  There are risk factors that increase the likelihood of a fracture not healing. These include:  Bone grafts are available in a variety of substances. These bone substitutes can be biological (natural) or synthetic.  Substitutes need to have several specific properties to be suitable for bone grafts.  Bones are porous, meaning that they contain tiny holes. A bone substitute with similar gaps allows blood vessels to grow into the graft to supply nutrients and encourage new bone growth.  Re-absorption is also essential for bone growth. Specific cells continuously break down bones and rebuild them.  Substitutes that break down too quickly are not suitable for bone grafts, as they do not allow enough time for the new bone to grow.  Conversely, some substitutes re-absorb too slowly, which can cause  inflammation .  There are two sources of bone for biological substitutes:  Below are some examples of bone grafts and their common uses.   De-mineralized bone matrix   This graft comprises bone that is  93 percent   collagen . It also contains growth factors to help the bone grow.  One of its main benefits is that it rarely causes an immune response. Doctors typically use it as filler, rather than as a complete bone substitute.  De-mineralized bone matrix can help in the treatment of:   Platelet-rich plasma   This substitute has a low infection rate but is not strong enough to be a stand-alone bone substitute.   Hydroxyapatite   Hydroxyapatite is a mineral that occurs in bones and teeth. It consists of  calcium  phosphate, which is what makes bones and teeth hard.  Doctors may use hydroxyapatite for:   Corals   This substitute has a porous structure similar to spongy bone. It can also act as a growth factor carrier to aid bone repair.  It has a slow reabsorption rate but does not cause inflammation.  Man-made bone substitutes include the following:   Calcium sulfate   Calcium sulfate is also known as gypsum or plaster of Paris. It is an inexpensive product with a similar structure to bone.  Doctors typically use calcium sulfate to support other grafts because it reabsorbs too quickly on its own.  In combination with other grafts, doctors may use it for:   Tricalcium phosphate (TCP) ceramics   There are different types of ceramic bone grafts. A doctor may use them for:   Bioactive glasses   Bioactive glasses are porous and do not cause inflammation. They also form a strong bond to bone tissue.  However, glasses are brittle, so they are not likely to be suitable for large areas of the body. Dentists or doctors may use bioactive glasses for dental procedures.   Polymer-based substitutes   Doctors do not generally use polymer-based bone substitutes as bone grafts, as they do not promote new bone growth.  However, they may recommend them in certain instances, including:  A person will typically be under general anesthetic during a bone graft procedure.  A surgeon will make an incision and then place the bone substitute in the damaged area.  They may use additional tools and supports to keep the graft in place, including:  The surgeon will close the wound with stitches. Doctors will monitor a person for several hours after the procedure. Before they discharge the individual, they will also provide instructions on how to help prevent infections.  Risks of a bone graft procedure include:  The recovery process depends on many factors, including the type of surgery and the person's age, physical health, and overall health.  Recovery time can be anywhere from 2 weeks to over 2 months.  The surgeon will provide in-depth instructions for the recovery period. They may also prescribe pain medications.  Eating a healthful diet and not smoking are essential for a good recovery. It is also vital to speak to a doctor or surgeon before purchasing any over-the-counter (OTC) medications in case they interfere with bone growth and healing.  Some people may have a drain in their wound after surgery. If this is the case, a doctor will provide them with instructions on how to look after it.  A person will need to return for follow-up appointments so that a doctor can remove the drain and monitor the healing process.    
 Bone grafting. (n.d.).  Bone grafting. (n.d.).  de Grado, G. F., Keller, L., Idoux-Gillet, Y., Wagner, Q., Musset, A.-M., Benkirane-Jessel, N., … Offner, D. (2018, January–December). Bone substitutes: A review of their characteristics, clinical use, and perspectives for large bone defects management.  Journal of Tissue Engineering ,  9 .  Lin, S. S., &amp; Yeranosian, M. G. (2016, December). The role of  orthobiologics  in fracture healing and arthrodesis [Abstract].  Foot and Ankle Clinics ,  21 (4), 727–737.  Truntzer, J., Vopat, B., Feldstein, M., &amp; Matityahu, A. (2015, February). Smoking cessation and bone healing: Optimal cessation timing.  European Journal of Orthopaedic Surgery &amp; Traumatology ,  25 (2), 211–215.  Wang, W., &amp; Yeung, K. W. K. (2017, December). Bone grafts and biomaterials substitutes for bone defect repair: A review.  Bioactive Materials ,  2   (4), 224–247.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "What to know about bone grafts."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322344.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, July 3). "What to know about bone grafts."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  