 When there is not enough moisture in the air, it can dry out the lining of the nostrils. This leaves the lining cracked and prone to bleeding.  Also, nosebleeds occur most frequently in children, who often pick or rub their noses while sleeping.  This article will explore:  It will also describe when to seek medical care.  The inside of the nose is covered with mucosa, a moist, delicate tissue with a large number of blood vessels that are close to the surface. Even minor injuries to this tissue can make these vessels bleed, sometimes a lot.  This is called an anterior nosebleed. It is the most common type and not usually serious.  Anterior nosebleeds start in the front of the nose, where the mucosa is most accessible, and the blood flows out of the nostrils.  The blood usually comes from the nasal septum, which is the thin wall between the two sides of the nose.  Posterior nosebleeds are rarer, and they tend to be more serious. They start at the back of the nasal passage, near the throat.  In the case of a posterior nosebleed, the blood usually comes from an artery higher and deeper in the nose, and it may flow down back of the throat or out through the nostrils.  Children do not usually experience posterior nosebleeds. A person is more likely to experience one if they have a condition such as  high blood pressure  or a bleeding disorder.  The most common causes and risk factors for nosebleeds at night are:  Dry air can crack the delicate skin inside the nose, causing it to bleed.  Nosebleeds are more likely to occur as the seasons change and before the nasal tissues have acclimated to a rise or fall in humidity.  Running a heater during colder months can dry out the air inside the home.  The common cold and other upper respiratory tract infections can lead to an increase in mucus, as well as frequent nose-blowing and sneezing. Allergic reactions can have the same effects.  These can irritate the inside of the nose, and increase the risk of bleeding, especially if symptoms are worse at night.  Also, nasal congestion can cause blood vessels to widen, making them more vulnerable to injury.  A person may encounter airborne chemicals in pollution or at work.  These chemicals can irritate or damage the inside of the nose, making it prone to bleeding. Cigarette smoke can have the same effect.  Drinking heavily can contribute to the risk of nocturnal nosebleeds in two ways.  First, alcohol interferes with the activity of the blood's platelets, which are the cells that cause blood to clot.  Second, alcohol can enlarge the superficial blood vessels in the nasal cavity, making them more prone to injury and bleeding.  Some medications interfere with the blood's ability to clot. These include:  A person taking any of these types of medications may have a higher risk of nosebleeds.  Nosebleeds are also a side effect of some nasal sprays, such as those that contain steroids to treat allergies.  When using a nasal spray, carefully follow the instructions to minimize the risk of nosebleeds and other side effects.  Some homeopathic medications and dietary supplements contain chemicals that prolong bleeding. The following ingredients can have this effect:  Take the following steps to stop most nosebleeds:  People can treat most nosebleeds quickly and easily at home.  However, doctors recommend seeking urgent medical attention if the blood loss is extensive, or if the person:  A person taking any of the following medications should take extra steps to prevent nosebleeds:  If a person taking any of these medications cannot stop a nosebleed, they should see a doctor.  To prevent a nosebleed:  Nosebleeds are common, especially in children. Usually, a person can easily treat them at home.  The tissues inside the nostrils are delicate and easy to damage. Picking the nose or dry air is usually responsible for this damage.  Dry air from a heater, for example, can crack the blood vessels and lead to nosebleeds during the night.    
 Kucik, C. J., &amp; Clenney, T. (2005, January). Management of epistaxis.  American Family Physician ,  71 (2), 305–311.  Kucik, C. J., &amp; Clenney, T. (2005, January). Management of epistaxis.  American Family Physician ,  71 (2), 305–311.  Ponraj Kumar, N., Rajasekar, S., &amp; Vikram, V. J. (2018). Epistaxis in children: A clinical study [Abstract].  International Journal of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery ,  4 (3), 701–703.  Viehweg, T. L., Roberson, J. B., &amp; Hudson, J. W. (2006, March). Epistaxis: Diagnosis and treatment [Abstract].  Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery ,  64 (3), 511–518.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "What causes a nosebleed at night?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322333.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, July 2). "What causes a nosebleed at night?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  