 This article will explore the potential causes of chest pain and vomiting. Some of the causes are harmless, while others can be more serious.  Common causes of chest pain and vomiting include:  GERD is a disorder of the digestive system that causes symptoms including acid  indigestion ,  heartburn , chest pain, and vomiting. People can usually manage GERD with medication and dietary changes.  Peptic ulcers develop on the lining of the stomach. They can be very painful, and symptoms include vomiting and a burning-type pain in the chest. Treatment includes medication, but sometimes surgery is necessary.  Panic attacks can be frightening, and symptoms can include feelings of tightness and pain in the chest.  Stress  and anxiety are leading contributors to panic attacks, so finding ways to reduce stress can help alleviate the symptoms.  Making some lifestyle changes can help address anxiety and panic attacks. People should also speak to a doctor about treatment.  Reducing stimulants, such as  coffee , as well as introducing meditation and mindfulness may also help alleviate stress.  Anyone who is experiencing chest pain and vomiting should visit a doctor for a diagnosis.  Sometimes chest pain and nausea can be symptoms of a heart attack.  It is important to know that women and men can present with different symptoms.  Common symptoms of a heart attack include:  According to the  American Heart Association , women are more likely than men to experience the following:  Heart attacks require immediate medical assistance. If someone suspects they are having a heart attack, or are with a person who is experiencing one, they should call the emergency services immediately.  A heart attack is when a person  experiences a blockage  in one or more of the coronary arteries. This blockage prevents oxygenated blood and nutrients getting to heart tissue and muscle, which can cause them to die.  A doctor can diagnose a heart attack with an electrocardiogram (EKG test) or  coronary angiography . If the tests detect an irregular rhythm, it might indicate a heart problem.  Sometimes, doctors will do a blood test to diagnose a heart attack.  Anyone experiencing these symptoms and suspects a heart attack should call 911 or the local emergency services.  While waiting for the ambulance to arrive, the emergency operator may recommend giving crushed  aspirin , which can reduce the effect of a heart attack.  Other early treatments might include:  However, some people might require surgery.  Surgery can include:  Long-term treatment involves adopting healthful lifestyle changes, managing stress, and  quitting smoking .   Angina  occurs due to plaque buildup in arteries. It is a symptom of underlying  heart disease , not a disease on its own.   Angina  may feel like a squeezing in the chest or like indigestion. Some people may also experience pain in the following areas:  A doctor will perform a physical exam and take a full medical history. The doctor will ask about:  If the doctor suspects angina, they will recommend tests, such as an EKG, stress testing, a chest X-ray, and blood tests.  There is a variety of treatment options available. If symptoms are mild, treatment can include making some lifestyle changes and taking medication.  Lifestyle factors include:  If these treatment options do not work, some people may require medical procedures, such as an angioplasty or coronary artery bypass grafting.   Chest pain  and nausea are some of the more common reasons children end up in the hospital.  Unlike adults, however, most cases of chest pain in children are benign.  Causes include:  Any adult who thinks they may be experiencing a heart attack should go straight to a hospital or call an ambulance.  It is essential not dismiss any symptoms as timing is key to a better outcome.  For children, evidence strongly shows that chest pain and vomiting is unlikely to be a cardiac issue. However, timely treatment is essential.    
 Angina. (n.d.).  Angina. (n.d.).  Anxiety disorders and panic attacks. (n.d.).  Babu, P., Dickson, S., Dhar, D., Hapuarachchi, D., Murtagh, K., &amp; Damda, F. (2015, April). Chest pain in children is rarely cardiac. Does ecg help? [Abstract].  Archives of Disease in Childhood ,  100 (s3), A71–A72.  Chun, J. H., Kim, T. H., Han, H. Y., Kim, N. Y., &amp; Yoon, K. L. (2015, November 22). Analysis of clinical characteristics and causes of chest pain in children adolescents.  Korean Journal of Pediatrics ,  58 (11), 440–445.  Coronary angiography. (n.d.).  Heart attack. [Fact sheet]. (n.d.).  Mehta, L. S., Beckie, T. M., DeVon, H. A., Grines, C. L., Krumholtz, H. M., Johnson, M. N. J., … Wenger, N. K. (2016, January 25). Acute mycocardial infarction in women: A scientific statement from the American Heart Association.  Circulation ,  133 (9), 916–947.  Rosen, R., Vandenplas, Y., Singendonk, M., Cabana, M., DiLorenzo, C., Gottrand, F., … Tabbers, M. (2018, March). Pediatric gastroesophageal reflux clinical practice guidelines: Joint recommendations of the North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition and the European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition.  Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition ,  66 (3), 516–554.  Warning signs of a heart attack. (2018, January 11).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "What causes chest pain and vomiting?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322352.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, July 3). "What causes chest pain and vomiting?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  