 Most people will not be aware that they have hyperchloremia because the symptoms are almost impossible to identify. Doctors often discover the condition from a chloride blood test, which is part of a routine blood screening to monitor or diagnose electrolyte levels.  A doctor might do these tests if they suspect a person has any of the following:  The doctor will usually do tests for other electrolytes, such as sodium,  potassium , and bicarbonate, at the same time.  If a doctor is concerned that a person might have  diabetes , they might recommend a urine test as well.  This article explains the chloride blood test and how to interpret the results. High or low levels may have different symptoms and are indicative of a number of different conditions  The test does not require any special preparation. However, always discuss any concerns or questions with a doctor.  The blood test involves taking a blood sample from a vein, usually in the arm or hand.  The test will take less than 10 minutes and should not cause any harm. Some people might experience slight pain or bruising at the site where the doctor inserts the needle.  Once collected, the blood will go to a lab for analysis. The doctor usually receives the results from the lab within a few days.  The normal range for chloride is between  98 and 106 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) .  Chloride levels above the normal range cause a condition known as hyperchloremia.  Hyperchloremia  happens when the volume of chloride ions rises, which might be due to a number of factors.  Possible causes include:  Newborn babies often have hyperchloremia because their chloride levels rise in the week after birth. However, this is nothing to worry about, as the levels rise naturally and do not indicate a health problem.  Hyperchloremia is common in  critically ill people .  Low levels of chloride cause a condition known as hypochloremia. Hypochloremia happens when the volume of chloride ions decreases.  Possible causes include:  Treatments vary according to the type of electrolyte balance a person has.  Most people can manage hyperchloremia with some lifestyle changes. For example, if dehydration is causing the hyperchloremia, treatment will likely include hydration, which may involve drinking lots of water every day.  People should eat a healthful, balanced diet and avoid caffeine and alcohol as they are diuretics.  However, anyone who experiences any symptoms that might suggest kidney problems should see a doctor as soon as possible.  If someone develops hypochloremia due to a medication they are taking, the doctor may adjust the dosage or prescribe a different drug. If hypochloremia is mild and due to diet irregularities, the doctor may recommend that the person increases their salt intake.  The amount of fluid a person consumes through drinking or loses through  excessive sweating ,  diarrhea , or vomiting can affect chloride levels. Maintaining proper hydration may make chloride levels more stable.  Results of the chloride blood test that are not in the normal range are not usually a cause for concern. However, they can signify an underlying condition that might require treatment.  Always discuss test results with a doctor. If the chloride levels fall outside of the normal range, the doctor will recommend the most appropriate treatment.    
 Besen, B. A. M. P., Gobatto, A. L. N., Melro, L. M. G., Maciel, A. T., &amp; Park, M. (2015, May 4). Fluid and electrolyte overload in critically ill patients: An overview.  World Journal of Critical Care Medicine ,  4 (2), 116–129.  Besen, B. A. M. P., Gobatto, A. L. N., Melro, L. M. G., Maciel, A. T., &amp; Park, M. (2015, May 4). Fluid and electrolyte overload in critically ill patients: An overview.  World Journal of Critical Care Medicine ,  4 (2), 116–129.  Blood Serum Chemistry – Normal Values. (2015).  Kraut, J. A., &amp; Kurtz, I. (2015, February 1). Treatment of acute non-anion gap metabolic acidosis.  Clinical Kidney Journal ,  8 (1), 93–99.  Nagami, G. T. (2016, July-August). Hyperchloremia – why and how.  Nefrologia ,  36 (4), 347–353.  Neyra, J. A., Canepa-Escaro, F., Li, X., Manllo, J., Adams-Huet, B., Yee, J., &amp; Yessayan, L. (2015, September). Association of hyperchloremia with hospital mortality in critically ill septic patients.  Critical Care Medicine ,  43 (9), 1938–1944.  ter Maaten, J. M., Damman, K., Hanberg, J. S., Givertz, M. M., Metra, M., O'Connor, C. M., … Voors, A. A. (2016, August 9). Hypochloremia, Diuretic Resistance, and Outcome in Patients With Acute Heart Failure.  Circulation: Heart Failure ,  9 (8), 1–20.  Yasuda, K., Hayashi, M., Murayama, M., &amp; Yamakita, N. (2016, June 28) Acidosis-Induced hypochloremic alkalosis in diabetic ketoacidosis confirmed by the modified base excess method.  Journal of Clinical Endicrinology Metabolism ,  101 (6), 2390–2395.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lewin, Jo. "What is the normal chloride level?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322314.php&gt;    APA  Lewin, J. (2018, June 29). "What is the normal chloride level?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  