 Most minor neck  pimples  respond well to home remedies and over-the-counter (OTC) medications and should resolve within a few days.  People with pimples on the neck that are severe, last for longer than a few weeks, or do not respond to primary treatment should seek advice from a doctor or dermatologist.  Pimples occur when hair follicles become clogged. It is not uncommon for pimples to develop on the neck, especially around the nape of the neck.  Multiple pimples usually indicate  acne , which is the  most common  skin condition in the United States.  A range of factors may increase the likelihood of clogged pores and pimples, including:  Some things may increase the risk of developing pimples on the neck specifically, such as:  Minor pimples should clear up after a few days. However, it can take weeks or months of continual, consistent use for products to work effectively on moderate or severe acne. People will also need to continue using acne medications or remedies once the symptoms have gone away to prevent them from returning.  Home remedies can often help to speed up the healing process for pimples. These include:  Some people use specific herbal remedies for mild acne, as they have antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory properties. Essential oils that may treat pimples include:  Dozens of OTC products exist to treat mild forms of acne. Many prescription acne medications contain the same ingredients as OTC products, just in stronger doses.  OTC washes, toners, creams, and gels for pimples typically contain between 0.025 and 10 percent of:  Always spread a thin, even layer of the acne medication onto the pimple and the skin surrounding it. Wash the hands carefully after using acne medications, as they often contain ingredients that can stain or bleach most fabrics and some stone or wood surfaces.  If OTC and topical prescription medications fail to clear acne, a doctor may prescribe systemic medications, which work throughout the body.  Depending on a person's sex, age, and overall health status, a doctor or dermatologist may prescribe the following for severe or chronic acne that is nodular or cystic:  Additional treatment options for severe or chronic acne include:  People can reduce the risk of developing pimples on their neck by following the recommendations below:  Dermatologists recommend never popping a pimple.  Popping a pimple can introduce bacteria and other microbes from the hands, potentially leading to infection of the pimple.  The forced popping can also cause the bacteria within the pimple to spread into the surrounding and deeper tissues, leading to more severe sores such as papules, pustules, nodules, and  cysts . More severe acne sores can lead to permanent skin complications, such as scarring, pitting, and dark spots.  Many pimples on the neck will disappear on their own or respond to home treatments.  A person should talk to a doctor or dermatologist if the pimples on their neck have the following characteristics:  Pimples on the neck are not uncommon, and it is often possible to prevent them with proper hygiene and other lifestyle measures.    
 Acne. (2018, March 2).  Acne. (2018, March 2).  Acne: Overview. (2016, July 28).  Acne: What causes it? (2016, January 9).  Skin conditions by the numbers. (n.d.).  Zaenglein, A. L., Pathy, A. L., Schlosser, B. J., Alikhan, A., Baldwin, H. E., Berson, D. S., ... &amp; Bhushan, R. (2016, May). Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris.  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  74 (5), 945–973.e33.  Zeichner, J. A., Baldwin, H. E., Cook-Bolden, F. E., Eichenfield, L. F., Fallon-Friedlander, S., &amp; Rodriguez, D. A. (2017, January 1). Emerging issues in adult female acne.  The Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology ,  10 (1), 37–46.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Why is there a pimple on my neck?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322318.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, June 29). "Why is there a pimple on my neck?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  