 Hot flashes are sudden feelings of heat that spread mainly through the face, neck, and chest. Night sweats happen when hot flashes occur at night. Up to  85 percent  of women report hot flashes during  menopause .  Read on to learn more about the causes of hot flashes and night sweats and how you can treat them at home or with medication.  Menopause is a normal stage of life. Surgery or  chemotherapy  cause the menopause in some people who have these treatments.  According to the  National Institute of Ageing , natural menopause occurs between 45 and 55 years of age and lasts for around 7 years, but can continue for up to 14 years.  According to some estimates, the occurrence of hot flashes may run for an average of  5.2 years . And the earlier in life they occur, the longer time period they may last.  Hot flashes and night sweats occur before and during menopause because of changing hormone levels, including  estrogen  and  progesterone , affecting the body's temperature control.  Changes in these hormone levels affect the action of other hormones that are responsible for regulating the body's temperature. This causes the characteristic feelings of sudden warmth, flushing, and  excessive sweating .  The frequency of hot flashes and night sweats differ between people. Some only experience occasional hot flashes while, for others, the symptoms can get in the way of daily life.  Although some women learn to deal with menopause-related hot flashes and night sweats and can live a normal life with them, for other women they can be quite disturbing.   Doctors recommend  that people use lifestyle changes to manage hot flashes for 3 months before trying medication.  People can try the following methods to reduce or prevent menopausal hot flashes and night sweats:  People can adopt a series of simple lifestyle changes to cope with menopausal hot flashes.  Different factors may increase hot flashes and night sweats in different people. Individuals can try making a note of triggers and avoiding them. According to the  National Institute of Ageing , common triggers include:  Other lifestyle tips include:  Many people find relief from the symptoms of menopause through using alternative medicine practices, though these remedies may not work for everyone.  Mind and body techniques that may improve symptoms include:  Some people may find that herbal remedies help. However, there is little research about their effectiveness, and some may interact with other medications or have harmful side effects.  If people wish to try dietary supplements to improve hot flashes, they can ask their doctor about the following:  If someone experiences severe hot flashes or night sweats that interrupt their daily lives or cause high levels of distress, a doctor may recommend the following medications:  Hormone therapy, or  hormone replacement therapy  (HRT), is where people take medication that contains estrogen to regulate hormone levels. HRT can relieve many menopausal symptoms, including hot flashes and night sweats.  Women who had their uterus removed by a procedure called hysterectomy can take estrogen alone.  But women who still have their uterus are at risk of endometrial  cancer  if they do so, and they should take a medication that contains both estrogen and progesterone. By combining these two hormones, it may reduce the risk of endometrial cancer compared to administering estrogen alone.  A doctor will tailor hormone therapies for the individual, according to relevant risk factors, and will prescribe the lowest effective dose of hormones to reduce side effects.  Doctors do not usually recommend hormone therapy for women who have had a type of cancer that is sensitive to hormones, such as  breast cancer . The reason for this is because these cancers grow faster in the presence of additional hormones. Similarly, doctors do not recommend this treatment for women who have had a blood clot.   Antidepressant  medications can also be used to reduce hot flashes and night sweats, although they are not as effective as hormone therapy.  However, they are a good option for women who cannot receive hormone therapy.  The FDA approve the use of paroxetine, an antidepressant, to treat hot flashes. Other antidepressants may also help, including venlafaxine and fluoxetine.  Dizziness, nausea,  dry mouth , weight gain, or sexual dysfunction are possible side effects of these medications.  Antidepressants can be an effective treatment for hot flashes and may only need to be taken during the menopausal transition when symptoms are occurring.  Other prescription medications can be used to relieve hot flashes and night sweats. However, these are off-label so not approved for this use and should not be taken for menopausal symptoms unless prescribed by a doctor. These include:  Most people experience hot flashes and night sweats when going through the menopause.  Some women only experience occasional hot flashes that do not get in the way of daily life, but for others, they can be very uncomfortable.  People can use home remedies to help with menopausal symptoms, and in severe cases, they can use medications, including hormone therapies.  It is advisable to talk to a doctor about the best and safest methods for relieving symptoms, as these can vary between individuals.    
 Carmody, J., Crawford, S., Salmoirago-Blotcher, E., Leung, K., Churchill, L., &amp; Olendzki, N. (2011, June). Mindfulness training for coping with hot flashes: Results of a randomized trial.  Menopause ,  18 (6), 611−620.  Carmody, J., Crawford, S., Salmoirago-Blotcher, E., Leung, K., Churchill, L., &amp; Olendzki, N. (2011, June). Mindfulness training for coping with hot flashes: Results of a randomized trial.  Menopause ,  18 (6), 611−620.  Chen, M.-N., Lin, C.-C., &amp; Liu, C.-F. (2015, March). Efficacy of phytoestrogens for menopausal symptoms: A meta-analysis and systematic review.  Climacteric ,  18 (2), 260–269.    Freedman, R. R. (2016, July 18). Imaging and menopausal hot flashes.  Temperature ,  3 (3), 361.  Hot flashes: What can I do? (2017, June 26).  Li, L., Xu, L., Wu, J., Dong, L., Zhao, S., &amp; Zheng, Q. (2016, September). Comparative efficacy of nonhormonal drugs on menopausal hot flashes [Abstract].  European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology ,  72 (9), 1051−1058.  Mallhi, T. H., Khan, Y. H., Khan, A. H., Mahmood, Q., Khalid, S. H., &amp; Saleem, M. (2018, June). Managing hot flushes in menopausal women: A review [Abstract].  Journal of the College of Physicians and Surgeons — Pakistan ,  28 (6), 460−465.  Miller, V. M., Kling, J. M., Files, J. A., Joyner, M. J., Kapoor, E., Moyer, A. M., …, Faubion, S. S. (2018, June). What's in a name: Are menopausal "hot flashes" a symptom of menopause or a manifestation of neurovascular dysregulation [Abstract]?  Menopause ,  25 (6), 700−703.  Shams, T., Setia, M. S., Hemmings, R., McCusker, J., Sewitch, M., &amp; Ciampi, A. (2010, March 11). Efficacy of black cohosh-containing preparations on menopausal symptoms: A meta-analysis.  Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine ,  16 (1), 36–44.  Norton, S., Chilcot, J., &amp; Hunter, M. S. (2014, June). Cognitive-behavior therapy for menopausal symptoms (hot flushes and night sweats): Moderators and mediators of treatment effects [Abstract].  Menopause ,  21 (6), 574−578.  Orleans, R. J., Li, L., Kim, M.- J., Guo, J., Sobhan, M., Soule, L., &amp; Joffe, H. V. (2014, May 8). FDA approval of paroxetine for menopausal hot flushes.  New England Journal of Medicine ,  370 (19), 1777–1779.  Santoro, N., Epperson, C. N., &amp; Mathews, S. B. (2016, June 2). Menopausal symptoms and their management.  Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America ,  44 (3), 497–515.  Sassarini, J., &amp; Anderson, R. A. (2017, May 6). New pathways in the treatment for menopausal hot flushes.  The Lancet ,  389 (10081), 1775−1777.  Sturdee, D. W., Hunter, M. S., Maki, P. M., Gupta, P., Sassarini, J., Stevenson, J. C., &amp; Lumsden, M. A. (2017, August). The menopausal hot flush: A review [Abstract].  Climacteric ,  20 (4), 296−305.  What is menopause? (2017, June 27).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "Coping with menopausal hot flashes and night sweats."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322351.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, July 3). "Coping with menopausal hot flashes and night sweats."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  