 Pregnant women may wonder if they will recognize their contractions when they begin, or if what they are feeling is premature labor.  While contractions can vary widely, there are some common symptoms of each stage of labor. Learn about them in this article.  Labor can vary greatly in its length and pain levels between individuals and also between different pregnancies.  But, by knowing what to expect from each type of contraction, a woman can feel better prepared.  Sometimes called "false" or "practice" labor contractions, Braxton-Hicks contractions do not indicate that labor has started.  Some of the key signs of Braxton-Hicks contractions include:  Braxton-Hicks contractions can occur as early as 6 weeks into pregnancy but are usually more pronounced during the second or third trimester.  Some women may be unaware of these contractions until well into the third trimester.  Prodromal labor refers to the contractions a woman experiences in the weeks, days, or hours before true labor begins.  These contractions are often stronger, more regular, and sometimes longer than Braxton-Hicks contraction, but do not signal true labor.  Doctors believe that prodromal labor may help move the baby into the proper position for true labor.  Some symptoms of prodromal labor include:  Prodromal contractions do not contract so much that they thin or dilate the cervix. This is how doctors can usually tell the difference between active labor and prodromal labor.  Early labor is the stage during which a woman's cervix begins dilating or enlarging, usually between 0 and 6 centimeters (cm).  Full dilation of the cervix is at around 10 cm, which is usually enough for the baby to pass through.  Women can have very different experiences of early labor contractions. Some of the symptoms they may describe include:  As labor progresses, the contractions lengthen (usually lasting at least 45 to 60 seconds) and will be 5 minutes apart or less.  At this stage, a woman will probably prepare for childbirth by going to the hospital or birth center, or by calling a midwife if they are planning to give birth at home.  Doctors often recommend laboring at home, as long as possible, before going to the hospital. This is especially true if it is someone's first pregnancy, as labor tends to take slightly longer.  Stage 2 labor is when contractions start to be more pronounced and painful. Delivering the baby is imminent at this time. Dilation of the cervix is usually at least 6 cm at this stage.  In addition to cervical dilation, symptoms of active labor include:  During this time, the pressure on the rectum may make a woman feel as if she has to have a bowel movement. She also may feel a strong urge to push.  Some measures that may help a person with labor pains include:  In addition to these techniques, a doctor can discuss medical pain management methods. These include epidural anesthesia or oral medications.  If a woman thinks labor contractions have started, there are a few things she should do. These include:  If a woman cannot rule out Braxton-Hicks contractions after lying down or walking, she should call her doctor to discuss the contractions.  She should also call her doctor if her water breaks, especially if she is aware of the discharge of any green- or brown-tinted fluid.  If contractions are especially painful or if a woman is worried about herself or the baby in any way, she should also seek medical attention.  Labor contractions are part of the natural process that moves a baby through the birth canal.  They can be very painful, but there are natural techniques and medications to help reduce their severity.  People should discuss labor contraction symptoms with their doctor in advance, to help identify those that signal the time to go to the hospital.    
 Contractions. (2013, December).  Contractions. (2013, December).  Dealing with pain during childbirth. (2018, June).  Hanley, G. E., Munro, S., Greyson, D., Gross, M. M., Hundley, V., Spiby, H., … Janssen, P. A. (2016, April 2). Diagnosing onset of labor: A systematic review of definitions in the research literature.  BMC Pregnancy &amp; Childbirth ,  16 , 71.  How to tell when labor begins. (2011, May).  Raines, D. A., &amp; Whitten, R. A. (2018, February 19). Braxton Hicks contractions.  StatPearls .  Stages of labor. (2014, May).  Zagami, S. E., Golmakani, N., Saadatjoo, S. A.-R., Ghomian, N., &amp; Baghbani, B. (2015, March). The shape of uterine contractions and labor progress in the spontaneous active labor.  Iranian Journal of Medical Sciences ,  40 (2), 98–103.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What do different types of contractions feel like?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322308.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, June 29). "What do different types of contractions feel like?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  