 Other common causes include:  In this article, we explore the common causes of both  headaches  and nausea, as well as some underlying issues that are less common and more serious. We also discuss treatments and ways to prevent the symptoms.  Headaches are  very common , and most people will experience one from time to time. Nausea sometimes accompanies a headache, and a number of health issues can cause this.   Migraines  represent the most common cause of both symptoms. According to a  2015 review , around 1 in 7 people in United States experience migraines every year.  A migraine feels like a moderate or severe headache. The pain is often throbbing and located on one side of the head. During a migraine, a person may also experience:  Beyond migraines, common causes of both headaches and nausea include:  Another common cause of a headache and nausea is low blood sugar, which can result from:  Other causes of concurrent headaches and nausea are more severe and may require urgent medical treatment. Understanding the full range of causes is essential, as it can enable a person to seek the right treatment in time.  Headaches and nausea are symptoms of the following severe conditions and injuries:  According to the findings of a  2013 review , over 60 percent of people with migraines also experience nausea and vomiting. However, the medical community is still unsure why migraines can cause nausea.  One explanation is that migraines affect nerve pathways that stimulate the part of the brain that controls vomiting. A  2014 study  found that people experiencing migraines with nausea showed activity in the rostral dorsal medullary area of the brain, which likely controls nausea.  Another theory relates to  serotonin , a chemical in the brain that affects:  According to a  2012 review , people with migraines sometimes have reduced serotonin levels, which may also lead to nausea.  Treatment for headaches and nausea depends on the cause. If the cause is a migraine, the following may help:  If a person has a severe, sudden headache and no history of migraines, they should speak with a doctor.  See a doctor right away if a headache and nausea follow a blow to the head.  Also, seek medical attention if headaches grow worse over time or accompany any of the following symptoms:  It may not always be possible to prevent headaches and nausea. However, the following may help:  Migraines are the most common cause of headaches that occur with nausea. Dehydration and low blood sugar are also frequently responsible.  Some causes are more serious. Several affect the brain, such as meningitis, brain aneurysms, and tumors. These issues typically feature additional symptoms.  Anyone who is worried or unsure about the cause of their headaches and nausea should speak with a doctor.    
 Aggarwal, M., Puri, V., &amp; Puri, S. (2012, April). Serotonin and CGRP in migraine.  Annals of Neurosciences ,  19 (2), 88–94.  Aggarwal, M., Puri, V., &amp; Puri, S. (2012, April). Serotonin and CGRP in migraine.  Annals of Neurosciences ,  19 (2), 88–94.  Burch, R. C., Loder, S., Loder, E., &amp; Smitherman, T. A. (2015, January). The prevalence and burden of migraine and severe headache in the United States: Updated statistics from government surveillance studies.  Headache ,  55 (1), 21–34.  Headache: Hope through research. (2018, May 22).  Láinez, M. J., García-Casado, A., &amp; Gascón, F. (2013, October 11). Optimal management of severe nausea and vomiting in migraine: Improving patient outcomes.  Patient Related Outcome Measures ,  4 , 61–73.  Maniyar, F. H., Sprenger, T., Schankin, C. &amp; Goadsby, P. J. (2014, December 3). The origin of nausea in migraine — A PET study.  The Journal of Headache and Pain ,  15 (1), 84.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What causes a headache with nausea?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322317.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, June 29). "What causes a headache with nausea?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  