 In this article, we examine the possible benefits of chlorophyll and the evidence supporting them. We also look at how to take chlorophyll supplements.  Chlorophyll is a pigment that gives plants their green color. Plants use chlorophyll along with sunlight to get their nutrients.  One of the primary ways of including chlorophyll in the diet is by eating green vegetables, such as alfalfa and spinach. Wheatgrass is particularly rich in chlorophyll and is available to purchase  online  as a powder, juice, or capsule.  A popular way to get chlorophyll into the diet is through taking supplements. These are available in the form of drops, pills, or capsules. A variety of chlorophyll supplements are available for purchase  online .  Most chlorophyll supplements contain chlorophyllin. Chlorophyllin is a water-soluble derivative of natural chlorophyll that is potentially better absorbed by the body than other forms of chlorophyll.  The label on supplements containing chlorophyllin may list 'sodium  copper  chlorophyllin' or 'chlorophyllin  copper  complex' in the ingredients.  People have used chlorophyll as a health supplement for many years. A variety of medical studies have suggested that it may be helpful for skin conditions, body odors, and fighting certain kinds of  cancer .  Chlorophyll is generally safe for people to try if they are interested in its possible benefits. However, anyone who has a health condition or takes any medications should speak to their doctor first.  Some of the potential benefits of chlorophyll include:  Topical chlorophyll may work as an anti-aging remedy. A  study  found that applying a gel containing chlorophyllin to the skin reduced signs of photoaging, which is aging that results from sun exposure. The study used skin samples from four healthy women and lasted for 12 days.  The results of the study showed that skin treated with chlorophyllin improved in a similar way to skin treated with tretinoin, which is a prescription skin cream that has been proven to help with skin aging. The authors suggest that using a combination of chlorophyllin and tretinoin could be an effective treatment for reversing the signs of photoaged skin.  Topical chlorophyll may also have potential as an  acne  treatment.  One  study  found that a gel containing chlorophyllin helped reduce facial acne and large, visible pores. The 10 people who completed the study had mild to moderate acne and used the chlorophyllin gel for 3 weeks.  In another  study , researchers compared using a combination of topical chlorophyll and phototherapy with phototherapy alone for the treatment of acne. The people who received the combination had fewer acne lesions, less severe acne, and less oily skin than those who did not. However, the 24 participants were all of Asian descent and had darker skin types, so the results may not be relevant for everybody.  Chlorophyll is chemically similar to hemoglobin, a protein that is essential in red blood cells as it carries oxygen around a person's body.   Researchers  have suggested that wheatgrass juice, which is rich in chlorophyll, may be helpful in treating hemoglobin deficiency disorders, such as  anemia  and thalassemia.  Researchers have studied chlorophyll for its potential as a deodorant for many years.  A  study  published in 1960 suggested that chlorophyll may reduce odors for people who have had a colostomy. Later, a  study  from 1989 found that chlorophyll was not effective in controlling odors in people who have had a colostomy. However, a 1980  study  noted that chlorophyll improved lower  body odor  in older adults living in nursing homes.  Today, some deodorants and mouthwashes contain chlorophyll. Some people also take chlorophyll pills to help reduce body odors.  Researchers studied chlorophyll as an aid for wound healing in the  1940s  and  1950s . Some of these studies suggested that chlorophyll may help heal surgical wounds and prevent infections.  More recently, a  2008 review  suggested that a medication containing chlorophyllin promotes wound-healing and reduces odors. Some doctors prescribe this medication today.  Chlorophyll has shown potential as a cancer treatment in some tests conducted on animals:  Although chlorophyll has a variety of potential health benefits, there are few adequate scientific studies to back them up, and all of them require further investigation. So far, most studies have been small and limited, and many of the potential health benefits have not been shown to work in humans.  Other possible health benefits that require more research include chlorophyll's effect on:  Most naturally green vegetables contain chlorophyll. Foods that are particularly rich in chlorophyll include:  Besides chlorophyll, these vegetables also provide a variety of healthful  vitamins  and minerals.  Chlorophyll supplements vary widely in strength and formulation. Some supplements come in drops that a person can add to water or another drink. Others come in capsule form.  Packages containing chlorophyll supplements usually include instructions for how to use them. If not, ask a doctor or nutritionist for advice before taking.  Most liquid chlorophyll supplements recommend adding around 1 teaspoon (5 milliliters) of the supplement to a drink. If the taste is unpleasant, try starting with a smaller amount and gradually increase the dosage.  For chlorophyll capsules, studies have used dosages ranging from 100 to 300 milligrams up to three times per day.  Chlorophyll supplements are generally safe to use and do not appear to have any serious side effects. However, anyone who is pregnant or breast-feeding should speak to a doctor before taking a chlorophyll supplement.  Some people may find that chlorophyll supplements cause  stomach upset  or skin irritation. People who experience bothersome side effects should stop taking the supplement and see a doctor.  Chlorophyll has a variety of potential health benefits, but the evidence for most of these is insufficient and more research is needed.  Some people may find that including more chlorophyll in their diet or taking supplements makes them feel better or helps with medical conditions, such as anemia.  Always discuss health supplements, including chlorophyll, with a doctor before taking them.  A range of chlorophyll supplements are available for  purchase online .  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bowers, W. F. (1947, January). Chlorophyll in wound healing and suppurative disease [Abstract].  The American Journal of Surgery ,  73 (1), 37–50.  Bowers, W. F. (1947, January). Chlorophyll in wound healing and suppurative disease [Abstract].  The American Journal of Surgery ,  73 (1), 37–50.  Chauhan, M. (2014). A pilot study on wheat grass juice for its phytochemical, nutritional and therapeutic potential on chronic diseases.  International Journal of Chemical Studies ,  2 (4), 27–34.  Christiansen, S. B., Byel, S. R., Strømsted, H., Stenderup, J. K., &amp; Eickhoff, J. H. (1989, July 3). Can chlorophyll reduce fecal odor in colostomy patients? [Abstract].  Ugeskrift for Laeger ,  151 (27), 1753–1754.  Das, J., Samadder, A., Mondal, J., Abraham, S. K., &amp; Khuda-Bukhsh, A. R. (2016, September). Nano-encapsulated chlorophyllin significantly delays progression of lung cancer both in  in vitro  and  in vivo  models through activation of mitochondrial signaling cascades and drug-DNA interaction [Abstract].  Environmental Toxicology and Pharmacology ,  46 , 147-157.  deVogel, J., Jonker-Termont, S. M. L., Kata, M. B., van der Meer, R. (2005, August 1). Natural chlorophyll prevents heme-induced cytoxic and hyperproliferative effects in rat colon.  The Journal of Nutrition  ,  135 (8), 1995-2000.  Lam, C. R., &amp; Brush, B. E. (1950, August). Chlorophyll and wound healing: Experimental and clinical study [Abstract].  The American Journal of Surgery ,  80 (2), 204–210.  McCook, J. P., Stephens, T. J., Jiang, L. I., Law, R. M., &amp; Gotz, V. (2016, July 25). Ability of sodium copper chlorophyllin complex to repair photoaged skin by stimulation of biomarkers in human extracellular matrix.  Clinical, Cosmetic and Investigational Dermatology ,  9 , 167–174.  Nagini, S., Palitti, F., &amp; Natarajan, A. T. (2015, February 4). Chemopreventive potential of chlorophyllin: A review of the mechanisms of action and molecular targets [Abstract].  Nutrition and Cancer ,  67 (2), 203–211.  Siegel, L. H. (1960, April). The control of ileostomy and colostomy odors [Abstract].  Gastroenterology ,  38 (4), 634–636.  Smith, R. G. (2008, August). Enzymatic debriding agents: An evaluation of the medical literature.  Ostomy Wound Management ,  54 (8), 16–34.  Song, B. H., Lee, D. H., Kim, B. C., Ku, S. H., Park, E. J., Kwon, I. H., ... Kim, K. J. (2014, October). Photodynamic therapy using chlorophyll-a in the treatment of acne vulgaris: A randomized, single-blind, split-face study [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  71 (4), 764–771.  Stephens, T. J., McCook, J. P., &amp; Herndon Jr, J. J. (2015, June). Pilot study of topical copper chlorophyllin complex in subjects with facial acne and large pores.  Journal of Drugs in Dermatology ,  14 (6), 589–592.  Young, R. W., &amp; Beregi, J. S. (1980, January). Use of chlorophyllin in the care of geriatric patients [Abstract]. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society ,  28 (1), 46–47.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "What are the benefits of chlorophyll?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322361.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, July 4). "What are the benefits of chlorophyll?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  