 Nails consist of layers of a protective fibrous protein called keratin that also occurs in skin and hair. Keratin makes the nails strong, but external trauma or an underlying health condition can cause thin layers of the nail to peel away.  When this occurs, it can leave the nails looking thin. They may also feel sensitive or uncomfortable.  Here, we look at the causes of peeling nails and how to prevent and treat them.  Mild iron deficiency is often the cause of peeling nails. However, some external causes and underlying health conditions can also produce this symptom.  External causes include:  Nails can take a long time to grow, so the results of external trauma may not become visible until many months later.  Underlying health conditions that may cause peeling or brittle nails include:  Changes in the way the nails grow may also happen as a person gets older.   Researchers  have suggested that age-related changes in a person's nails may occur as a result of blood circulation problems and extended exposure to UV rays.  A mild iron deficiency is more likely than a severe underlying health condition to be the cause of peeling nails.  However, it is still useful for people to be aware of other conditions that may cause peeling nails. If they have any other relevant symptoms in addition to peeling nails, they will know to mention these to a doctor.  Below, we cover the additional symptoms of conditions that may cause peeling, brittle, or discolored nails.  Without treatment, a mild iron deficiency can become more serious and may lead to anemia. Anemia occurs when the body is low in healthy red blood cells and does not have enough hemoglobin available.  Hemoglobin is a substance in red blood cells that helps them to carry oxygen around the body.  In addition to peeling nails, the symptoms of a severe iron deficiency may include:  People can become dehydrated if they do not drink enough water or non-caffeinated beverages.  Dehydration may cause a range of symptoms, as well as peeling nails. These can include:  An underactive thyroid does not produce enough hormones. As well as brittle nails, an underactive thyroid may cause:  In some instances, nail abnormalities may be a sign of lung disease.  According to the  American Lung Association , the symptoms of lung disease may include:  According to a  2015 article , brown discoloration on the upper half of the nail may indicate kidney disease.  Other symptoms may include:  The best way to treat peeling nails is:  The recommended daily intake of iron is  18 milligrams (mg) . Iron-rich foods include:   Research  suggests that  coconut oil  is a safe and effective skin moisturizer. Rubbing coconut oil into nails may help to keep them moisturized.  Although it is rare, underlying health conditions can sometimes cause peeling nails. Below are the treatments for each of these conditions.  The standard treatment for iron deficiency is to eat more iron-rich foods or take iron supplements.  If a person has symptoms of anemia, they should speak to their doctor, who can recommend the best treatment.  People can treat mild dehydration by drinking more water. If they have severe dehydration, they may need to receive intravenous fluids in a hospital.  It is possible to treat an underactive thyroid with a synthetic form of the T4 hormone that a healthy thyroid produces.  There are several treatments available for this condition. The best one will depend on the type of lung disease that a person has.  One type of lung disease is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Treatments for this may include:  The following tips can help to prevent peeling nails:  Peeling nails are generally treatable at home, but if the nails are also painful or bleeding, it is best to visit a doctor. People should also seek medical advice if peeling nails accompany other symptoms of more severe conditions.    
 Abdullah, L. (2011, February). Common nail changes and disorders in older people.  Canadian Family Physician ,  57 (2), 173–181.  Abdullah, L. (2011, February). Common nail changes and disorders in older people.  Canadian Family Physician ,  57 (2), 173–181.  Iron: Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Lin, T.-K., Zhong, L., &amp; Santiago, J. L. (2018, January). Anti-inflammatory and skin barrier repair effects of topical application of some plant oils.  International Journal of Molecular Sciences , 19 (1), 70.  Singal, A., &amp; Arora, R. (2015, March–April). Nail as a window of systemic diseases.  Indian Dermatology Online Journal ,  6 (2), 67–74.  The lowdown on thyroid slowdown. (2014, March).  Warning signs of lung disease. (2018, March 15).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "How to fix peeling nails."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322321.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, June 29). "How to fix peeling nails."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  