 A heart palpitation may feel as though the heart is:  Heart palpitations are usually harmless. However, in some cases, they can indicate a problem in the heart or elsewhere in the body.  Heart palpitations can cause a wide variety of symptoms. Pregnant women may experience one or any combination of the following:  A variety of factors can cause heart palpitations during pregnancy. Most are not serious.  In some cases, however, the underlying cause of the palpitations requires medical treatment.  Some harmless causes of heart palpitations during pregnancy include:  More serious causes include:  Pregnant women and healthcare providers may find it difficult to distinguish the cause of palpitations.  Many symptoms of heart problems occur during a normal pregnancy, making it hard to know whether an underlying condition is causing the symptoms.  Only a doctor can correctly diagnose the cause of heart palpitations. The doctor will usually begin by asking about symptoms and medical history.  If a woman has any of the following, it is important to tell the doctor:  The doctor will usually then perform an exam and listen for abnormalities of the heartbeat. They will often perform additional tests to pinpoint the underlying cause of the palpitations.  The doctor may use any of the following to make a diagnosis:  A woman attends several scheduled visits during pregnancy. The frequency of these visits will increase as the due date approaches, or if the doctor suspects that there are complications.  If heart palpitations occur more frequently between visits, become more intense, or last for increasingly long periods, a woman should contact the doctor.  Seek emergency medical attention if any of the following symptoms occur with heart palpitations:  Heart palpitations do not necessarily require treatment.  When symptoms are mild and do not result from an underlying condition, a doctor will usually not recommend treatment, and a woman can expect the palpitations to end with the pregnancy.  If symptoms are severe, a doctor may prescribe medication to regulate the heartbeat. The doctor will discuss the risks to the woman and fetus before prescribing medication.  The risks are higher during the first trimester, and a doctor is unlikely to prescribe medication then.  If a woman has an arrhythmia, a doctor can use a timed electrical current to return the heart to its normal rhythm. This procedure, called cardioversion, is considered safe during pregnancy.  Many pregnant women experience heart palpitations. They may be disconcerting, but most heart palpitations are harmless.  However, they can result from underlying problems that require medical treatment. Any pregnant woman who experiences heart palpitations should report her symptoms to her doctor for further evaluation because of this.  Heart palpitations during pregnancy often do not require treatment. For those who need treatment, many safe options are available.    
 High blood pressure and women. (2016, October).  High blood pressure and women. (2016, October).  Kienzle, M. G., &amp; Giudici, M. C. (2018, January). Heart palpitations: Frequently asked questions.  Marine, J. (n.d.). When to evaluate heart palpitations.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "How to stop heart palpitations during pregnancy."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322327.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, July 2). "How to stop heart palpitations during pregnancy."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  