 In this article, learn about these physical effects of  depression , including chronic pain, weight changes, and increased  inflammation .  Depression is a complex  mental health  condition that causes a person to have low mood and may leave them feeling persistently sad or hopeless.  Depressive symptoms can be a temporary experience in response to grief or trauma. But when the symptoms last longer than 2 weeks, it can be a sign of a serious depressive disorder.  The same symptoms can also be a sign of another mental health condition, such as bipolar or  post-traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD).  The   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders  ( DSM-5 )  lists the following symptoms of depression:  The symptoms vary between individuals and may change over time. For a doctor to diagnose depression, a person must have five or more symptoms that must be present during the same 2-week period.  Research has documented many ways that depression can affect physical health, including the following:  People with depression  may experience  appetite changes, which can cause unintended weight loss or gain.  Medical experts have associated excessive weight gain with many health issues, including  diabetes  and  heart disease . Being underweight can harm the heart, affect fertility, and cause fatigue.  People with depression may experience  unexplained aches or pains , including joint or muscle pain, breast tenderness, and  headaches .  A person's depression symptoms can worsen because of chronic pain.  Depression can reduce a person's motivation to make positive lifestyle choices. Their risk of heart disease increases when they eat a poor diet and have a sedentary lifestyle.  Depression may also be an independent risk factor for heart health problems.  According to research published in 2015 , one in five people with  heart failure  or  coronary artery disease  has depression.   Research  indicates that chronic  stress  and depression are linked to inflammation and may change the immune system.  Other research  suggests that depression could be due to chronic inflammation.  People with depression are  more likely  to have inflammatory conditions or autoimmune disorders, such as  irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS),  type 2 diabetes , and  arthritis .  However, it is unclear whether depression causes inflammation or chronic inflammation makes someone more vulnerable to depression. More research is necessary to understand the link between the two.  People with depression may have a decreased libido, have trouble becoming aroused, no longer have orgasms, or have less pleasurable orgasms.  Some people also experience relationship problems due to depression, which can have an impact on sexual activity.  People who already have a chronic health condition may find their symptoms are worse if they develop depression.  Chronic illnesses may already feel isolating or stressful, and depression may exacerbate these feelings.  A person with depression may also struggle to follow the treatment plan for a chronic illness, which can allow the symptoms to get worse.  People who experience depression and who have a chronic illness should talk to a doctor about strategies for addressing both conditions. Preserving mental health may improve physical health and make a chronic condition easier to manage.  People with depression may experience  insomnia  or trouble sleeping.  This condition can leave them feeling exhausted, making it difficult to manage both physical and mental health.  Doctors link  sleep deprivation  to a host of health problems. Similarly, research has  correlated  long-term sleep deprivation with  high blood pressure , diabetes, weight-related issues, and some types of  cancer .  People with depression  often report  stomach or digestion problems, such as  diarrhea , vomiting, nausea, or  constipation . Some people with depression also have chronic conditions, including IBS.  According to  research published in 2016 , this may be because depression changes the brain's response to stress by suppressing activity in the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and adrenal glands.  Recognizing that depression can cause physical health problems can help a person to seek treatment and make changes to help manage their symptoms.  Depression is treatable. A doctor may recommend a combined approach, using medication, therapy, and lifestyle changes. With the right support, a person can manage both physical and mental health effects of depression.    
 Blumenthal, J. A., Smith, P. J., &amp; Hoffman, B. M. (2013, July 1). Is exercise a viable treatment for depression?  ACSM's Health &amp; Fitness Journal ,  16 (4), 14–21.  Blumenthal, J. A., Smith, P. J., &amp; Hoffman, B. M. (2013, July 1). Is exercise a viable treatment for depression?  ACSM's Health &amp; Fitness Journal ,  16 (4), 14–21.  Cohen, B. E., Edmondson, D., &amp; Kronish, I. M. (2015, April 24). State of the art review: Depression, stress, anxiety, and cardiovascular disease.  American Journal of Hypertension ,  28 (11), 1295–1302.  Coryell, W. (2018, May). Depressive disorders.  Karling, P., Wikgren, M., Adolfsson, R., &amp; Norrback, K.-F. (2016, April). Hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis hypersuppression is associated with gastrointestinal symptoms in major depression.  Journal of Neurogastroenterology and Motility ,  22 (2), 292–303.  Leonard, B. E. (2010, December 15). The concept of depression as a dysfunction of the immune system.  Current Immunology Reviews ,  6 (3), 205–212.  Liu, H., Waite, L., Shen, S., &amp; Wang, D. (2016, October 6). Is sex good for your health? A national study on partnered sexuality and cardiovascular risk among older men and women.  Journal of Health and Social Behavior ,  57 (3), 276–296.  Medic, G., Wille, M., &amp; Hemels, M. E. H. (2017, May 19). Short- and long-term health consequences of sleep disruption.  Nature and Science of Sleep ,  9 , 151–161.  Miller, A. H., &amp; Raison, C. L. (2017, August 3). The role of inflammation in depression: From evolutionary imperative to modern treatment target.  Nature Reviews Immunology ,  16 (1), 22–34.  Rantala, M. J., Luoto, S., Krams, I., &amp; Karlsson, H. (2018, March). Depression subtyping based on evolutionary psychiatry: Proximate mechanisms and ultimate functions [Abstract].  Brain, Behavior, and Immunity ,  69 , 603–617.  Reynolds, C. R., &amp; Kamphaus, R. W. (2013). Major depressive disorder.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "How does depression affect the body?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322395.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, July 9). "How does depression affect the body?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  