 A person on a time-restricted eating diet will only eat during specific hours of the day. Outside of this period, they will fast.  In this article, we look at what time-restricted eating is, whether or not it works, and what effect it has on muscle gain. We also provide beginner's tips on how to get started with this diet plan.  Time-restricted eating means that a person eats all of their meals and snacks within a particular window of time each day. This timeframe can vary according to the person's preference and the plan they choose to follow. Typically though, the eating window in time-restricted programs ranges from 6–12 hours a day.  Outside of this period, a person consumes no  calories . They should, however, drink water or no-calorie beverages to remain hydrated. In some time-restricted diet plans, people may also consume unsweetened  coffee  or tea with no cream.  Time-restricted eating is a type of intermittent fasting. Intermittent fasting refers to any diet that alternates between periods of restricting calories and eating normally.  Although time-restricted eating will not work for everyone, those who have their doctor's approval may find it beneficial. Some recent studies have shown that it can aid weight loss and may lower the risk of metabolic diseases, such as  diabetes .  Time-restricted eating can help a person to restrict their food intake without having to count calories. It may also be a healthy way to avoid common diet pitfalls, such as late-night snacking. However, people with diabetes or other health issues should speak to their doctor before trying this type of diet.  No single diet plan will work for everyone. While some people are likely to have success with time-restricted eating, others may not benefit from it. It is best to speak to a doctor before trying time-restricted eating, or any other diet.  Many of the studies on time-restricted eating have been small or have involved animals rather than people, so large human studies are still necessary. Nonetheless, some recent research shows that time-restricted eating may have the potential to lead to weight loss and health improvement:  Although these studies suggest that time-restricted eating has potential, not all research shows a benefit.  A  2017 review  concluded that intermittent calorie restriction, including time-restricted feeding, offers no significant advantage over limiting calorie intake each day.  Research has shown that time-restricted eating can work well alongside efforts to build muscle.  One  study  investigated time-restricted eating in young men who followed a set resistance training program for 8 weeks. The men restricted their eating window to 4 hours on the 4 non-workout days each week.  The authors concluded that participants who followed the time-restricted eating plan reduced their calorie intake without losing strength. However, time-restricted eating did not result in reductions in  body weight  or body fat compared to a standard diet.  Another  study  placed resistance-trained men into either a time-restricted eating group or a normal diet group. Those in the time-restricted eating group ate 100 percent of their calorie needs during an 8-hour window each day for 8 weeks. The time-restricted eating led to a decrease in body fat with no reduction in muscle mass.  One of the main advantages of time-restricted eating is that it requires no special food or equipment. After getting a doctor's approval, a person can begin a time-restricted eating plan immediately.  However, as with any diet, some thought and planning can increase the likelihood of success. The following tips can help to make time-restricted eating safer and more effective:  Start with a shorter fasting period and then gradually increase it over time. For example, start with a fasting period of 10:00 p.m. to 6:30 a.m. Then increase this by 30 minutes every 3 days to reach the desired fasting period.  Studies have suggested that restricting feeding periods to less than 6 hours is unlikely to offer additional advantages over more extended feeding periods.  It is tempting to start a vigorous exercise plan alongside a diet for faster results. However, with time-restricted eating, this could make the fasting period more difficult.  People may wish to keep their existing exercise program the same until their body adjusts to the new eating plan. This can help to avoid increased hunger from extra workouts, which could cause diet burnout or failure.  Hunger can be difficult for people who do not have experience of fasting for several hours each day. Choosing foods rich in fiber and protein during the eating window can help to combat this. These nutrients help a person feel full and can prevent a blood sugar crash or food cravings.  For example, eat whole-grain bread and pasta rather than white or refined grains. Choose a snack which includes protein in the form of lean meat, egg, tofu, or nuts.  It is normal to have days where time-restricted eating does not work out. For example, a night out with friends, a special occasion, or a diet slip-up may lead to people eating outside of their fixed eating window.  However, this does not mean that they should quit.  It is best to see setbacks as an opportunity to get back on track. The next day, people can recommence the time-restricted eating plan and continue toward their goal.  For most people, time-restricted eating is unlikely to be a miracle weight-loss cure. However, studies have shown that it can offer health benefits without a high risk of side effects. It could be a simple way for many people to reduce their calorie intake without complicated or strict diet rules.  Which people, situations, or medical conditions might a time-restricted eating diet suit and why?   Time-restricted feeding seems to be beneficial for most people who are not experiencing acute illness or taking medications to lower blood sugar, for type 2 diabetes for example. 
 Adolescents, young adults, or middle-aged people may all benefit from time-restricted eating if they are only lightly or moderately physically active and are interested in: 
 
 losing weight 
 reducing blood sugar 
 reducing gut inflammation or improving their gut microbiome 
 
 These people are most likely to experience benefits with minimal downsides. 
 Time-restricted feeding may also be beneficial for those who are not successful with daily calorie restriction since some study results indicate that both types of diet yield similar results.   Time-restricted feeding seems to be beneficial for most people who are not experiencing acute illness or taking medications to lower blood sugar, for type 2 diabetes for example.  Adolescents, young adults, or middle-aged people may all benefit from time-restricted eating if they are only lightly or moderately physically active and are interested in:  These people are most likely to experience benefits with minimal downsides.  Time-restricted feeding may also be beneficial for those who are not successful with daily calorie restriction since some study results indicate that both types of diet yield similar results.    
 Aragon, A. A., Schoenfeld, B. J., Wildman, R., Kleiner, S., VanDusseldorp, T., Taylor, L., … Antonio, J. (2017, June 14). International society of sports nutrition position stand: Diets and body composition.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  14 (16).  Aragon, A. A., Schoenfeld, B. J., Wildman, R., Kleiner, S., VanDusseldorp, T., Taylor, L., … Antonio, J. (2017, June 14). International society of sports nutrition position stand: Diets and body composition.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  14 (16).  Chaix, A., Zarrinpar, A., Miu, P., &amp; Panda, S. (2014, December 2). Time-restricted feeding is a preventative and therapeutic intervention against diverse nutritional challenges.  Cell Metabolism ,  20 (6), 991–1,005.  Chung, H., Chou, W., Sears, D. D., Patterson, R. E., Webster, N., &amp; Ellies, L. G. (2016, December). Time-restricted feeding improves insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis in a mouse model of postmenopausal obesity.  Metabolism ,  65 (12), 1,743–1,754.  Gabel, K., Hoddy, K. K., Haggerty, N., Song, J., Kroeger, C. M., Trepanowski, J. F., ... Varady, K. A. (2018, June 15). Effects of 8-hour time restricted feeding on body weight and metabolic disease risk factors in obese adults: A pilot study.  Nutrition and Healthy Aging ,  4 (4), 345–353.  Moro, T., Tinsley, G., Bianco, A., Marcolin, G., Pacelli, Q. F., Battaglia, G., ... Paoli, A. (2016, October 13). Effects of eight weeks of time-restricted feeding (16/8) on basal metabolism, maximal strength, body composition, inflammation, and cardiovascular risk factors in resistance-trained males.  Journal of Translational Medicine ,  14 , 290.  Olsen, M. K., Choi, M. H., Kulseng, B., Zhao, C.-M., &amp; Chen, D. (2017, May 1). Time-restricted feeding on weekdays restricts weight gain: A study using rat models of high-fat diet-induced obesity.  Physiology &amp; Behavior ,  173 , 298–304.  Rothschild, J., Hoddy, K. K., Jambazian, P., &amp; Varady, K. A. (2014, May). Time-restricted feeding and risk of metabolic disease: A review of human and animal studies.  Nutrition Reviews ,  72 (5), 308–318.  Sutton, E. F., Beyl, R., Early, K. S., Cefalu, W. T., Ravussin, E., &amp; Peterson, C. M. (2018, June 5). Early time-restricted feeding improves insulin sensitivity, blood pressure, and oxidative stress even without weight loss in men with prediabetes.  Cell Metabolism ,  27 (6), 1,212–1,221.e3.  Tinsley, G. M., Forsse, J. S., Butler, N. K., Paoli, A., Bane, A. A., La Bounty, P. M., ... Grandjean, P. W. (2017). Time-restricted feeding in young men performing resistance training: A randomized controlled trial.  European Journal of Sport Science ,  17 (2), 200–207.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "Is time-restricted eating effective for weight loss?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322365.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, July 4). "Is time-restricted eating effective for weight loss?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  