 The symptoms of viral  pneumonia  are often similar to those of bacterial pneumonia, but, depending on the virus responsible, there may be a few additional symptoms.  Most of the time, viral pneumonia occurs as a complication of viral infections that cause the  flu  or common cold. In rare cases, viral pneumonia may be life-threatening.  Read on to learn more about the symptoms, causes, and treatment of viral pneumonia.  The symptoms of viral pneumonia may range in severity and can include the following:  Some people with viral pneumonia may also have a  sore throat  or a  headache , depending on the underlying cause of the viral infection.  Viral pneumonia also presents differently in each age group. Young children with viral pneumonia tend to have mild symptoms that gradually worsen. A child with viral pneumonia may develop noticeable wheezing, and their skin and lips often take on a blue tint from lack of oxygen. They are also likely to lose their appetite.  On the other hand, adults over the age of 65 may experience abnormally low body temperatures, confusion, and dizziness.  Viruses are responsible for viral pneumonia.  These viruses can include the following:  Viruses spread easily when affected people sneeze or cough. Coming into contact with a contaminated surface can also transmit the virus.  Viral pneumonia could affect anyone, as the viruses that cause it are very contagious.  However, the following factors may increase a person's risk of developing viral pneumonia:  Pneumonia is an infection in the lungs. Doctors classify pneumonia according to its cause. The causes of pneumonia include:  Bacterial and viral pneumonia are more common than pneumonia resulting from fungal infections.  Bacteria such as  Streptococcus pneumoniae  cause bacterial pneumonia. This type of pneumonia is usually more severe than viral pneumonia.  The symptoms of bacterial pneumonia may include:  Viral pneumonia may have some of the same symptoms, but the symptoms tend to be less severe.  Bacterial pneumonia requires treatment with  antibiotics . Viral pneumonia does not require antibiotics unless it causes a secondary bacterial infection.  A doctor will be able to diagnose viral pneumonia.  They will generally begin by asking about any symptoms and carrying out a physical examination. As part of the examination, the doctor will listen to the lungs for any abnormal sounds that may indicate pneumonia.  These sounds may include crackling in the lungs or wheezing while breathing. A doctor will also look for a rapid heart rate and decreased airflow.  If the doctor suspects that pneumonia may be present, they are likely to order some of the following tests to confirm the diagnosis:  The tests that the doctor decides to order will depend on the severity of a person's symptoms and whether or not they are in one of the higher-risk groups.  People who have an increased risk of developing pneumonia should see a doctor or visit an emergency room immediately if they develop flu-like symptoms along with any of the following:  Pneumonia can be extremely serious in higher-risk individuals. These people will need immediate treatment for the best outcome.  Viral pneumonia usually goes away on its own. Therefore, treatment aims to ease some of the symptoms. A person with viral pneumonia should get plenty of rest and drink extra fluids.  A doctor may prescribe cough medicine to help ease coughing. People should only take cough medicine if and when a doctor instructs them to because coughing helps to clear the infection from the lungs.  In some cases of viral pneumonia, a doctor may prescribe antiviral medication. This should reduce viral activity and tends to be most effective when the virus is in its early stages.  In rare instances, a doctor may hospitalize a person with viral pneumonia. People aged over 65 or with chronic health conditions are more likely to need hospital care.  The viruses that cause viral pneumonia are contagious. During the cold and flu season, a person can take steps to stay healthy. These steps may protect against viral pneumonia and other viral illnesses.  Some techniques that people can use to try to prevent getting sick include:  Most people with viral pneumonia recover within 1–2 weeks. Some people may take several weeks to recover fully, especially people who are immunocompromised or adults over the age of 65.  While viral pneumonia is extremely contagious, a person can practice good hygiene and self-care to lower their risk of developing the infection.    
 Brogan, R. J. (2017, December). Pneumonia.  Brogan, R. J. (2017, December). Pneumonia.  Galván, J. M., Rajas, O., &amp; Aspa, J. (2015, November). Review of non-bacterial infections in respiratory medicine: Viral pneumonia.  Archivos de Bronconeumología (English Edition) ,  51 (11), 590–597.  Gattarello, S., &amp; Rello, J. (2017, June 26). Severe viral pneumonia in adults: What is important for the ICU physician?  Hospital Practice ,  45 (4), 131–134.  Learn about pneumonia. (2018, March 30).  Pneumonia symptoms, causes, and risk factors. (2018, March 30).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What are the symptoms of viral pneumonia?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322350.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, July 3). "What are the symptoms of viral pneumonia?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  