 It is often possible to identify the cause of pain when swallowing by looking at the specific symptoms.  Depending on the cause, these may include sharp or dull pain in the jaw, throat, chest, or food pipe. The pain may only affect one side of the throat and can change when a person breathes deeply.  In this article, we take a closer look at the causes and symptoms of painful swallowing. We also look at how to relieve the pain.  Several illnesses and conditions that lead to infection,  inflammation , and obstruction of the throat, mouth, or food pipe can cause discomfort swallowing.  Depending on the cause, additional symptoms are often present. The following causes can lead to painful swallowing:  Throat infections are one of the most common causes of pain when swallowing. These include  strep throat , which is an infection with  Streptococcal  bacteria.  People with strep throat may also notice:   Tonsillitis  is an infection and inflammation of the tonsils, which are two lymph nodes at the back of the throat. Tonsillitis is a common cause of painful swallowing.  Tonsillitis is a contagious condition. Viruses or bacterial infections, including strep throat, can cause tonsillitis.  If the pain when swallowing is due to tonsillitis, people may also notice:   Epiglottitis  is a throat infection that causes inflammation of the epiglottis, which is the flap in the back of the throat that prevents food from going down the windpipe.  In addition to pain when swallowing, typical symptoms of epiglottitis include:  Yeast infections in the mouth, throat, or food pipe can also lead to discomfort swallowing. Yeast is a type of fungus that can grow out of control if the conditions inside the body change in a way that promotes yeast growth.  A bacteria called  Candida  is a common cause of yeast infections.  Additional symptoms might include:  The food pipe, also called the esophagus, is the pipe that carries food and liquid from the mouth to the stomach.  Esophagitis  is inflammation of the esophagus.  The most common cause of esophagitis is gastric reflux disease, which is a condition that allows stomach acid to flow back up the food pipe.  Certain medications and allergic reactions can also cause esophagitis.  Esophagitis can cause the following symptoms alongside painful swallowing:  Although less common than other causes, an injury to the throat can also lead to pain when swallowing.  Eating or drinking something that is too hot can burn the inside of the throat or food pipe. People can also scratch or cut the back of their throat when eating a cracker or chip that has a sharp edge.  Depending on the location and extent of the injury, there may only be pain on one side of the throat or further down in the food pipe.  An accurate diagnosis is vital to treat pain when swallowing. Doctors may recommend various tests to make a diagnosis. After reviewing a person's medical history and carrying out a physical examination, they may perform the following diagnostic tests:  Treatment for pain when swallowing generally depends on the cause.  Medication is the standard treatment for certain types of infection. Doctors usually recommend antifungal medications to treat yeast infections and  antibiotics  to treat bacterial infections, including strep throat.  When people have recurring tonsillitis, or it does not respond well to medication, a doctor may recommend removing the tonsils in a procedure called a tonsillectomy.  People can use the following home remedies for short-term relief from painful swallowing:  Painful swallowing often resolves in a few days, especially if it occurs due to a cold. However, in some cases, professional medical help is necessary to determine the cause and provide treatment.  It is best to consider seeing a doctor if the following circumstances apply:  It is also important to recognize when painful swallowing can be a sign of a medical emergency. A person should seek immediate medical care if pain when swallowing occurs alongside:  Although it can be uncomfortable, pain when swallowing is typically only temporary. Depending on the cause, painful swallowing often goes away in a few days.  For example, if the pain is due to a cold, it usually resolves within a week.  If a bacterial or fungal infection is causing the pain, treatment is usually successful. In the meantime, people can use home remedies to manage their symptoms and reduce discomfort.    
 Abdallah, C. (2012, July–September). Acute epiglottitis: Trends, diagnosis and management.  Saudi Journal of Anaesthesia ,  6 (3), 279–281.  Abdallah, C. (2012, July–September). Acute epiglottitis: Trends, diagnosis and management.  Saudi Journal of Anaesthesia ,  6 (3), 279–281.   Candida  infections of the mouth, throat, and esophagus. (2017, August 4).  Grossi, L., Ciccaglione, A. F., &amp; Marzio, L. (2017, May 7). Esophagitis and its causes: Who is "guilty" when acid is found "not guilty"?  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  23 (17), 3011–3016.  Symptoms and causes of GER &amp; GERD. (2014, November).  Worried your sore throat may be strep? (2018, January 31).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  de Pietro, MaryAnn. "Why does it hurt when I swallow?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Jun. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322301.php&gt;    APA  de Pietro, M. (2018, June 28). "Why does it hurt when I swallow?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  