 Most doctors do not recommend nipple stimulation to induce labor, but some anecdotal evidence exists for its effectiveness.  In this article, we consider the research on nipple stimulation and also look at the other home remedies that some people use to try to induce labor.  After a woman gives birth, stimulation of the nipples by a breast-feeding baby triggers the release of  oxytocin . Oxytocin is a hormone that triggers uterine contractions that help the uterus return to its pre-pregnancy size.  As vaginal labor requires uterine contractions to move the baby down the birth canal, many women use nipple stimulation to try to encourage these contractions.  In a  2011 survey  of postpartum women in the Midwestern United States, 7.5 percent of the 201 respondents said that they stimulated their nipples to try to induce labor.  A study in the journal   PLoS One   reports that 50 percent of women in Japan use nipple stimulation to help induce labor.  Researchers have conducted several studies regarding nipple stimulation and its effectiveness in inducing labor. These studies include the following:  Most experiments on nipple stimulation and labor have involved women with low-risk pregnancies.  Low-risk pregnancies are those in which the women have no additional health risks. These health risks include  high blood pressure , gestational  diabetes , low or high  amniotic fluid  amounts, or other risks that could complicate the pregnancy.  The theory behind nipple stimulation is that it mimics breast-feeding and causes sensory cells in the nipples to signal the brain to release oxytocin.  Some women use a breast pump to stimulate the nipples. Others may prefer to use their hands or a partner's mouth for stimulation.  Some ways to stimulate nipples with the hands include:  Some women also use nipple stimulation during labor to reduce its duration. This may make contractions feel particularly strong.  There are many other natural methods that people use to try to induce labor. Some of these techniques include:  Most methods to induce labor are either ineffective or pose the risk of unwanted side effects. As a result, doctors do not usually recommend them.  Before trying any methods to induce labor, a woman should talk to a doctor. If the doctor thinks that it is necessary to induce the birth, they can admit the woman to the hospital and prescribe medications to stimulate uterine contractions and labor.  Medications may include Pitocin, which is a synthetic version of oxytocin. However, doctors prefer not to use these methods unless they are medically necessary.  Are any natural ways to induce labor effective?  There is not enough data to suggest the effectiveness of any of the natural labor-inducing methods described above. Therefore, health professionals cannot recommend them as evidence-based approaches to labor induction.    
 Chaudhry, Z., Fischer, J., &amp; Schaffer, J. (2011, March 10). Women's use of nonprescribed methods to induce labor: A brief report [Abstract].  BIRTH: Issues in perinatal care ,  38 (2), 168–171.  Chaudhry, Z., Fischer, J., &amp; Schaffer, J. (2011, March 10). Women's use of nonprescribed methods to induce labor: A brief report [Abstract].  BIRTH: Issues in perinatal care ,  38 (2), 168–171.  Demirep, G., &amp; Gluer, H. (2015, October 7). The effect of uterine and nipple stimulation on induction with oxytocin and the labor process [Abstract].  Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing ,  12 (5), 273–280.  Duryea, E. (2017, April 18). The truth about "natural" ways to induce labor.  Singh, N., Tripathi, R., Mala, Y. M., &amp; Yelda, N. (2014, November 27). Breast stimulation in low-risk primigravida's at term: Does it aid in spontaneous onset of labor and vaginal delivery? A pilot study.  BioMed Research International ,  2014 , 695037.  Takahata, K., Horiuchi, S., Tadokoro, Y., Shuo, T., Sawano, E., &amp; Shinohara, K. (2018, February 15). Effects of breast stimulation for spontaneous onset of labor on salivary oxytocin levels in low-risk pregnant women: A feasibility study.  PLoS One ,  13 (2), e0192757.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Does nipple stimulation help to induce labor?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322326.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, July 2). "Does nipple stimulation help to induce labor?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  