 If the results of the test show that cortisol levels are outside the standard range, this can suggest a range of conditions, including  Addison's disease  and Cushing's syndrome.  The procedure is relatively simple and should not lead to any significant side effects.  Cortisol is a hormone that contributes to several bodily functions, including the fight or flight response to  stress .  When a person believes that they are in danger, the brain releases an extremely powerful chemical called adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).  This hormone triggers the adrenal gland, which is located just above the kidneys, to release cortisol.  The body uses cortisol to halt any non-essential physical processes. These include growth processes and reproductive and immune functions.  As non-essential functions shut down, the person will gain a burst of strength and energy to deal with the potential threat.  The release of cortisol may also cause emotional arousal, giving people strong emotions, such as anger and fear.  Cortisol also increases blood sugar levels and  insulin resistance .  Finally, cortisol supports several different systems in the body including:  Cortisol levels tend to be highest earlier in the day so a doctor will often recommend scheduling a test in the morning hours.  People will not typically need to fast in preparation for the test. However, a doctor may ask them to stop taking certain medications that might affect cortisol levels. It is essential to never stop taking a medication without speaking to a doctor first.  A cortisol level test usually includes the following steps:  When a technician carries out the cortisol level test between 6 a.m. and 8 a.m., the results will typically be within the range of  10–20  micrograms per deciliter (mcg/dL) in a healthy person.  A doctor will generally consider measurements outside of this range to be abnormally low or high. However, testing techniques vary between facilities. People should discuss their results with their doctor to confirm what their score may mean.  When test results are low, it may indicate one of the following:  Certain medications, including phenytoin and androgen drugs, may also reduce the levels of cortisol.  When test results indicate high cortisol levels, this may be because the person has a  tumor  in a part of the body that impacts the production of cortisol, such as the adrenal or pituitary gland.  Some drugs may also elevate levels of cortisol, including estrogen-containing drugs and synthetic glucocorticoids, such as prednisone.  Physical and emotional stress can cause raised levels of cortisol too, as can certain illnesses.  Women may have increased levels of cortisol during pregnancy.  Healthcare professionals consider the test to be safe.  There are some side effects of blood removal from the arm, including temporary scabbing and bruising or discoloration at the site of needle insertion.  In rare cases, a person may have more severe side effects, including:  If a doctor orders a cortisol test, there is a strong likelihood that they are trying to diagnose a specific disorder.  The doctor will discuss the results of the test with the individual. If a cortisol level test reveals low or high levels of cortisol, a person is likely to need additional testing to confirm a diagnosis.  Most people do not experience any significant side effects from the test and can continue with their everyday activities.    
 Abercrombie, H. C., Kalin, N. H., &amp; Davidson, R. J. (2005). Acute cortisol elevations cause heightened arousal ratings of objectively nonarousing stimuli.  Emotion ,  5 (3), 354–359.  Abercrombie, H. C., Kalin, N. H., &amp; Davidson, R. J. (2005). Acute cortisol elevations cause heightened arousal ratings of objectively nonarousing stimuli.  Emotion ,  5 (3), 354–359.  Cortisol. (2018, June 28).  Cortisol (Blood). (n.d.).  Cortisol test. (2017, October 3).  Findling, J. (2014, Spring). Diagnostic testing for Cushing's syndrome.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What does a cortisol level test show?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322330.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, July 2). "What does a cortisol level test show?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  