 Treatments for Haglund's deformity may initially include shoe modifications and  physical therapy . If these do not relieve pain, a doctor may recommend surgery to remove the bony ridge or repair the Achilles tendon.  People also refer to the condition as Haglund's syndrome or "pump bump." The term "pump bump" followed doctors observing that women who wore high-heeled pump shoes had the condition.  Experts now know that Haglund's deformity can happen to anyone, and pumps and other shoes are not necessarily exclusively to blame.  Patrick Haglund first named Haglund's deformity in 1927. The condition has been  described as idiopathic , meaning it has no apparent cause, although doctors have linked it to several factors.  A person's natural foot structure may sometimes make them more prone to Haglund's deformity.  Doctors have linked some features to Haglund's deformity, including:  Wearing certain types of shoes may cause Haglund's deformity, or some shoes may aggravate the condition and bring on symptoms such as pain.  Shoes or boots with rigid backs can cause friction that aggravates a foot structure that is prone to Haglund's deformity.  People with the foot types listed above may wish to avoid shoes with rigid backs and ensure their footwear fits properly.  The shoes most often linked to Haglund's deformity symptoms include:  Haglund's deformity can cause symptoms that range from mild to severe and may include:  A doctor may be able to identify Haglund's deformity by looking at the heel and discussing the symptoms.  Diagnostic tests, such as an X-ray or  MRI , may be used to evaluate the shape of the heel bone and to determine the severity of the condition. An X-ray or other tests can help a doctor decide which treatment options may be best.  Doctors will often try non-surgical treatments for Haglund's deformity first.  Although none of these treatments can alter the bone or the foot structure, they may provide pain relief for some people and may improve quality of life.  Some non-surgical treatment choices include:  Surgery may be needed when non-surgical treatments do not relieve symptoms. Surgery aims to remove the part of the heel bone that is sticking out. Surgery may also be used to repair the Achilles tendon if it is damaged.  Podiatrists and foot and ankle surgeons can perform different types of surgery to correct Haglund's deformity. The type of procedure depends on how severe the Haglund's deformity is, the person's health history, and their lifestyle.  Endoscopic surgery is less invasive than traditional surgery. Because it uses smaller incisions than traditional surgery, the  recovery is often shorter . According to 2018 research, it results in good to excellent outcomes in the short and medium-term.  Conventional surgery, however, also appears to have successful outcomes. One study found that the majority of those who had traditional surgery had  relief of their pain at their one-year follow-up . But, the authors noted that doctors should tell people that the recovery from surgery can be several months.  People cannot avoid Haglund's deformity in every case. People may, however, be able to reduce the risk of it developing by taking the following steps:  Haglund's deformity may be a result of genetic foot structure that people cannot prevent in many cases. Wearing proper footwear and avoiding friction on the heel, however, is a good strategy for preventing this condition.  People who have relatives with Haglund's deformity may wish to be cautious about footwear choices, avoiding the types of shoes and boots that cause friction on the heel.  Some treatments, fortunately, provide effective relief for Haglund's deformity. Noninvasive therapies often help relieve pain and may be enough for mild cases. For others, surgery can correct the underlying issue and bring relief.  People should not ignore foot pain. Finding a qualified health professional who treats this condition is key to resuming regular activity as quickly as possible.    
 Cerrato, R., &amp; Switaj, P. (2017, December). Using arthroscopic techniques for Achilles pathology.  Foot and Ankle Clinics ,  22 (4), 781–799.  Cerrato, R., &amp; Switaj, P. (2017, December). Using arthroscopic techniques for Achilles pathology.  Foot and Ankle Clinics ,  22 (4), 781–799.  Haglund's deformity. (n.d.).  Haglund's deformity. (n.d.).  Myerson, C. L., Shimozono, Y., &amp; Kennedy, J. G. (2018, June). Haglund's deformity and chronic Achilles tendonitis [Abstract].  Operative Techniques in Orthopaedics ,  28 (2), 104–109.  Natarajan, S., &amp; Narayanan, V. L. (2015, March). Haglund deformity — surgical resection by the lateral approach.  Malaysian Orthopaedic Journal ,  9 (1), 1–3.  Vaishya, R., Agarwal, A. K., Azizi, A. T., &amp; Vijay, V. (2016, October 7). Haglund's syndrome: A commonly seen mysterious condition.  Cureus ,  8 (10), e820.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "How do you treat Haglund's deformity?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322432.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, July 12). "How do you treat Haglund's deformity?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  