 In this article, we look at how Lexapro can affect appetite and weight. We also provide some tips on how to cope with any changes in weight that may occur as a result of taking this  antidepressant .  Doctors may prescribe Lexapro for the treatment of mood disorders, such as  depression  and  anxiety . Lexapro is one of a group of medications known as selective  serotonin  reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).  SSRIs work by increasing the amount of serotonin in the brain. Serotonin is a chemical that helps to regulate a person's mood.  Lexapro comes in the form of either a liquid or pills. The recommended dose is usually 10 milligrams (mg), which people should take once a day in the morning or the evening.  The medication usually takes 4–6 weeks to work, and a person may need to take it for months or years. Lexapro is safe to take over an extended period.  Many experts believe that this type of medication is less likely than older antidepressants to cause weight gain. Older forms of antidepressant medication include monoamine oxidase inhibitors and tricyclic antidepressants.  A person may gain some weight when taking Lexapro. This can happen for different reasons. Lexapro boosts serotonin, which plays a role in controlling weight. The medication may increase appetite directly, or a person may begin to eat more as their depression or anxiety lessens.  Weight loss is a less common side effect, but it can happen as the body adjusts to the medication. Some people may also find that they have more energy or more desire to exercise as the medication relieves their depression. This symptom relief could also put a stop to unhealthy patterns of behavior, such as binge eating, which could lead to some weight loss.  The  United States National Library of Medicine  include increased appetite as one of the recognized side effects of Lexapro. Having a larger appetite usually results in a person eating more, which can lead to weight gain. However, some people taking Lexapro will experience none or only some of the side effects linked to this medication.  Depression and anxiety can both affect a person's eating habits. They can cause someone to have less of an appetite, take less pleasure in food, or feel anxious about eating. As people receive treatment for their depression or anxiety, these symptoms should lessen or go away. This can increase a person's enjoyment of food, or reduce any anxiety relating to eating.  A  2014 study  in New England looked at weight changes over a 12-month period in people taking a range of antidepressants, including Lexapro. The researchers used citalopram as the reference drug for comparison.  All of the SSRIs in the study caused a gradual increase in weight. The only SSRI to cause some initial weight loss before weight gain was fluoxetine.  The average weight gain for Lexapro was less than 0.5 percent. The most significant weight gain occurred in young men and those who had a low body mass index ( BMI ) before starting treatment.   Research in 2017  looked at the role that SSRIs play in weight gain and found that specific risk factors increased the likelihood of a person gaining weight when taking these antidepressants. These factors included:  A  2011 study  directly compared Lexapro with nortriptyline, which is an older tricyclic antidepressant. The authors found that Lexapro was the less likely of the two drugs to cause weight gain.  It is not completely clear why taking SSRIs such as Lexapro can lead to weight gain. More research is necessary to provide a definite answer.  Medication affects everyone differently. People who experience dramatic weight loss or gain may wish to seek medical advice. It is often possible for a physician to prescribe an alternative antidepressant.  Alongside medication, exercise can be an essential part of treatment. As well as helping a person to avoid weight gain, it can improve sleep and reduce  stress  and anxiety.  The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  recommend that adults do at least 2.5 hours of exercise every week. People can break this down into smaller chunks to fit it into their everyday routine.  Eating well is key to preventing changes in  body weight . A healthful diet includes whole grains, fruits, vegetables, some dairy, and protein. Eating healthful snacks and not skipping meals can help a person to maintain a good level of energy throughout the day.  Lexapro can cause other side effects, which may include:  If these side effects do not go away or are very severe, a person should seek medical advice.  Some side effects, including the following, can be serious and require urgent medical attention:  All SSRIs have a slightly different range of side effects. If the side effects of an antidepressant are affecting a person's quality of life, they might benefit from trying an alternative drug to see if it causes them fewer side effects.  Weight changes are one possible side effect of Lexapro. People whose weight remains within a healthy range may feel willing to accept this change if it is preferable to the feelings of anxiety or depression they experience without the medication.  However, weight gain or loss can sometimes cause health problems, and it can also affect a person's self-esteem or well-being. In such cases, a person may wish to seek advice from a doctor or try an alternative medication.  A healthful diet and regular exercise are a vital part of the recovery from mood disorders. They can also help to prevent weight changes as the body adjusts to the medication.    
 Blumenthal, S. R., Castro, V. M., Clements, C. C., Rosenfield, H. R., Murphy, S. N., Fava, M., … Perlis, R. H. (2014, August). An electronic health records study of long-term weight gain following antidepressant use.  JAMA Psychiatry ,  71 (8), 889–896.  Blumenthal, S. R., Castro, V. M., Clements, C. C., Rosenfield, H. R., Murphy, S. N., Fava, M., … Perlis, R. H. (2014, August). An electronic health records study of long-term weight gain following antidepressant use.  JAMA Psychiatry ,  71 (8), 889–896.  Care for your health. (n.d.).  Escitalopram. (2018, July 9).  Escitalopram (marketed as Lexapro) information. (2014, December 16).  Escitalopram. (n.d.).  Healthy diet: Eating with mental health in mind. (n.d.).  How much physical activity do adults need? (2015, June 4).  Label: Escitalopram — escitalopram tablet, film coated. (2017, February 2).  Shi, Z., Atlantis, E., Taylor, A. W., Gill, T. K., Price, K., Appleton, S., … Licinio, J. (2017, August 11). SSRI antidepressant use potentiates weight gain in the context of unhealthy lifestyles: Results from a 4-year Australian follow-up study.  BMJ Open ,  7 , e016224.  Uher, R., Mors, O., Hauser, J., Rietschel, M., Maier, W., Kozel, D., … Farmer, A. (2011, April 1). Changes in body weight during pharmacological treatment of depression.  International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology ,  14 (3), 367–375.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "Can Lexapro cause weight changes?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322444.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2018, July 13). "Can Lexapro cause weight changes?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  