 Simple  cysts  are relatively common and usually clear on their own. Complex cysts are more likely to need treatment.  Most  ovarian cysts  are benign, meaning that they are noncancerous.  In this article, we take a close look at complex ovarian cysts, including their causes, symptoms, and treatments.  Ovarian cysts are small sacs that form in or on an ovary. Ovarian cysts can be simple or complex, depending on the substances that are inside them.   Simple cysts  are filled with fluid. Monthly  ovulation  will often include the formation of cysts, and they are not usually a cause for concern. When they cause no problems, they are called functional cysts.   Complex cysts  are less common than simple cysts. Either blood or a hard substance fills complex cysts. Unlike simple cysts, complex cysts are not related to the typical menstrual cycle.  Most cysts are not harmful. According to the  Office of Women's Health (OWH) , cancerous cysts are rare and more common in older women.  The different types of complex ovarian cyst include:  A person with complex ovarian cysts may not experience any symptoms. People may only discover them during medical exams for other conditions or symptoms.  If complex ovarian cysts do cause symptoms, people may notice the following:  If a person has endometriomas, they may have additional symptoms that include:  People should see their doctor if they experience severe pain in the abdomen, a  fever , and vomiting.  In many cases, medical experts do not know what causes complex ovarian cysts.  A condition called  endometriosis  causes endometriomas. Endometriosis is when the cells of the uterine lining grow outside of the uterus.  Women who ovulate are most at risk for developing an ovarian cyst. Meanwhile, after  menopause , ovarian cysts are more likely to develop into  ovarian cancer .  In many cases, a cyst will clear on its own without treatment. However, if a doctor suspects that someone has an ovarian cyst, they will typically conduct a pelvic examination.  A doctor may perform an  ultrasound scan  to identify the type and location of any cysts. They may take blood samples to look for proteins that might indicate if a person has  cancer .  Most complications from complex ovarian cysts are minor, but some may be more severe.  Complications of complex ovarian cysts may include the following:  If a cyst ruptures or hemorrhages, a person may experience severe symptoms, including:  Complex cysts are more likely to need treatment than simple cysts.  According to the OWH, between  5–10 percent  of women with ovarian cysts will have surgery. Of that number, between 13–21 percent are cancerous.  A doctor may recommend surgery when a cyst is becoming too large, interfering with the ovary or other organs, or is painful.  A surgeon will often use laparoscopy to remove an ovarian cyst. Here, the medical team places the individual under general anesthesia, and the surgeon performs keyhole surgery, using small entry points, to remove the cyst.  Most complex ovarian cysts are benign and may not cause any symptoms. A person may experience pain or discomfort if the cyst grows too large.  An enlarged cyst may push against the bladder, cause abdominal pain, or interfere with fertility. Full recovery is usual when a person requires surgery.  If someone suspects that they have an ovarian cyst, they should speak to their doctor to find out the best course of action.    
 About endometriosis. (n.d.).  About endometriosis. (n.d.).  Berna, C. (2016, June 2). Endometrioma: What you need to know.  Functional ovarian cysts. (n.d.).  Manjiri, S., Padmalatha, S. K., &amp; Shetty, J. (2017, January–March). Management of complex ovarian cysts in newborns – Our experience.  Journal of Neonatal Surgery ,  6 (1), 3.  Ovarian cysts. (2018, May 22).  Pre menopausal asymptomatic complex ovarian cysts. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What to know about complex ovarian cysts."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322476.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, July 16). "What to know about complex ovarian cysts."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  