 The production of adrenaline occurs in the adrenal glands, which sit above the kidneys. Adrenaline is responsible for the fight-or-flight reaction to a threat, and it triggers specific processes in the body. For example, it might make the body send extra oxygen to the lungs to aid a person to run away.  As well as allowing a quick escape from danger, adrenaline has other effects on the body. These include:  However, the release of adrenaline into the body may sometimes occur when there is no real threat. The hormone has the same effect on the body whether or not the danger is present.  The release of adrenaline into the body occurs very quickly, usually within a  few seconds .  It goes away once the possible threat has disappeared. This speed is what gives an adrenaline rush its name.  Adrenaline triggers the following changes in the body:  Side effects may include sweating as a reaction to  stress , feeling lightheaded due to changes in blood and oxygen supply, and a change in temperature as a result of the blood redirection.  The effects of adrenaline on the body can last for up to 1 hour after an adrenaline rush.  An adrenaline rush does not always happen when a person is facing a real threat. It may also occur during times of stress, such as an exam or job interview.  Extreme activities, which include riding a rollercoaster or doing a bungee jump, can also trigger an adrenaline rush.  Some people enjoy the feeling of an adrenaline rush. They may choose to do extreme sports or activities to trigger a deliberate release of adrenaline into the body.  During the day, a person may be too busy or distracted to think about sources of stress or worry. Therefore, these thoughts often appear at night as a person is trying to sleep. If the stress is extreme, it may trigger an adrenaline rush.  It is also possible for a dream to trigger a fight-or-flight response.  The primary causes of an adrenaline rush are:   Anxiety  and stress can cause a more frequent release of adrenaline into the body.  Other causes include the following:   PTSD  can affect people who have had a traumatic experience, such as combat or sexual assault. People who have PTSD may experience an adrenaline rush when thinking about their stress or trauma from the past.  This is sometimes known as hyperarousal. It can cause concentration problems, a jittery feeling, difficulty sleeping, constant alertness to possible danger, and feelings of irritability.  Sometimes a  tumor  can cause the body to create too much adrenaline. This can occur when the tumor is on the adrenal glands, called a pheochromocytoma, or in part of the nervous system other than the brain, known as a paraganglioma.  Both of these types of tumor are very rare, but they may cause a person to experience an adrenaline rush at random. This might feel similar to a  panic attack .  An adrenaline rush can be an uncomfortable experience. Sometimes it will happen at an inconvenient time.  There are some steps that a person can take to control their body's reaction to a release of adrenaline.  These techniques can help to calm the body and mind, and they may lessen the immediate effects of an adrenaline rush.  Over time, high levels of adrenaline in the body can cause health problems. These include:  In the short term, an adrenaline rush should have no impact on health.  An adrenaline rush will usually have an underlying cause, such as stress or a tumor on the adrenal glands. People should consider seeing a doctor if they are experiencing frequent adrenaline rushes, as these can have an impact on health in the long term.  If an adrenaline rush occurs as a result of stress or anxiety, a doctor should be able to offer advice or treatment. They may recommend lifestyle changes, medication, or therapy.  Seeking support from others, addressing the underlying cause of stress, sleeping well, and doing regular exercise may all help.    
 Adrenaline. (2018, January).  Adrenaline. (2018, January).  Holt, E. H., &amp; Peery, H. (2010).  Basic Medical Endocrinology . Academic Press.  Halpern, M. (2018, May 27). Trends in sleep patterns among mental health screeners.  Paraganglioma. (2016, December).  Understanding the stress response. (2018, May 1).  What is adrenaline? (n.d.).  What is PTSD? (2017, September 15).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "What happens when you get an adrenaline rush?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322490.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2018, July 17). "What happens when you get an adrenaline rush?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  