 Often, people find that their  eczema  or dermatitis gets particularly bad on parts of the skin that they expose to the elements in winter, for example, their hands and face.  A range of treatments and home remedies can tackle winter flare-ups of eczema or prevent rashes and itchiness.  Read on for 10 tips for preventing eczema during winter, plus how to help babies and children with eczema flare-ups.  To minimize eczema outbreaks and soothe irritated skin during the winter, people can try the following methods:  When the skin is experiencing big changes in temperature, it starts to dry and feel itchy.  In winter, our skin keeps jumping back and forth between temperature extremes. This cycle of moving from the cold air outside to the warm and dry air indoors can make the skin dry and cracked.  People can reduce eczema flare-ups by avoiding abrupt changes in temperature. Wear gloves, scarves, and hats when outside to stop the skin from getting cold.  Transition slowly between temperatures by using the following strategies:  Moisturizing is an important part of skincare for eczema, and this is especially true in the winter months. People's skin may need a heavier moisturizer, such as shea butter, during winter months.  Always carry moisturizer and apply it liberally several times a day to protect the skin from cold, dry winter air.  When shopping for moisturizers, look out for ones  approved by the National Eczema Association . Oil-based moisturizers and emollients are especially useful.  During the changing temperatures of winter, the skin becomes more sensitive. This means that skincare products that do not usually irritate the skin can start to cause problems, such as contact dermatitis.  Soaps and detergent can contain harsh chemicals or fragrances that may irritate sensitive skin. Switch to natural or unscented skincare products to reduce irritation.  People should also avoid washing the hands, face, or body excessively during winter, as water can dry out skin by stripping away its natural, protective oils.  People's skin naturally creates  vitamin D  when they expose it to sunlight. The sun comes out less often during winter, so it can be more difficult to get the  vitamin  D that our skin needs to repair itself.  A review of studies from  2016  suggests that vitamin D supplements can significantly improve the symptoms of eczema or atopic dermatitis.  While the sun is less hot in winter, people may still need to use sunscreen.  Sunburn  can make eczema worse as it further dries out already dry skin.  The air becomes much drier in winter, both inside and outside the house. This can cause skin irritation, leading to painful, cracked skin.  Along with moisturizing the skin regularly, people can use a humidifier inside the house to add moisture to the air. This  can help  to stop the skin from cracking and becoming irritated.  After spending time outside in the snow or rain, remove wet clothes right away, as the cold and damp environment can make eczema worse.  Always practice good hygiene after getting wet. Cold, damp environments can encourage fungal growth.  A doctor or dermatologist can prescribe a variety of creams, medications, and ointments to treat eczema.  Even if people do not need them for the rest of the year, it may be worthwhile keeping hold of prescription medications to use when winter comes.  The  National Eczema Association  recommend the following treatments for eczema:  Research about natural treatments for eczema is still underway. Researchers have tested the effects of natural supplements, such as evening primrose oil, borage oil, and Chinese herbal medicines. However, it is not yet clear how effective these are for treating eczema.  The  National Eczema Association  suggest that some people may find relief in the following:  Layering is an important tool for avoiding winter flare-ups of eczema. Wearing layers can allow people to respond to changing temperatures easily. It also means they can keep their skin at an evenly warm temperature, and allowing the skin to breathe when needed.  Along with the cold, sweat can also irritate eczema, so people should avoid getting too hot during winter.  When bundling up, choose natural fabrics. Harsh fabrics, including wool, are commonly used in winter clothes, and they may irritate your skin further.  Several studies  have shown  that in people with atopic dermatitis, certain foods can worsen eczema symptoms.  Food allergies  can cause eczema, with common culprits being milk, shellfish, and eggs.  On the other hand, foods that contain prebiotics  may help  to reduce eczema symptoms, when taken together.  People can talk to a doctor to find out if any food allergies may be causing eczema flare-ups, especially if their diet changes between seasons.  Babies and children may also experience eczema flare-ups in winter. To help protect them, caregivers can use the following methods:  Staying warm, layering, adding moisture to both skin and air, and avoiding irritating products will help eczema in the winter.  Teaching children the importance of staying warm, and using layers correctly to avoid the hot-cold cycle will help eczema symptoms.  For more suggestions on how to manage eczema in winter, people may wish to take a look at  the National Eczema Association's "member's tips" for avoiding flare-ups during winter .    
 15 tips for avoiding eczema flares in winter. (n.d.).  15 tips for avoiding eczema flares in winter. (n.d.).  Dhar, S., &amp; Srinivas, S. M. (2016, November). Food allergy in atopic dermatitis.  Indian Journal of Dermatology ,  61 (6), 645–648.  Eczema (atopic dermatitis). (2015).  Eczema (atopic dermatitis) treatment. (2017, May 24).  Eczema products. (n.d.).  Ferreira, M. A., Vonk, J. M., Baurecht, H., Marenholz, I., Tian, C., Hoffman, J. D., … Paternoster, L. (2017, December). Shared genetic origin of asthma, hay fever and eczema elucidates allergic disease biology.  Nature Genetics ,  49 (12), 1752–1757.  Hawryluk, E. (n.d.). Topicals, oral medicines and phototherapy: An overview of eczema treatments.  Humphreys, K. (n.d.). Eczema in winter.  Katta, R., &amp; Schlichte, M. (2014, March). Diet and dermatitis: Food triggers.  The Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology ,  7 (3), 30–36.  Kim, G., &amp; Bae, J. H. (2016, September). Vitamin D and atopic dermatitis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  Nutrition ,  32 (9), 913–920.  Lio, P. (2015, March 10). Natural and alternative treatments for eczema, what works, what doesn't.  Schlichte, M. J., Vandersall, A., &amp; Katta, R. (2016, July 31). Diet and eczema: A review of dietary supplements for the treatment of atopic dermatitis.  Dermatology Practical &amp; Conceptual ,  6 (3), 23–29.  Six tips for keeping eczema calm in winter. (n.d.).  What is eczema? (n.d.).  What is eczema? (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "Ten tips to prevent eczema flares in winter."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322422.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, July 11). "Ten tips to prevent eczema flares in winter."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  