 This article discusses the causes and symptoms of end-stage kidney disease (ESKD), which is also called end-stage renal disease (ESRD) or kidney failure.  We also cover treatment, prevention, and ways to reduce the risk of developing ESKD.  End-stage kidney disease or ESKD is the most advanced stage of chronic or long-term kidney disease, which is when a person gradually loses kidney function over time.  There are five stages of kidney disease. ESKD is stage 5.  When a person has ESKD, their kidneys fail to function, either wholly or partially. Even if the kidneys work partially, it is not enough to meet the body's needs.  The kidneys have an essential role in the body. They filter out waste and excess water from the blood. These waste products come out in a person's urine.  If a person has ESKD, waste products can build up in their blood and may become life-threatening.  A person with ESKD will need kidney dialysis or a kidney transplant to save their life.  A buildup of waste products in the blood causes the symptoms of ESKD. The buildup occurs because the kidneys are no longer able to filter those waste products out of the blood sufficiently.  A person with ESKD may experience:   Chronic kidney disease  can slowly lead to kidney failure and ESKD, but the kidneys may also stop working suddenly.  If a person suddenly has kidney failure, it is called acute renal failure or acute kidney injury.  We explore the causes of ESKD as well as acute renal failure below:  According to the  American Kidney Fund ,  diabetes  and  high blood pressure  are the first and second most common chronic conditions that cause ESKD.  Other chronic conditions that can cause ESKD include:  Acute renal failure is when the kidneys stop working suddenly. This may occur due to:  ESKD is the most advanced stage of chronic or long-term kidney disease. Chronic kidney disease affects  between 10 and 16 percent  of adults worldwide.  Several factors increase the risk of chronic kidney disease, including:  If a person has chronic kidney disease, the following factors increase the risk it will progress to ESKD:  Reduced kidney function may affect many other parts of the body.  Complications of ESKD include:  If a person has symptoms of ESKD, a doctor may test their blood and urine for waste products. These tests may include:  According to  research from 2016 , a doctor may diagnose ESKD if a person has uremia, which is when the blood retains large amounts of substances that the kidneys usually remove in the urine. Uremia means they will need ongoing kidney dialysis.  Doctors will also look for a low GFR, which tells them if the kidneys are not filtering a person's blood well.  A doctor will usually suggest renal replacement therapy for ESKD. Renal replacement therapy includes kidney dialysis or a kidney transplant.  In 2013, more than  1.4 million people  were receiving renal replacement therapy worldwide.  There are two main types of kidney dialysis: hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis.  Hemodialysis is when a machine filters waste from a person's blood. This process takes 3 or 4 hours, and people have it done at a dialysis center. A person with ESKD will usually use hemodialysis 2 or 3 times each week.  During peritoneal dialysis, a person pumps dialysis fluid into their abdomen. The fluid draws out waste fluids through the lining of the abdomen, which is known as the peritoneum. The fluid comes out through a catheter. Peritoneal dialysis can be done at home.  A kidney transplant is when a surgeon replaces the damaged kidney with a healthy one from a donor.  Alongside renal replacement therapy, a person may need to follow a specific diet to support their treatment. The diet may involve:  The following lifestyle changes may slow the progress of chronic kidney disease:  If a person has the symptoms of chronic kidney disease or ESKD, they should see their doctor. Getting the right treatment, as soon as possible, may improve the outlook for this conditions.  Without kidney dialysis or a kidney transplant, ESKD is life-threatening. A person with ESKD that requires kidney dialysis will continue to use it long-term. A kidney transplant may help them regain normal kidney function.    
 Agarwal, R. (2016, June 1). Defining end-stage renal disease in clinical trials: A framework for adjudication.  Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation ,  31 (6), 864–867.  Agarwal, R. (2016, June 1). Defining end-stage renal disease in clinical trials: A framework for adjudication.  Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation ,  31 (6), 864–867.  Kazancioglu, R. (2013, December). Risk factors for chronic kidney disease: An update.  Kidney International Supplements ,  3 (4), 368–371.  Kidney failure (ESRD): Causes, symptoms, &amp; treatments. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What to know about end-stage kidney disease."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322471.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, July 16). "What to know about end-stage kidney disease."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  