 The lead-up to  menopause  is called perimenopause. Changing hormone levels during this time can alter the frequency, symptoms, and regularity of a person's periods.  Each person's experience of perimenopause is different, and changes to the menstrual cycle vary between individuals.  When people are approaching menopause, hormonal shifts cause their bodies to ovulate less frequently. When the ovary does not release an egg, the uterus lining does not shed, and the person does not have a period.  The most common shift in the menstrual cycle is that a person begins to have fewer monthly periods.  Because  ovulation  is not occurring cyclically during perimenopause, the body produces smaller amounts of a hormone called  progesterone . This can cause the lining of the uterus to build up for longer than usual, which makes periods less frequent and heavier.  Because of these hormonal fluctuations, people may notice the following changes in their periods during perimenopause:  The time between monthly periods can also vary greatly. Some people's periods may change unpredictably from month to month. For example, their period may be heavy one month and absent the next.  In general, people experience lighter and less frequent periods as they go through perimenopause. If someone experiences, longer, heavier, and more frequent periods they should see their doctor to discuss possible reasons for this.  Over time, perimenopause will cause a person's periods to become less frequent and eventually to stop altogether. Typically, doctors consider the transition into menopause as complete when an individual has  gone 1 year without a period .  After 1 year, people should talk to their doctor about any vaginal bleeding.  If people notice that their menstrual symptoms are becoming more uncomfortable during perimenopause, they can try:  People who experience irregular or painful periods might find relief from using hormonal  birth control .  Many people report other symptoms during perimenopause, including mood swings, hot flashes, vaginal dryness, and exhaustion. Doctors often prescribe  hormone replacement therapy  (HRT) to help manage these symptoms.  Hormones can help with many symptoms, but people should note that they can carry health risks,  including  an increased risk of:  The risk is usually small and depends on the person's overall health and the specific treatment used. So, always discuss the benefits and risks with a doctor.   The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists  noted that certain herbs, including soy and black cohosh, may help with some perimenopause symptoms. Always talk to a doctor before trying new remedies, including these supplements, which are available over-the-counter.  Some people believe that soy helps perimenopause symptoms because it mimics estrogen.  According to a  2017 study , eating a diet rich in soy products may help people regulate their hormones. The researchers found that certain soy supplements can reduce the number of menopause symptoms a person experiences.  Because most people still have periods during perimenopause, it is  still possible to get pregnant  during this time. Those who already use hormonal birth control should continue taking it if they want to avoid pregnancy.  Some dietary changes can help a person stay healthy during this transition.  Diet tips include:  The regular monthly period is not the only reason why people may bleed.  Because a person's periods are often irregular during perimenopause, they should pay extra attention for any abnormal symptoms — particularly as some uterus-related conditions are more common during and after perimenopause.  People may bleed because of:  Perimenopause is not a disease and does not require treatment. It can, however, increase people's risk of developing certain diseases. Moreover, the menstrual cycle can change for reasons other than perimenopause.  Anyone experiencing changes in their menstrual cycle should see a doctor for a diagnosis.  People going through perimenopause should see a doctor if:  The transition to menopause is different for everyone, both physically and psychologically.  People should discuss their symptoms with a healthcare provider they trust.  Support from loved ones, support groups, or a therapist can help with the emotional side effects of perimenopause.  Though dealing with the changes can be difficult, this new stage in life can be a time of growth and reflection that offers new purpose and meaning.    
 Ahsan, M. &amp; Mallick, A. K. (2017, September 1). The effect of soy isoflavones on the menopause rating scale scoring in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women: A pilot study.  Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research ,  11 (9), FC13–FC16.  Ahsan, M. &amp; Mallick, A. K. (2017, September 1). The effect of soy isoflavones on the menopause rating scale scoring in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women: A pilot study.  Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research ,  11 (9), FC13–FC16.  Knudtson, J., &amp; McLaughlin, J. E. (2016, August). Female reproductive endocrinology.  Menopause basics. (2018, May 22).  Perimenopausal bleeding and bleeding after menopause. (2011, May).  Santoro, N. (2016, April 1). Perimenopause: From research to practice.  Journal of Women's Health ,  25 (4), 332–339.  The menopause years. (May 2015).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "How does perimenopause affect periods?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322480.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, July 16). "How does perimenopause affect periods?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  