 Polyps are common and increasingly so as people age. Colorectal polyps, which are polyps in the colon or rectum, are estimated to occur in at least  30 percent  of adults who are 50 years old or more in the United States.  Colorectal polyps also occur in children with an estimated  6 percent  affected, rising to 12 percent in those who experience intestinal bleeding.  Most colon or bowel polyps are harmless, but some can develop into  cancer . If they do, it can take  many years  for them to turn cancerous.  In this article, we take a close look at colon polyps, including their causes, treatments, and how to prevent them from occurring.  Different types of polyps carry different risk factors. Furthermore, the size of the polyp is related to its potential severity.  A  2014 review  concluded that polyps of 5 millimeters (mm) or less had little risk of becoming cancerous while those between 1.5 and 3.5 centimeters (cm) had a malignancy potential of 19 to 43 percent.  The  most common types  of polyps are hyperplastic and adenomatous polyps:   Hyperplastic polyps   Hyperplastic polyps, or inflammatory polyps, are usually harmless and not a cause for concern with a  low malignancy potential . These polyps will rarely become cancerous.   Adenomas   Adenomas, or adenomatous polyps, are not cancerous but they may become cancerous in the future. Larger adenomas are more likely to become cancerous. Doctors usually recommend removing adenomas.   Malignant polyps   Malignant polyps are polyps that contain cancerous cells. The best treatment for these polyps will depend on the severity of the cancer and a person's overall health.  People with colon polyps often have no signs or symptoms of the condition.  Doctors usually find these polyps during routine tests or tests for another disorder. A doctor may recommend that older adults and people with risk factors for colon polyps have regular screening. When doctors detect polyps early, there is a better chance that they can completely remove the growths without complications.  When colon polyps do cause symptoms, people may notice the following:  People are either born with colon polyps or develop them during their lifetimes.  Doctors do not yet know the exact causes of colon polyps, but their appearance may be linked to the following lifestyle factors:  In some people, genetic factors cause the cells of the colon to multiply more than they should. When this happens in the colon, people get colon polyps. When it occurs in the rectum, people get colorectal polyps.  People are more likely to develop colon polyps if they have the following inherited conditions:  People with these conditions have an increased risk of developing cancer in several organs, including the small intestine and colon.  Certain  risk factors  make a person more likely to develop colon polyps. These include:  A doctor may recommend that older adults and people with risk factors for colon polyps have regular screening exams, especially after 50 years of age.  A doctor may begin by taking a person's medical history, assessing risk factors, and performing a physical exam. If they suspect colon polyps, they may recommend further tests. Catching colon polyps early can reduce the risk of complications.  Screening exams may include:  Doctors will usually treat colon polyps by removing them. They may also suggest certain lifestyle changes to prevent colon polyps from reoccurring.  Doctors can remove colon polyps using the following methods:  After removing a polyp, the doctor will send it for lab testing where experts will check it for cancer.  A pathologist who is a specialist in analyzing tissue samples will examine the polyp tissue under a microscope and check whether it is benign or precancerous. The will base the recommended time interval for the next colonoscopy on this information plus the number and size of polyps.  In people who already have polyps or colon cancer, the doctor may prescribe  aspirin  and coxibs (COX-2 inhibitors) to stop new polyps from forming. For people with a family history of colon polyps, genetic counseling is recommended to prevent their development.  People can reduce their risk of developing colon polyps by adopting healthy lifestyle habits, such as:  People who have had colon polyps should get regular colon checkups, as they have a higher likelihood of developing others.  A polyp is a growth of tissue on the lining of the colon and rectum that projects into the intestines.  People with colon polyps usually have no symptoms. Most colon polyps are harmless, though some types can become cancerous. Polyp removal is the best way to treat colon polyps and prevent cancer from developing.  People with risk factors should get regular screenings for colon polyps, especially if they are over 50 years of age.  If a person has polyps, they should follow their doctor's advice about getting checkups and making lifestyle changes to help manage the condition.    
 Aarons, C. B., Shanmugan, S., &amp; Bleier, J. I. (2014, November 21). Management of malignant colon polyps: Current status and controversies.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  20 (43), 16178−16183.  Aarons, C. B., Shanmugan, S., &amp; Bleier, J. I. (2014, November 21). Management of malignant colon polyps: Current status and controversies.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  20 (43), 16178−16183.  Angarita, F. A., Feinberg, A. E., Feinberg, S. M., Riddell, R. H., &amp; McCart, J. A. (2018, February). Management of complex polyps of the colon and rectum [Abstract].  International Journal of Colorectal Disease ,  33 (2), 115−129.  Colorectal cancer risk factors. (2018, February 21).  Mansoor, S., Dolkar, T., &amp; El-Fanek, H. (2013, June). Polyps and polypoid lesions of the colon [Abstract].  International Journal of Surgical Pathology ,  21 (3), 215−223.  Meseeha, M., &amp; Attia, M. (2017, April 30). Colon Polyps. StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing.  Understanding your pathology report: Colon polyps (sessile or traditional serrated adenomas). (2017, February 27).  What is colorectal cancer? (2018, February 21).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "What to know about colon polyps."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322428.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, July 11). "What to know about colon polyps."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  