 While tooth-whitening kits are readily available at most pharmacies, many natural remedies can help remove stains and protect tooth enamel.  Teeth turn yellow for two reasons, both of which tend to accelerate with age:  The outer layer of teeth consists of enamel, which is colored almost white and protects the deeper tooth structure. Beneath the enamel is a layer of tissue called dentin, which is yellow-brown. When the enamel layer thins or wears away, the teeth begin to look darker.  Acidic foods,  gum disease , and aging can wear down tooth enamel. Some people also have enamel that is naturally thinner.  Specific foods and beverages, such as  coffee , can stain the teeth. Some foods that stain the teeth may also wear down enamel, increasing the yellowing.  Other sources of stains include smoking and tobacco products and certain types of  antibiotics .  The following strategies may help to whiten teeth:  Eliminating foods that mark the teeth can prevent further staining. Foods and beverages that contain tannins, such as wine and tea, can stain the teeth. Coffee and dark sodas and juices can also stain them.  Acidic foods can make the teeth look yellow by wearing down the enamel. People who are concerned about the color of their teeth should avoid the excessive consumption of citrus, coffee, and soda. Alternatively, they should always brush their teeth after having them.  Dentists generally recommend waiting 30 minutes after eating before brushing the teeth. Acids can weaken the enamel, so brushing too soon can cause damage.   Quitting smoking  or tobacco products can reduce the risk of nicotine stains. It can also prevent tooth decay and gum disease, both of which can damage the enamel and cause oral health issues.  Oil pulling is the term for washing the mouth with oil to remove dirt, bacteria, and debris. It is not a substitute for regular brushing or flossing, but some  research  suggests that washing the mouth with certain oils may help to whiten the teeth.  The  American Dental Association  (ADA) consider oil pulling to be unconventional dentistry, stating, "there are no reliable scientific studies to show that oil pulling reduces cavities, whitens teeth, or improves oral health and well-being."  To try this method, rinse the mouth with oil for a minute after brushing, then spit it out.  Oils suitable for oil pulling include:  Baking soda can gently polish away stains on the surface of the teeth. Some people worry that baking soda is too harsh and may grind away enamel, but  research from 2017  found it to be a safe way to remove stains.  Baking soda may also help to fight bacteria, which suggests that it may be able to reduce plaque and prevent tooth decay.  Hydrogen peroxide is a mild bleach that  can help to whiten stained teeth . For optimal whitening, a person can try brushing with a mix of baking soda and hydrogen peroxide for 1–2 minutes twice a day for a week. They should only do this occasionally.  Hydrogen peroxide may increase tooth sensitivity, so it is not suitable for long-term use or for people who already have sensitive teeth.  Papain and bromelain, which are enzymes that occur in  papayas  and pineapples respectively, may both help to whiten teeth.  A  2012 study  found preliminary evidence that solutions containing these ingredients could offer modest whitening effects. However, the authors of the study caution that more research is necessary to determine whether or not these enzymes are effective.  Maintaining excellent oral hygiene is the most important thing that a person can do to reduce tooth yellowing.  Regular brushing and flossing protects the enamel, prevents gum decay, and removes stains.  Good oral hygiene includes:  Natural teeth-whitening strategies that  may harm  the teeth include using:  Few people have naturally white teeth, as teeth tend to yellow with age. However, maintaining excellent oral hygiene and having regular dental checkups can help to keep teeth bright.  Yellow teeth are not usually the sign of a health problem, but a dentist can check for enamel loss and tooth decay.  Natural remedies can help people whiten their teeth at home. A dentist can also offer professional teeth-whitening.    
 ADA fluoridation policy. (n.d.).  ADA fluoridation policy. (n.d.).  Brooks, J. K., Bashirelahi, N., &amp; Reynolds, M. A. (2017, September). Charcoal and charcoal-based dentifrices [Abstract].  The Journal of the American Dental Association ,  148 (9), 661–670.  Chakravarthy, P. K., &amp; Acharya, S. (2012, October–December). Efficacy of extrinsic stain removal by novel dentifrice containing papain and bromelain extracts.  Journal of Young Pharmacists ,  4 (4), 245–249.  Kumar, A., Kumar, V., Singh, J., Hooda, A., &amp; Dutta, S. (2014, May 28). Which groups of drugs cause tooth discoloration? An updated review.  Li, Y. (2017, November). Stain removal and whitening by baking soda dentifrice: A review of literature .  The Journal of the American Dental Association ,  148 (11), S20–S26.  Natural teeth whitening: Fact vs. fiction. (n.d.).  Oil pulling. (n.d.).  Shanbhag, V. K. L. (2017, January). Oil pulling for maintaining oral hygiene — a review.  Journal of Traditional and Complementary Medicine ,  7 (1), 106–109.  Statement on the safety and effectiveness of tooth whitening products. (2012, April).  Vano, M., Derchi, G., Barone, A., Genovesi, A., &amp; Covani, U. (2015, January 20). Tooth bleaching with hydrogen peroxide and nano-hydroxyapatite: A 9-month follow-up randomized clinical trial [Abstract].  International Journal of Dental Hygiene ,  13 (4), 301–307.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Six natural ways to whiten teeth."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322421.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, July 11). "Six natural ways to whiten teeth."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  