 According to the  American Dental Association , 2-year molars typically come through when a child is between 23 and 33 months old.  The lower set usually appears between the ages of 23 and 31 months, while the upper set typically appears between the ages of 25 and 33 months.  Many toddlers show no signs of pain while teething. However, when these molars come through, it can be particularly painful and lead to crankiness and irritability.  In this article, learn to tell when the 2-year molars are coming in and how to reduce a child's discomfort.  Getting 2-year molars can cause significant discomfort, and a child may not be able to communicate the cause of the pain.  Parents and caregivers can look for signs of the molars coming in. The child may:  Two-year molars and dental pain do not lead to higher-grade  fevers  or an  upset stomach . A child with either symptom may have a cold or a stomach-related illness.  A child's teething symptoms may seem to grow worse at night, when the child is tired and has fewer distractions from the pain.  A child experiencing pain in the gums and mouth may not be inclined to show the area to an adult. Singing a song or playing a game that involves sticking out the tongue and opening the mouth wide can help.  Many simple home remedies can help to relieve teething pain.  The following tips can reduce discomfort:  Parents and caregivers should always observe children who are using a teething toy, a spoon, or another device to relieve the pain.  Distraction techniques, such as coloring, singing songs, and dancing, can also help to take a child's mind off their aching teeth.  Acetaminophen or ibuprofen can also help to reduce discomfort for 1 or 2 days. Be sure to administer pain relievers that are safe for children, and never give a child more than the recommended dose.  If a parent or caregiver wishes to give the child pain relievers after 2 or 3 days, they should consult a doctor first.  Teething rings are available for purchase in some grocery stores and pharmacies, as well as  online .  The  U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  warn against using some medications developed for teething.  Many teething gels and pastes are available. However, the FDA and other organizations caution that these can contain  harmful ingredients .  For example, some contain benzocaine, which can lead to a life-threatening condition called methemoglobinemia.  Also, it is important to watch for signs the medication has numbed the back of the child's throat. This can cause difficulty swallowing.  Many drugstores sell homeopathic medications that may be labeled as teething tablets. However, the  FDA  also warn against using these to treat teething pain.  If home remedies are not relieving 2-year molar pain, it may be a good idea to make an appointment with the child's doctor.  Teething should not make a child feel ill. Speak with a doctor if the child exhibits any of the following symptoms:  These symptoms can indicate the presence of underlying illness, such as a viral infection.  Baby teeth eventually fall out, but they serve an important purpose. They act as placeholders, preventing the permanent teeth from growing in when the mouth is still too small.  Caring for a child with 2-year molar pain can sometimes be difficult. It is important to maintain the child's routine as much as possible and provide them with plenty of distractions.  Home remedies can help. It is essential to remember that teething pain is temporary and that the child will feel well again once the teeth have fully come in.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Baby teeth. (n.d.).  Baby teeth. (n.d.).  Beers, L. (2018, March 2). Soothing a teething toddler.  Do teething babies need medicine on their gums? No. (2018, May 23).  Primary tooth development. (2012).  Teething: 4 to 7 months. (2016, October 6).  Teething pain. (2013, September 18).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How to deal with 2-year molars."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322488.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, July 17). "How to deal with 2-year molars."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  