 An estimated  1–5 percent  of adults in the United States have small liver hemangiomas that cause no symptoms and do not need treatment. Larger hemangiomas can cause pain or discomfort.  In this article, we discuss the symptoms, causes, and treatment of a hemangioma in the liver, in addition to diagnosis and possible complications.  When a collection of blood vessels forms a lump, it is called a hemangioma. Some hemangiomas occur externally on the skin while others develop inside the body, including on organs such as the liver.  Hemangiomas are usually less than  5 centimeters  (cm) across. Although some people may have multiple hemangiomas, it is more common only to have one.  Hemangiomas are not malignant, meaning that they do not become cancerous.  A hemangioma of the liver is also called a hepatic hemangioma or a cavernous hemangioma.  Hemangiomas of the liver  very rarely  cause symptoms, as people usually have small-sized and solitary liver hemangiomas.  However, more rarely, people can have multiple hemangiomas in their liver. They may also have larger hemangiomas.  If a hemangioma is larger than 4 cm in diameter, it  may cause  the following symptoms:  In severe cases, a larger hemangioma can rupture. This can interfere with organ function and cause bleeding into the abdomen or widespread blood clotting. It can lead to  heart failure  and can be fatal.  Doctors are still not sure what causes liver hemangiomas.  In some cases, liver hemangiomas may be present from birth, but they can also develop at any point during a person's life. They are more common in people aged  30–50 years , and more likely to occur in women than in men.  If a hemangioma is large enough to cause symptoms, a doctor may order imaging tests to look for abnormalities in the liver. These tests may include:  In most cases, people do not know that they have a liver hemangioma until a doctor detects it when testing for another condition.  Hemangiomas often do not need treatment, and there is no evidence that people with untreated liver hemangiomas will develop  liver cancer .  However, depending on their location, size, and number, some hemangiomas may be problematic. It is often best to treat a hemangioma if it is large and causing symptoms.  Possible treatments for people with liver hemangiomas include:  Most liver hemangiomas do not cause complications.  However, people who are pregnant or taking medicines containing the female hormone  estrogen , including some  birth control  pills, are more likely to experience complications from liver hemangiomas. This might be because estrogen can cause liver hemangiomas to enlarge.  During pregnancy, there is an increase in estrogen. Women with a liver hemangioma can still become pregnant, but they should discuss their plans with a doctor.  Although many people refer to them as tumors, hemangiomas are not malignant and do not become cancerous. There is no evidence to suggest that people who do not treat a liver hemangioma can develop liver cancer.  Liver hemangiomas are the  most common  type of benign liver  tumor . They are not cancerous.  Most people with liver hemangiomas have no symptoms and do not require medical treatment.  Liver hemangiomas rarely cause complications, although larger or multiple hemangiomas can cause painful or uncomfortable symptoms.  If someone suspects that they have a liver hemangioma, they should speak to a doctor about the best ways to diagnose and manage the condition.    
 Bajenaru, N., Balaban, V., Săvulescu, F., Campeanu, I., &amp; Patrascu, T. (2015). Hepatic hemangioma —review.  Journal of Medicine and Life ,  8 (Spec Issue), 4–11.  Bajenaru, N., Balaban, V., Săvulescu, F., Campeanu, I., &amp; Patrascu, T. (2015). Hepatic hemangioma —review.  Journal of Medicine and Life ,  8 (Spec Issue), 4–11.  Evans, J., &amp; Sabih, D. E. (2017, December 3). Hemangioma, cavernous liver. StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing.  Herrine, S. K. (n.d.). Hemangiomas of the liver.  Hoekstra, L. T., Bieze, M., Erdogan, D., Roelofs, J. J., Beuers, U. H., &amp; van Gulik, T. M. (2013, March). Management of giant liver hemangiomas: An update [Abstract].  Expert Review of Gastroenterology &amp; Hepatology ,  7 (3), 263–268.  Machado, M. M., Rosa, A. C. F., Lemes, M. S., da Mota, O. M., da Silva, O. Q., de Oliveira Campoli, P. M., ..., Cerri, G. G. (2006, November–December). Liver hemangiomas: Ultrasound and clinical features.  Radiologia Brasileira ,  39 (6), 441−446.  Tuxun, T., Apaer, S., Zhou, C. M., Zhang, J. H., Zhao, J. M., Tai, Q. W., … Wen, H. (2014, November–December). Surgery vs. observation for liver hemangioma: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  Hepatogastroenterology ,  61 (136), 2377−2382.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "What to know about liver hemangiomas."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322450.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, July 13). "What to know about liver hemangiomas."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  