 According to the   ICD-11  , people with gaming disorder have trouble controlling the amount of time that they spend playing digital or video games. They also prioritize gaming over other activities and experience negative effects from their gaming behaviors.  The WHO decided to classify the condition after reviewing the research and consulting with experts. The WHO claim that this classification will result in an increased focus on gaming disorder and its prevention and treatment.  Gaming disorder shares similarities with  internet gaming disorder  (IGD), which is a condition that the American Psychiatric Association (APA) have labeled in their  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders  ( DSM-5 ) as requiring further study. The APA does not currently recognize IGD as an official condition.  In this article, we discuss the signs and symptoms of gaming disorder and explore what its classification may mean for gamers.  According to the WHO's definition, a person who has gaming disorder will show the following characteristics for at least 12 months:  For a diagnosis, these behaviors must be so severe that they affect a person's:  According to some  research , gaming  addiction  may co-occur with other mood disorders, such as:  People who remain physically inactive for extended periods due to gaming may also have a higher risk of  obesity , sleep problems, and other health issues.  The WHO have listed gaming disorder as a  disorder due to addictive behavior  in the  ICD-11 .  Addiction to gaming is similar in many ways to other types of addiction. People with the disorder often spend many hours playing games, have a strong emotional attachment to this behavior, and may experience fewer social connections as a result.  As with other addictions, gaming disorder can have a negative impact on family life, relationships, and work or education. This may lead to irritation with those who criticize gaming, or it may cause feelings of guilt.  Although the WHO classification defines the behaviors that may lead to a diagnosis of gaming disorder, it is not yet clear how medical professionals will assess these behaviors.  Experts will probably need to devise diagnostic tests, such as questionnaires and structured interviews, to help determine whether or not someone has gaming disorder. They may use something similar to the  Internet Gaming Disorder Scale (IGDS) , a standard measure of computer and video game addiction.  Gaming disorder is a new classification, so there is no clear treatment plan in place yet. However, it is likely that treatments for other addictive behaviors, such as gambling addiction, will also be relevant for gaming disorder.  Treatment for compulsive gambling may include therapy, medication, and self-help groups.  According to a  2017 study  on the treatment of IGD, it may be beneficial to combine several types of treatment. In the study, researchers used the following treatments:  This is just one proposed treatment model. It is likely that other researchers will suggest alternative treatments for gaming disorder.  Any co-occurring conditions, such as anxiety and depression, may also require treatment.  There is no doubt that some gaming behaviors are problematic. Excessive gaming has even resulted in death in some cases. But the majority of people who play computer and video games do not need to worry.  According to  research  on IGD, most people who play online games do not report negative symptoms and do not meet the criteria for IGD. Researchers report that only 0.3–1.0 percent of people are likely to qualify for an IGD diagnosis.  Those who do meet the criteria for video game addiction tend to have poorer emotional, physical, mental, and social health, according to another  study .  It is important to note that both of these studies used the APA's criteria for IGD rather than the WHO's criteria for gaming disorder, but there is some overlap between the symptoms of the two disorders.  Some experts believe that playing video games can offer some benefits, especially for children.  Research  suggests that gaming may have positive effects on children's cognitive and social skills.  Even though gaming disorder is not widespread, people should be aware of the amount of time that they spend playing games. They should also monitor the effect that gaming has on their other activities, their physical and mental health, and their relationships with others.  Sometimes, excessive gaming can mask another issue, such as depression or anxiety. Seeking help for the underlying issue may put a stop to the over-reliance on video games.  The classification of gaming disorder in the ICD-11 has generated both support and criticism.  Dr. Richard Graham, an expert in technology addiction, has  supported the WHO's validation  of gaming disorder, but he has also expressed some concern that worried parents may mistake enthusiastic gaming for gaming disorder.  Some scholars contributed a  paper  to the  Journal of Behavioral Addictions  outlining their concerns about the classification of gaming disorder. They echo Dr. Graham's worries regarding moral panic around gaming habits and people getting an inaccurate diagnosis, especially children and young people.  The authors question the quality of the research base for gaming disorder and stress the difficulties of making a diagnosis. They also take issue with using substance abuse and gambling disorders to formulate the criteria for gaming disorder.  Gaming disorder is a newly classified condition in the WHO's ICD-11. However, it is likely that only a small percentage of people who play online and video games will meet the criteria for gaming disorder. Controversy surrounds the diagnosis, and it is clear that further research is necessary.  Those who are worried that gaming may be negatively impacting their health or relationships should speak with a doctor or a mental health professional.    
 6C51 Gaming disorder. (2018, July 12).  6C51 Gaming disorder. (2018, July 12).  Aarseth, E., Bean, A. M., Boonen, H., Colder Carras, M., Coulson, M., Das, D., ... Van Rooij, A. J. (2017, September). Scholars' open debate paper on the World Health Organization ICD-11 Gaming Disorder proposal.  Journal of Behavioral Addictions ,  6 (3), 267–270.  Disorders due to addictive behaviours. (2018, July 12).  Gaming disorder: Online Q&amp;A. (2018, January).  Internet gaming. (2018, June).  Kovess-Masfety, V., Keyes, K., Hamilton, A., Hanson, G., Bitfoi, A., Golitz, D., ... Pez, O. (2016, March). Is time spent playing video games associated with mental health, cognitive and social skills in young children?  Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology ,  51 (3), 349–357.  Lemmens, J. S., Valkenburg, P. M., &amp; Gentile, D. A. (2015, January 5). The Internet Gaming Disorder Scale.  Psychological Assessment ,  27 (2), 567–582.  Przybylski, A. K., Weinstein, N., &amp; Murayama, K. (2017, March 1). Internet gaming disorder: Investigating the clinical relevance of a new phenomenon.  The American Journal of Psychiatry ,  174 (3), 230–236.  Stockdale, L., &amp; Coyne, S. M. (2018, January 1). Video game addiction in emerging adulthood: Cross-sectional evidence of pathology in video game addicts as compared to matched healthy controls.  Journal of Affective Disorders ,  225 , 265–272.  Torres-Rodríguez, A., Griffiths, M. D., &amp; Carbonell, X. (2017, November 13). The treatment of Internet Gaming Disorder: A brief overview of the PIPATIC program.  International Journal of Mental Health and Addiction , 1–16.  Wakefield, J. (2018, January 2). Gaming addiction classified as disorder by WHO.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What is gaming disorder?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322478.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, July 16). "What is gaming disorder?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  