  Cancer  stages range from 1 to 4 and indicate the extent of the disease. A doctor may also refer to stage 4 as advanced or metastatic  breast cancer .  Breast cancer is the  second most common  cancer in women.  In this article, learn about the symptoms of stage 4 breast cancer, as well as the treatment options.  A person with stage 4 breast cancer may experience some symptoms specific to the breast, as well as others that affect the whole body.  Breast-related symptoms include:  Other symptoms that may appear throughout the body include:  When breast cancer cells move to other areas of the body, they remain as breast cancer cells. For example, breast cancer that has spread to the lungs is still breast cancer, not  lung cancer .  In stage 4 breast cancer, cancer spreads to different parts of the body in a process called metastasis. It may cause different symptoms depending on the affected parts of the body:  When breast cancer cells move into bone, this is called bone metastasis. It is  more common  for breast cancer to spread to the bones than to any other body part.  The primary symptom of bone metastasis is intermittent bone pain. At times, the pain may become persistent.  Other symptoms may include:  Lung metastasis does not always cause symptoms, but a doctor may discover it during a  CT scan , as the cells will typically form a  tumor .  If symptoms do occur, they may include:  Although some of the symptoms may resemble those of a common cold, lung metastasis will require treatment. Therefore, it is vital that anyone with stage 4 breast cancer makes their doctor aware of any new symptoms, even if they do not seem severe.  The risk of breast cancer spreading to the brain is generally  highest  in those with HER2-positive or triple-negative breast cancer, which are more aggressive subtypes of this disease.  About  10–15 percent  of women with stage 4 breast cancer will develop brain metastasis.  Symptoms include:  If a doctor suspects that the cancer has moved into the brain, they will order an  MRI  to confirm the diagnosis.  Breast cancer that spreads to the liver does not always cause symptoms.  A doctor may be able to diagnose liver metastasis with a blood test that measures specific enzymes and proteins in the blood.  If symptoms do occur, they may include:  In addition to a blood test, a doctor may use imaging tests, such as an MRI, CT scan, or  ultrasound  to help them make a diagnosis.  Lymph nodes are part of a network of tubes and glands that play an important role in the body's immune system. The lymph system filters waste material and harmful substances from the body. It also helps to fight infections.  When cancer spreads, it can travel through either the bloodstream or the lymph system. If cancer starts to grow inside the lymph nodes, they may begin to feel hard or swollen.  Symptoms of lymph node metastasis can include a lump or swelling in the following areas of the body:  If the lymph nodes are producing uncomfortable symptoms, a doctor can provide treatment.  In one study, people with stage 4 breast cancer  reported  feeling frustrated as a result of symptoms restricting their activity. These symptoms included  depression ,  anxiety , sleep problems, fatigue, and sadness.  It is vital to address the  mental health  issues that a stage 4 breast cancer diagnosis may cause.  To manage these symptoms, people can try  yoga , meditation, and other stress-relieving techniques.   Treatment  for stage 4 breast cancer can include surgery, radiation, and  chemotherapy .  If doctors believe that stage 4 breast cancer will be terminal, they will focus on trying to alleviate painful or uncomfortable symptoms to help a person have a better quality of life.  If a breast cancer tumor is  hormone receptor-positive , the doctor may suggest using hormonal therapy.  Hormonal therapy includes the use of tamoxifen, aromatase inhibitors, and other therapies to reduce  estrogen  production. This is because estrogen contributes to breast cancer growth.  In some cases, a doctor may also remove a person's ovaries to reduce the amount of estrogen in their body.  Other targeted therapy treatments identify and attack specific cancer cells. These include:  Treatment for bone metastasis  may include  bisphosphonates or denosumab to alleviate pain and reduce the risk of bone disease.  If a person is experiencing any symptoms of breast cancer, they should visit a doctor immediately.   Screening  is essential for catching and treating breast cancer during the early stages.  Screening involves:  Regular screening is especially vital if a person has certain genetic mutations or a personal or family history of cancer.  A person with stage 4 breast cancer will usually already have a team of doctors working to treat the disease and reduce symptoms. They should report any new symptoms to a doctor as soon as possible.  The 5-year relative survival rate for stage 4 breast cancer is  22 percent , which means that 22 percent of people will live for at least 5 years after diagnosis.  However, many factors influence survival rates, including:  HER2 and triple-negative cancers are more aggressive and may have a lower survival rate.  A doctor that specializes in cancer, called an oncologist, will be able to provide a clear individual prognosis based on a person's test results and personal medical history.  A person with stage 4 breast cancer can also seek support from family, friends, and support groups for people with a similar diagnosis.    
 Bone metastasis: Symptoms and diagnosis. (2018, March 22).  Bone metastasis: Symptoms and diagnosis. (2018, March 22).  Brain metastasis: Symptoms and diagnosis. (2018, March 14).  Breast cancer — patient version. (n.d.).  Breast cancer stages. (2018, May 18).  Breast cancer survival rates. (2017, December 20).  Breast cancer treatment (PDQ®) — patient version: Inflammatory breast cancer. (2018, April 12).  Breast cancer treatment (PDQ®) — patient version: Stages of breast cancer. (2018, April 12).  Cancer Screening Overview (PDQ®) — patient version. (2017, April 25).  Cancer stat facts: Female breast cancer. (n.d.).  Carson, J. W., Carson, K. M., Olsen, M. K., Sanders, L., &amp; Porter, L. S.. (2017, March 13). Mindful yoga for women with metastatic breast cancer: Design of a randomized controlled trial.  BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  17 , 153.  Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC). (n.d.).  Liver metastasis: Symptoms and diagnosis. (2018, March 22).  Lower your risk. (n.d.).  Lung metastasis: Symptoms and diagnosis. (2018, March 22).  Lymph nodes and cancer. (2015, April 14).  Metastatic breast cancer symptoms and diagnosis. (2018, March 14).  Mosher, C. E., Daily, S., Tometich, D., Matthias, M. S., Outcalt, S. D., Hirsh, A. … Miller, K. (2016, July 27). Factors underlying metastatic breast cancer patients' perceptions of symptom importance: A qualitative analysis.  European Journal of Cancer Care ,  27 (1), e12540.  Stage IIA &amp; IIB treatment options. (2015, November 5).  Stage IV treatment options. (2015, November 5).  Symptoms of advanced breast cancer. (2017, December 8).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "What are the symptoms of stage 4 breast cancer?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322462.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, July 13). "What are the symptoms of stage 4 breast cancer?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  