 The immune system consists of organs, cells, tissues, and proteins. Together, these carry out bodily processes that fight off pathogens, which are the viruses, bacteria, and foreign bodies that cause infection or disease.  When the immune system comes into contact with a pathogen, it triggers an immune response. The immune system releases antibodies, which attach to antigens on the pathogens and kill them.  Incorporating specific foods into the diet may strengthen a person's immune response. Read on to discover 15 foods that boost the immune system.  A healthful, balanced diet plays a vital role in staying well. The following foods may help to boost the immune system:   Blueberries  contain a type of flavonoid called anthocyanin, which has  antioxidant  properties that can help boost a person's immune system. A  2016 study  noted that flavonoids play an essential role in the respiratory tract's immune defense system.  Researchers found that people who ate foods rich in flavonoids were less likely to get an upper respiratory tract infection, or common cold, than those who did not.  Dark chocolate contains an  antioxidant called theobromine , which may help to boost the immune system by protecting the body's cells from free radicals.  Free radicals are molecules that the body produces when it breaks down food or comes into contact with pollutants. Free radicals can damage the body's cells and may contribute to disease.  Despite its potential benefits, dark chocolate is high in  calories  and saturated fat, so it is important to eat it in moderation.  Turmeric is a yellow spice that many people use in cooking. It is also present in some alternative medicines. Consuming turmeric may improve a person's immune response. This is due to the qualities of curcumin, a compound in turmeric.  According to a  2017 review , curcumin has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects.  Salmon, tuna, pilchards, and other oily fish are a rich  source of omega-3 fatty acids .  According to a  2014 report , long-term intake of  omega-3  fatty acids may reduce the risk of  rheumatoid arthritis  (RA).  RA is a chronic autoimmune condition that occurs when the immune system mistakenly attacks a healthy part of the body.  Broccoli is another  source of vitamin C . It also contains potent antioxidants, such as sulforaphane. For these reasons, it is a good choice of vegetable to eat regularly to support immune system health.  Sweet potatoes are  rich in beta carotene , a type of antioxidant that gives the skin of the potatoes its orange color.   Beta carotene  is a source of  vitamin  A. It helps to make skin healthy and may even provide some  protection against skin damage  from ultraviolet (UV) rays.  Spinach may boost the immune system, as it contains many essential nutrients and antioxidants,  including :  Vitamins C and E can help  support the immune system .   Research  also indicates that flavonoids may help to prevent the common cold in otherwise healthy people.  People use  ginger  in a variety of dishes and desserts, as well as in teas.  According to a review, ginger has anti-inflammatory and antioxidative properties and is likely to offer health benefits. However, more research is necessary to confirm whether or not it can effectively prevent illness.  Garlic is a common home remedy for the prevention of colds and other illness.  One  review  looked at whether taking garlic supplements containing allicin reduced the risk of getting a cold.  The group of participants taking a  placebo  had more than double the number of colds between them than those taking the garlic supplements. However, the researchers concluded that more research is necessary to determine whether or not garlic can help to prevent colds.   Green tea  contains only a small amount of caffeine, so people can enjoy it as an alternative to black tea or  coffee . Drinking it may also strengthen the immune system.  As with blueberries, green tea contains flavonoids, which  may reduce  the risk of a cold.  Kefir is a fermented drink that contains live cultures of bacteria that are beneficial for health.  Initial research suggests that drinking kefir may boost the immune system. According to a  2017 review , various studies have shown that regular consumption of kefir can help with:  The majority of the research that supports this was carried out on animals or in a laboratory. Researchers need to perform additional studies to understand how kefir may prevent disease in humans.  Sunflower seeds can make a tasty addition to salads or breakfast bowls. They are a rich  source of vitamin E , an antioxidant.  In the same way as other antioxidants,  vitamin E improves immune function . It does this by fighting off free radicals, which can damage cells.  Almonds are another excellent source of  vitamin E . They also contain manganese,  magnesium , and fiber.  A small handful or a quarter of a cup of almonds is a healthful snack that may benefit the immune system.  Oranges and kiwis are an excellent source of vitamin C, which is the vitamin that many people turn to when they feel a cold developing.  While scientists are still not sure exactly how it helps, vitamin C  may reduce  the duration of common cold symptoms and improve the function of the human immune system.  For people trying to avoid the sugar in fruit, red bell peppers are an excellent alternative source of vitamin C.  Stir-frying and roasting both preserve the nutrient content of red bell peppers better than steaming or boiling, according to a  study on cooking methods .  The following lifestyle strategies may make a person's immune system stronger:  Enjoying the 15 immune-boosting foods covered in this article may strengthen people's immune system and improve their ability to fight off infections.  That said, it is important to remember that the immune system is complex. Eating a healthful, balanced diet is just one way to support immune health.  It is also essential to be mindful of the other lifestyle factors that may affect immune system health, such as exercising and not smoking.  Anyone who gets frequent colds or other illnesses and is concerned about their immune system should speak to a doctor.    
 Allan, G. M., &amp; Arroll, B. (2014, February 18). Prevention and treatment of the common cold: Making sense of the evidence.  Canadian Medical Association Journal ,  186 (3), 190–199.  Allan, G. M., &amp; Arroll, B. (2014, February 18). Prevention and treatment of the common cold: Making sense of the evidence.  Canadian Medical Association Journal ,  186 (3), 190–199.  Beta-carotene. (2017, November 1).  Chen, C.-Y., Lapsley, K., &amp; Blumberg, J. (2006, November). A nutrition and health perspective on almonds.  Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture ,  86 (14), 2245–2250.  Di Giuseppe, D., Wallin, A., Bottai, M., Askling, J., &amp; Wolk, A. (2014). Long-term intake of dietary long-chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and risk of rheumatoid arthritis: A prospective cohort study of women.  Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases ,  73 (11), 1949–1953.  Hewlings, S. J., &amp; Kalman, D. S. (2017, October 22). Curcumin: A review of its effects on human health.  Foods ,  6 (10), 92.  Hwang, I. G., Shin, Y. J., Lee, S., &amp; Yoo, S. M. (2012, December). Effects of different cooking methods on the antioxidant properties of red pepper.  Preventive Nutrition and Food Science ,  17 (4), 286–292.  Martinez-Pinilla, E., Oñatibia-Astibia, A., &amp; Franco, R. (2015, February 20). The relevance of theobromine for the beneficial effects of cocoa consumption.  Frontiers in Pharmacology ,  6 , 30.  Mashhadi, N. S., Ghiasvand, R., Askari, G., Hariri, M., Darvishi, L., &amp; Mofid, M. R. (2013, April). Anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory effects of ginger in health and physical activity: Review of current evidence.  International Journal of Preventive Medicine ,  4 (Suppl. 1), S36–S42.  Nandha, R. (2014, April–May). Therapeutic potential of sunflower seeds: An overview.  International Journal of Research and Development in Pharmacy and Life Sciences , 3 (3), 967–972.  Nichols, P. D., Petrie, J., &amp; Singh, S. (2010, June). Long-chain omega-3 oils — an update on sustainable sources.  Nutrients , 2 (6), 572–585.  Porter, Y. (2012, May 7), Antioxidant properties of green broccoli and purple-sprouting broccoli under different cooking conditions.  Bioscience Horizons: The International Journal of Student Research ,  5 .  Rosa, D. D., Dias, M. M. S., Grześkowiak, Ł. M., Reis, S. A., Conceição, L. L., &amp; Peluzio, M. D. C. G. (2017, June). Milk kefir: Nutritional, microbiological and health benefits [Abstract].  Nutrition Research Reviews ,  30 (1), 82–96.  Schagen, S. K., Zampeli, V. A., Makrantonaki, E., &amp; Zouboulis, C. C. (2012, July 1). Discovering the link between nutrition and skin aging.  Dermato-Endocrinology ,  4 (3), 298–307.  Shaik-Dasthagirisaheb, Y. B., Varvara, G., Murmura, G., Saggini, A., Caraffa, A., Antinolfi, P., … Pandolfi, F. (2013, April–June). Role of vitamins D, E and C in immunity and inflammation.  Journal of Biological Regulators and Homeostatic Agents , 27 (2), 291–295.  Sommerville, V. S., Braakhuis, A. J., &amp; Hopkins, W. G. (2016, May 9). Effect of flavonoids on upper respiratory tract infections and immune function: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  Advances in Nutrition ,  7 (3), 488–497.  Tahseen, F. (2016, December). Nutritional value of Spinacia oleraecea spinach: An overview.  International Journal of Life Sciences and Review,   2 (12), 172–174.  Vimala, B., Nambisan, B., &amp; Hariprakash, B. (2011, August). Retention of carotenoids in orange-fleshed sweet potato during processing.  Journal of Food Science and Technology ,  48 (4), 520–524.  Whitehead, A., Beck, E. J., Tosh, S., &amp; Wolever, T. M. S. (2014, December). Cholesterol-lowering effects of oat β-glucan: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  100 (6), 1413–1421.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "The best foods for boosting your immune system."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322412.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, July 10). "The best foods for boosting your immune system."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  