 Salivary gland infections  most commonly  develop in the two main glands, which are located in the front of the ear (the parotid gland) and under the chin (the submandibular gland).  A salivary gland infection, also called sialadenitis, can cause a blockage in the saliva ducts due to  inflammation . This can lead to pain, tenderness, and swelling.  In this article, we discuss the types, causes, and treatments of salivary gland infections.  A salivary gland infection occurs when bacteria or viruses infect a gland that produces saliva.  People can get a salivary gland infection from having:  Blockages in the salivary glands can cause inflammation, making the glands more vulnerable to infection.  Also, inflamed salivary glands tend to produce less saliva, which flows more slowly than usual. As a result of this, the saliva sometimes pools in the glands, allowing the concentration of bacteria or viruses within the saliva to increase.  Some of the more common causes of salivary gland obstructions include:  Bacteria tend to cause more salivary gland infections than viruses do. But some of the more common viruses known to cause of salivary gland infections include:  People of all ages, including newborn babies, can develop salivary gland infections. They are especially common in older adults and people with chronic illnesses.  There are three pairs of major salivary glands, with one of each pair located on either side of the face. Any of these six glands can develop an infection. The major salivary glands are the:  The parotid and submandibular glands tend to become infected  most often .  Most salivary gland infections are acute or develop suddenly. Infections related to obstructions or narrowed tubes may develop over time.  Most of the symptoms of salivary gland infections only last around a week, though some minor swelling may linger for a few weeks.  Acute salivary gland infections rarely cause additional complications.  The specific symptoms of a salivary gland infection may differ between people and will depend on their location and severity.  The symptoms usually affect parts of the head or neck and may cause:  For many people, symptoms become worse after eating.  People with tumors that cause obstructions may develop a hard, firm, immobile lump in the affected area.  Seek emergency medical attention if the symptoms:  Many salivary gland infections resolve on their own without the use of medications.  The best way to treat salivary gland infections depends on the cause.  People with bacterial infections will usually need to take  antibiotics .  There are no specific antiviral medications, but there are medications that can help reduce or manage symptoms of herpes, influenza, and HIV.  When blockages, such as stones or tumors, cause salivary gland infections, a doctor may recommend surgery to resolve the problem.  People may also need surgery to repair or remove kinks or narrowed tubes that affect the flow of saliva.  People with salivary gland infections triggered by underlying medical conditions will require additional specialized treatment.  If a person has an infection caused by a large abscess, a doctor may need to open and drain the abscess.  For people taking medications linked to salivary gland infections, a doctor may need to switch their medication or change the dosage.  Aside from medications, there is a variety of home remedies that may help the body clear salivary gland infections. People can try:  To diagnose salivary gland infections, a doctor will often ask a person questions about their symptoms, review their medical history, and perform a physical exam of the area.  Where a tumor or growth has caused the infection, a doctor may also take a sample to send to a lab for testing.  If there is a blockage in the salivary gland, a doctor may also order imaging tests to get a better view of the area, such as a:  A wide range of lifestyle factors, medications, and medical conditions can reduce the flow of saliva and trigger salivary gland infections, such as:  In many cases, there are no specific ways to prevent salivary gland infections entirely.  However, a few lifestyle tips may help reduce the risk of infections forming. These include:  Overall the outlook for salivary gland infections is excellent in most cases.  A majority of salivary gland infections clear up on their own or with the aid of medications, self-care, and at-home remedies.  People with severe or chronic salivary gland infections will need ongoing medical care, especially if the infection is related to underlying medical conditions.  Always talk with a doctor about head and neck symptoms of any kind that are severe, last for more than two weeks, do not respond to primary care or interfere with the mouth opening and closing.    
 Chandak, R., Degwekar, S., Chandak, M., &amp; Rawlani, S. (2012, July 24). Acute submandibular sialadenitis—a case report.  Case Reports in Dentistry ,  2012 .  Chandak, R., Degwekar, S., Chandak, M., &amp; Rawlani, S. (2012, July 24). Acute submandibular sialadenitis—a case report.  Case Reports in Dentistry ,  2012 .  Abdel Razek, A. A. K., &amp; Mukherji, S. (2017, June). Imaging of sialadenitis.  The Neuroradiology Journal ,  30 (3), 205–215.  Saliva &amp; salivary gland infections. (2018, February).  Sasaki, C. (n.d.) Salivary gland disorders.  Sialadenitis. (2016, November 8).  The salivary glands. (n.d.).  Wilson, K. F., Meier, J. D., &amp; Ward, D. P. (2014, June 1). Salivary gland disorders.  American Family Physician ,  89 (11), 882–888.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What to know about salivary gland infections."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322439.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, July 14). "What to know about salivary gland infections."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  