 An individual with hypochlorhydria is unable to produce enough hydrochloric acid (HCL) in the stomach.  Stomach acid, along with several enzymes, helps to break down food. Other functions of this acid include:  In this article, we describe the symptoms and causes of hypochlorhydria. We also explore the treatment options.  Common causes of hypochlorhydria include:   Age   The stomach can produce less acid as a result of aging.  According to a  2013 review , hypochlorhydria is the main change in the stomach of older adults. People over the age of 65 have the highest risk.   Stress   While everyday  stress  may not have much effect on the production of stomach acid, chronic stress can contribute to hypochlorhydria.   Medications   Long-term use of antacids or other medications for  acid reflux  or  heartburn  may decrease the body's production of stomach acid.  Doctors often prescribe medications called proton pump inhibitors to treat acid reflux, and these can  cause  hypochlorhydria.   Bacterial infection    Over 50 percent  of people worldwide are infected with a bacteria called  Helicobacter pylori  ( H. pylori ). This infection can contribute to low levels of stomach acid and gastric ulcers.   Zinc deficiency   Zinc is necessary for the production of stomach acid. A lack of this mineral can contribute to hypochlorhydria.   Stomach surgery   Some surgical procedures, including gastric bypass surgery, can reduce the amount of acid the stomach produces.  Symptoms of hypochlorhydria can include:  There is also a link between hypochlorhydria and several other medical issues, such as:  Certain factors can increase the risk of developing hypochlorhydria, such as:  To diagnose hypochlorhydria, a doctor will typically take a person's medical history and perform a physical exam.  They can also test the acidity of the stomach with a small capsule that contains a transmitter. The person swallows the capsule, and the transmitter reports the amount of acid in the gastrointestinal tract.  Doctors measure acidity using the pH scale. A pH value of 3–5 suggests hypochlorhydria, while a pH level of less than 3 indicates normal levels of stomach acid.  If the pH value is greater than 5, this suggests an almost complete absence of stomach acid, which is termed achlorhydria.  If the results show hypochlorhydria or achlorhydria, the doctor may take blood tests to check for a deficiency in iron or other nutrients.  A doctor may prescribe HCL supplements to confirm a diagnosis. If a person feels better when taking the supplements, low stomach acid is likely the cause of symptoms.  Treatment for hypochlorhydria depends on the underlying cause. Options include:  An  H. pylori  infection requires  antibiotic  treatment.  A doctor will usually prescribe at least two antibiotics to take at the same time. Taking a combination of antibiotics prevents the bacteria from developing a resistance to one of the drugs.  The doctor may need to check whether the  H. pylori  bacteria are still present after 4 weeks of treatment. If they are, the doctor may prescribe a different combination of medications.  Long-term use of antacids and proton pump inhibitors can result in hypochlorhydria. A doctor may recommend stopping the use of the drugs or switching to a different treatment.  Always speak with a doctor before changing or stopping medications.  A person may benefit from taking an HCL supplement and a pepsin enzyme to increase stomach acidity. This treatment option may be especially beneficial for older adults experiencing a natural decline in levels of stomach acid.  Natural digestive enzymes are also available in health stores and drugstores. These often contain extracts of  papaya  and pineapple, which can stimulate the production of stomach acid.  A variety of digestive enzyme supplements are also available to  purchase online .  Consult a doctor before taking an HCL supplement.  Reducing chronic stress can restore digestive function. The following lifestyle changes can help:  Making some dietary changes can help to improve symptoms of hypochlorhydria.  Avoid foods that are difficult to digest, such as those that are fatty and fried. Also, chew each bite thoroughly to break the food down and allow it to mix with the digestive enzymes in the mouth. Smaller food particles are more easily digested in the stomach.  It is a good idea to avoid eating for at least 3 hours before bedtime. This allows the body to fully digest before sleeping, and it can reduce the risk of nighttime heartburn.  Do not lie down immediately after a meal, and do not eat while lying down.  For the stomach to produce HCL, the body needs to absorb zinc from the diet. Zinc-rich foods include:  A low level of stomach acid can result in other deficiencies, such as a lack of iron, vitamin B-12, and  calcium . A doctor or a dietician can help. They may recommend taking supplements or increasing dietary intake of these nutrients, especially once a person regains a regular level of stomach acid.  If left untreated, hypochlorhydria can negatively impact a person's health and well-being. It is important for people to report associated symptoms and undergo testing.  Once a doctor determines why a person's level of stomach acid is low, they can recommend ways to relieve or prevent symptoms. Prompt treatment also reduces the risk of complications.  Treatment options include making dietary and lifestyle changes, taking supplements, and altering the course of medications.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Britton, E., &amp; McLaughlin, J. T. (2013, February). Ageing and the gut.  Proceedings of the Nutrition Society ,  72 (1), 173–177.  Britton, E., &amp; McLaughlin, J. T. (2013, February). Ageing and the gut.  Proceedings of the Nutrition Society ,  72 (1), 173–177.  Franceschi, F., Tortora, A., Di Rienzo, T., D'Angelo, G., Ianiro, G., Scaldaferri, F., … Gasbarrini, A. (2014, September 28). Role of  Helicobacter pylori  infection on nutrition and metabolism.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  20 (36), 12,809–12,817.  Kines, K., &amp; Krupczak, T. (2016, August). Nutritional interventions for gastroesophageal reflux, irritable bowel syndrome, and hypochlorhydria: A case report.  Integrative Medicine: A Clinician's Journal ,  15 (4), 49–53.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What is hypochlorhydria?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322491.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, July 17). "What is hypochlorhydria?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  