 There are various other names for wild yam, such as  colic  root, devil's bones, rheumatism root, or China root. While there are over 600 species of wild yam, only 12 are edible.  In this article, we investigate the potential medicinal uses of wild yam and the evidence supporting them. We also look at how to take it and its safety and side effects.  The bulb and roots of wild yams contain a chemical called diosgenin, which can influence the production of several useful hormones in humans, such as  estrogen  or dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). Consuming wild yam may be a natural way of promoting these hormones in the body, which could have certain medical benefits.  However, at present, there is little evidence to support any medical applications of wild yam. The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have yet to evaluate wild yam for its safety or effectiveness.  Some of the potential medical uses of wild yam include:  Some traditional medicine practitioners suggest using wild yam as an alternative to estrogen replacement therapy for treating symptoms of  menopause . The theory is that wild yam may increase or stabilize estrogen levels in the body to help relieve a person's symptoms.  However, there is very little evidence to support these claims. One of the only  studies  available on the topic found that the 23 women who applied a wild yam cream over a 3-month period experienced no changes in their menopausal symptoms.  Some traditional medicine practitioners believe that wild yam has  anti-inflammatory  properties and use it to treat  rheumatoid arthritis .  Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic condition that causes  inflammation  of the joints. This can cause pain and stiffness that restricts mobility in people with the condition.  It is possible that wild yam might reduce this inflammation and have a positive effect on symptoms, but there is little evidence to support this.  Wild yam also contains a chemical called dioscoretine, which some people  think  helps with the regulation of blood sugar levels. Wild yam could be useful in regulating blood sugar levels in people with  diabetes . However, the effect of dioscoretine on blood sugar has only been studied in animals so far. It is unclear whether it would have the same effect in humans.  Other proponents of wild yam, believe that it has  anti-spasmodic  properties, which are substances that reduce muscle spasms. This anti-spasmodic property means that wild yam might be useful for reducing cramps and muscular pain related to premenstrual syndrome (PMS), for example. However, more research is needed to support this.  Consuming wild yam is rare due to its bitter taste. However, it is available in a variety of formulations, including:  Many of these formulations of wild yam are available to  purchase online .  How much wild yam to take depends on several factors, such as:  However, scientific studies have yet to determine a safe and effective dosage range for wild yam. It is therefore essential to consult a medical professional before taking wild yam. Always read the packaging carefully before using.  The FDA have not yet evaluated wild yam for its medicinal use, so there is little detailed information on its safety or side effects.  Wild yam is a natural substance, but this does not mean it is free from side effects. In small doses, wild yam is considered safe for most people. However, large amounts of wild yam can lead to side effects, including:  Some people may also have an allergic reaction to wild yam. For example, wild yam may cause skin irritation when applied as cream.  People who have hormone-sensitive conditions, such as  breast cancer  or uterine  fibroids , should not use wild yam. It is possible for wild yam to influence estrogen production and worsen the condition.  There is also insufficient evidence about whether wild yam is safe during pregnancy, breast-feeding, or for young children. For this reason, doctors recommend people avoid using wild yam during these times.  Wild yam has been shown to interact with certain medications. For example, it can interact with estradiol, which is a substance used in certain  birth control  pills or hormone replacement therapies.  There may be other medications that wild yam can interact with, but further investigation is needed. It is essential to consult a doctor before taking wild yam to ensure it is safe for use.  Although traditional medicine practitioners use wild yam to treat a variety of health conditions, further research is needed to determine its safety and effectiveness.  Wild yam may interact with other medications, and consuming large amounts can lead to side effects. It is, therefore, necessary to speak to a doctor before taking wild yam.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Hill, D. A., Crider, M., &amp; Hill, S. R. (2016, December 1). Hormone therapy and other treatments for symptoms of menopause.  American Family Physician ,  94 (11), 884–889.  Hill, D. A., Crider, M., &amp; Hill, S. R. (2016, December 1). Hormone therapy and other treatments for symptoms of menopause.  American Family Physician ,  94 (11), 884–889.  Komesaroff, P. A., Black, C. V. S., Cable, V., &amp; Sudhir, K. (2001, June). Effects of wild yam extract on menopausal symptoms, lipids and sex hormones in healthy menopausal women [Abstract].  Climacteric ,  4 (2), 144–150.  Malviya, N., Jain, S., &amp; Malviya, S.. (2010). Antidiabetic potential of medicinal plants.  Acta Poloniae Pharmaceutica ,  67 (2), 113–118.  Mukesh, R., &amp; Namita, P. (2013). Medicinal plants with antidiabetic potential – A review.  American-Eurasian Journal of Agricultural &amp; Environmental Sciences ,  13 (1), 81–94.  Nonhormonal treatments for menopause. (2017, March).  Pengelly, A., &amp; Bennett, K. (2011, September). Appalachian plant monographs.  Dioscorea villosa  L. Wild yam.  Rheumatoid arthritis (RA). (2018, April 3).  Women's reproductive health. (2017, February 17).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What are the health benefits of wild yam?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322423.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, July 11). "What are the health benefits of wild yam?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  