 In this article, we look at treatment options, lifestyle changes, and promising natural treatments for an enlarged prostate.  The prostate is a small gland that sits between the penis and the bladder. It functions as part of the male reproductive system.  If the prostate becomes enlarged, it can place pressure on the bladder and the urethra, which is the tube that carries urine from the bladder out through the penis. The medical term for an enlarged prostate is benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH.  BPH is a common health condition in older people. In the United States, according to the  National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases , BPH affects:  Common symptoms of BPH include:  BPH is a progressive condition, which means that if a person does not get treatment, their symptoms may get worse over time. Treatment options for BPH include:  The primary stage of BPH treatment is usually called watchful waiting. During watchful waiting, the affected individual will be:  A doctor will also work with the individual and keep a close eye on their condition. Many people with an enlarged prostate remain at this level of care for some time.  When BPH becomes more advanced, a doctor may recommend medication. Medication can help to control the growth of the prostate and reduce the symptoms of BPH.  Common medications  for BPH include:  When medication alone does not relieve the symptoms of BPH, the next level of treatment typically involves minimally invasive procedures. During these procedures, a doctor will insert an instrument into a person's urethra or rectum to either destroy excess prostate tissue or widen the urethra.  If medication and minimally invasive procedures are unable to improve the symptoms of BPH sufficiently, a doctor may recommend surgery. A person may also require surgery if their symptoms become severe or if complications develop. Potential complications include:  Surgery is not uncommon for people with BPH. According to the Urology Care Foundation, around  150,000 men  in the U.S. undergo transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) for BPH each year. TURP is the most common type of surgery for BPH in the U.S., but there are now several other surgical options.  Some procedures can take place under local anesthetic on an outpatient basis, but others are likely to require full anesthesia and a hospital stay.  Surgical options for BPH include:  People with BPH can take action to relieve their symptoms without medication or surgery, particularly during the watchful waiting phase.  They can try the following strategies to relieve symptoms:  Some natural remedies have shown promise for treating symptoms of BPH. These include:  Saw palmetto berries are a well-known natural remedy that may help to treat BPH. According to a  2016 review , some studies have suggested that berry extracts from saw palmetto can help to reduce the symptoms of BPH. The authors state that they may even be as effective as finasteride, a common medication for the treatment of urinary retention.  However, a  2012 Cochrane review  of 32 trials concluded that saw palmetto in any form does not improve any of the symptoms associated with BPH, suggesting that this natural remedy cannot help people with this condition.  Traditional medicine practitioners use bark extract from  Prunus africana , the African cherry, to treat a variety of health conditions. According to a  2016 review , some studies have suggested that the bark extract may be effective for relieving symptoms of BPH.  A  Cochrane review  states that more evidence is necessary, but that this plant may provide moderate relief from the symptoms that BPH causes.  Dietary polyphenols are complex chemicals that occur in certain foods, such as:  Extracts and supplements containing dietary polyphenols have shown promise as potential treatments for BPH. According to a  2017 review , studies have indicated that:  People with BPH have a higher likelihood of  vitamin D  deficiency. According to a  2013 review , increasing  vitamin  D intake may reduce the size and rate of growth of the prostate in people with BPH.  BPH can cause a range of urinary problems and affect a person's quality of life. However, there are a variety of treatment options and lifestyle changes that can relieve symptoms and slow the progression of this condition.  People with BPH should work closely with their doctor to ensure that they manage their symptoms effectively and use the most suitable forms of treatment.    
 Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). (2017, July 19).  Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). (2017, July 19).  Cunningham, G. R., &amp; Kadmon, D. (2017, September 12). Patient education: Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) (Beyond the Basics).  Eleazu, C., Eleazu, K., &amp; Kalu, W. (2017, April 28). Management of benign prostatic hyperplasia: Could dietary polyphenols be an alternative to existing therapies?  Frontiers in Pharmacology ,  8 , 234.  Espinosa, G., Esposito, R., Kazzazi, A., &amp; Djavan, B. (2013, August). Vitamin D and benign prostatic hyperplasia — a review.  The Canadian Journal of Urology International ,  20 (4), 6820–6825.  Nyamai, D. W., Arika, W. M., Rachuonyo, H. O., Wambani, J. R., &amp; Ngugi, M. P. (2016, May 30). Herbal management of benign prostatic hyperplasia.  Journal of Cancer Science &amp; Therapy ,  8 , 130–134.  Prostate enlargement (benign prostatic hyperplasia). (2014, September).  Surgery. (n.d.).  Tacklind, J., MacDonald, R., Rutks, I., Stanke, J. U., &amp; Wilt, T. J. (2012, December 12).  Serenoa repens  for benign prostatic hyperplasia.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  12 , Art. No.: CD001423. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001423.pub3.  Try these techniques to relieve common urinary symptoms without medication. (2013, November).  van Rij, S., &amp; Gilling, P. (2015, December 21). Recent advances in treatment for benign prostatic hyperplasia.  F1000Research ,  4 (F1000 Faculty Rev), 1482.  What is benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)?. (n.d.).  Wilt, T. J., &amp; Ishani, A. (2002). Pygeum africanum for benign prostatic hyperplasia.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews   1 , Art. No.: CD001044. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001044.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "What are the treatment options for BPH?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322436.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, July 12). "What are the treatment options for BPH?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  