 The American Academy of Ophthalmology report that as many as  20 percent  of babies are born with a blocked tear duct, which is also called a nasolacrimal obstruction.  Tears come from tear glands, which sit above a person's eyes on the side furthest from the nose. The tears drain through the tear ducts into the nose. Blockages can develop in the tear ducts and prevent tears from draining normally.  Tears play a significant role in people's vision. They help to maintain the health of the eyes by keeping them moist and supplying them with oxygen. They also protect the eyes by coating their surface with natural  antibiotics  and washing away irritating or harmful substances.   According to leading ophthalmologists , blocked tear ducts are the most common disorder of the tear duct system in infants.  Infants with this condition will typically display the following signs:  These signs may begin to show by the time a baby is  3 weeks old .  Even though their eyes may be full of tears, a blocked tear duct does not usually cause a baby much discomfort. If a baby with tearing and eye discharge seems to be uncomfortable, it is best to take them to see a doctor.  The most common cause of a blocked tear duct in a baby is a tear duct system that has only partially developed.  This can lead to the following issues:  The following causes of a blocked tear duct in a baby are less common:  The symptoms of a blocked tear duct in a baby begin developing early and will typically always be present before the baby is  3 months old .  Doctors look for the following signs to make a diagnosis:  A doctor will thoroughly examine the baby to ensure that other conditions are not responsible for the symptoms.  They will check the eye pressure and corneal health in case of infantile  glaucoma . They will also look for redness, swelling, and irritation of the eyes to rule out  conjunctivitis .  The majority of blocked tear ducts resolve without treatment within the first year of the baby's life.  As a result, doctors tend to recommend conservative treatment only, while carefully monitoring the infant's health. This  should clear 90 percent of tear duct blockages .  Some doctors may suggest massaging the tear sac. This forces fluid through the tear ducts which can remove the blockages.  They may also prescribe antibiotic eye drops if the baby's eyes are producing a lot of discharge, but this will not fix the underlying problem.  In some cases, a tear duct will not unblock with time and conservative treatment, and the doctor will need to use a different treatment method.  The most common approach is surgical probing, where the doctor inserts a medical instrument into the tear duct to remove the obstruction. For infants aged 6 months or younger, surgical probing will generally take place in the doctor's office without anesthesia. Slightly older children are more likely to undergo the procedure in an operating room under general anesthesia.  The procedure generally  takes about 10 minutes  and  has an 80 percent success rate .  If probing does not entirely resolve the problem, additional treatment options may include:  It can take up to  7 days  after any of these procedures for the baby's symptoms to begin to improve.  Soak a soft cloth or cotton ball in warm water and use it gently to clean the crusty matter and dried discharge from the baby's eyes.  This is particularly important to do before using prescription antibiotic eye drops.  Always wipe the infant's eye from the inside, near the nose, toward the outside. Use a fresh cotton ball or a different part of the cloth for each eye if necessary.  Massage is the home treatment that doctors most commonly recommend for a blocked tear duct. An ophthalmologist or doctor can show people how to use this procedure on themselves or their child to open up the tear duct.  The  American Academy of Ophthalmology  suggest massaging the ducts using 10  strokes  twice a day. For a baby, it is best to do the blocked tear duct massage during a diaper change.  Experts frequently recommend using a cotton swab rather than a finger, because the swab's smaller size makes it easier to target the tear sac.  People can place hot compresses, such as a warm, moist washcloth, gently over the eyes to help relieve the symptoms of a blocked tear duct.  The  American Optometric Association  recommends a full eye examination for all infants at 6 months, even if no problems are evident. If there are concerns about the health of a baby's eyes, it is advisable to see a doctor right away.  Prompt treatment of an infant with a blocked tear duct, even conservative treatment, can reduce the risk of infection and the need for more invasive procedures at a later date.  Blocked tear ducts in babies generally resolve themselves.  It is essential to see a doctor if an infant has very watery eyes, discharge, or appears to be tearing an unusual amount without any apparent cause. In addition, as a blocked tear duct in a baby will not typically cause a child pain, it is advisable to seek medical advice if the baby is showing signs of discomfort or is unusually sensitive to light.    
 Babu, P. S., Ram, A., &amp; Amaresh, G. (2013, March). Evaluation of conservative management of congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction in infants between 2wks to 11 months age.  Journal of Evolution of Medical and Dental Sciences ,  2 (9), 1050–1087.  Babu, P. S., Ram, A., &amp; Amaresh, G. (2013, March). Evaluation of conservative management of congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction in infants between 2wks to 11 months age.  Journal of Evolution of Medical and Dental Sciences ,  2 (9), 1050–1087.  Boyd, K. (2015, March 1). What is a blocked tear duct?  Boyd, K. (2015, October 14). Blocked tear duct treatment.  How your eyes work: Tears. (n.d.).  Infant vision: Birth to 24 months of age. (n.d.).  Lueder, G. T. (2015, November 15). Nasolacrimal duct obstruction in children.  Mukamal, R. (2016, December 21). Facts about tears.  Nasolacrimal duct obstruction. (2016, January).  Olitsky, S. E. (2014, July). Update on congenital nasolacrimal duct obstruction [Abstract].  International Ophthalmology Clinics ,  54 (3), 1–7.  Tear duct – blocked. (n.d.).  Tear duct obstruction and surgery. (2015, February).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "What causes a blocked tear duct in infants?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322486.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, July 17). "What causes a blocked tear duct in infants?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  