 Becoming pregnant  may be more difficult  for women with  endometriosis . However, many women with endometriosis do get pregnant and have healthy babies.  This article discusses the effect of pregnancy on endometriosis symptoms. It also considers whether or not having endometriosis during pregnancy increases the risk of complications.  Pregnancy has different effects on each woman with endometriosis. Some women may find that becoming pregnant relieves their endometriosis symptoms, as they will no longer be having periods.  Raised levels of the hormone  progesterone  during pregnancy may also improve symptoms.  Research has found that progestin, which is a synthetic version of progesterone, reduces endometriosis pain for around  90 percent of women . Progestin is a standard treatment for endometriosis.  The body's natural progesterone may have similar effects to progestin for some women, but not everyone with endometriosis finds that their symptoms improve during pregnancy.  In fact, pregnancy can worsen some women's endometriosis symptoms. This may be due to the growing uterus putting extra pressure or traction on existing areas of endometriosis.  Another factor that may worsen endometriosis symptoms during pregnancy is a rise in the hormone  estrogen , which can encourage more endometriosis lesions to develop.  Even if pregnancy does provide relief, the symptoms of endometriosis are likely to return once a woman's periods start again after pregnancy, although breast-feeding can delay this further.  A  2018 review  states that women should not think of pregnancy as a strategy for managing or treating endometriosis. Pregnancy will not cure endometriosis.  People with endometriosis may be more likely to experience complications during pregnancy or when giving birth, although this is very rare.  Most people with endometriosis are able to have a healthy, uncomplicated pregnancy.  There are no specific monitoring tests or treatments for people who are pregnant and have endometriosis.  However, having endometriosis may slightly increase the risk of the following complications:  The results of a  2017 population-based study  in Denmark suggest that pregnant women with endometriosis have a higher risk of  pre-eclampsia .  Symptoms of pre-eclampsia include:  A woman with symptoms of pre-eclampsia during pregnancy should speak to a doctor. The doctor will also check for signs of this condition during routine pregnancy appointments.  A  2016 study  suggests that having endometriosis during pregnancy may significantly increase the risk of placenta previa.  Placenta previa is when the placenta lies very low in the womb, partially or fully covering the cervix. Placenta previa may endanger the baby and the woman during childbirth.  A woman with placenta previa will usually require a cesarean delivery.  The primary sign of placenta previa is bright red vaginal bleeding. Any women experiencing this should speak with a doctor.   Research  suggests that having endometriosis may increase the risk of preterm birth.  Also known as premature birth, this is when the baby is born after less than 37 weeks of gestation.  According to  research , having endometriosis may increase the likelihood of needing a cesarean delivery.  A cesarean delivery uses a surgical procedure in the abdominal region to remove the baby if a vaginal birth is not possible.  Doctors may perform a cesarean delivery if a vaginal birth is unsafe for the woman or baby.  Having endometriosis also increases the risk of miscarriage, according to  a 2017 research review .  Lower  back pain , cramping, or bleeding during pregnancy may indicate a miscarriage. Women should see a doctor if they experience any of these symptoms.  Many people use hormonal therapies to manage endometriosis. These include progestin-only pills, combined pills containing estrogen and progestin, and intrauterine devices (IUDs). These options are not safe to use during pregnancy.  Some people also manage the condition by having keyhole surgeries, or laparoscopies, to remove endometriosis lesions. Surgery is also not possible during pregnancy.  Pregnant women with endometriosis may safely manage their symptoms by:  Experts estimate that endometriosis affects as many as  10 percent  of women of childbearing age.  When a person has endometriosis, cells similar to those that line the uterus grow elsewhere in the body, including:  Endometriosis can also affect other parts of the body.  Endometriosis lesions respond to the menstrual cycle, meaning that this tissue also thickens and breaks down or bleeds each month. However, it cannot flow out of the vagina, so the blood remains trapped in the body and causes pain,  inflammation , and other symptoms.  Endometriosis may also cause pelvic adhesions, where tissues in the pelvis stick together.  Many women with endometriosis have a safe pregnancy and birth with help from their doctor.  Although some women experience a reduction in their symptoms during pregnancy and while breast-feeding, others find that their symptoms remain the same or get worse.  It is essential to speak with a doctor about how to manage endometriosis symptoms during pregnancy, as many traditional treatment options are unsafe at this time.  Endometriosis rarely increases the risk of complications during pregnancy and childbirth, but a doctor can provide advice on the best way to manage the condition. Any women who have symptoms of a complication should speak to their doctor.    
 Fadhlaoui, A., Bouquet de la Jolinière, J., &amp; Feki, A. (2014, July 2). Endometriosis and infertility: How and when to treat?  Frontiers in Surgery ,  1 (24).  Fadhlaoui, A., Bouquet de la Jolinière, J., &amp; Feki, A. (2014, July 2). Endometriosis and infertility: How and when to treat?  Frontiers in Surgery ,  1 (24).  Gezer, A., &amp; Oral, E. (2016, September 12). Progestin therapy in endometriosis.  Women's Health ,  11 (5), 643–652.  Glavind, M. T., Forman, A., Arendt, L. H., Nielsen, K., &amp; Henriksen, T. B. (2017, January). Endometriosis and pregnancy complications: A Danish cohort study.  Fertility and Sterility ,  107 (1), 160–166.  Harada, T., Taniguchi, F., Onishi, K., Kurozawa, Y., Hayashi, K., &amp; Harada, T. (2016, December 22). Obstetrical complications in women with endometriosis: A cohort study in Japan.  PLoS One ,  11 (12), e0168476.  Kohl Schwartz, A. S., Wölfer, M. M., Mitter, V., Rauchfuss, M., Haeberlin, F., Eberhard, M., … Leeners, B. (2017, November). Endometriosis, especially mild disease: A risk factor for miscarriages [Abstract].  Fertility and Sterility ,  108 (5), 806–814.e2.  Leeners, B., Damaso, F., Ochsenbein-Kölble, N., &amp; Farquhar, C. (2018, May 1). The effect of pregnancy on endometriosis — facts or fiction?  Human Reproduction Update ,  24 (3), 290–299.  Leone Roberti Maggiore, U., Ferrero, S., Mangili, G., Bergamini, A., Inversetti, A., Giorgione, V., … Candiani, M. (2016, January–February). A systematic review on endometriosis during pregnancy: Diagnosis, misdiagnosis, complications and outcomes.  Human Reproduction Update ,  22 (1), 70–103.  Preeclampsia and high blood pressure during pregnancy. (2018, May).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What to know about endometriosis during pregnancy."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322516.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, July 18). "What to know about endometriosis during pregnancy."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  