 Doctors can take a vaginal pH measurement to determine how acidic the vaginal environment is. It is also possible to test this at home.  In the vagina, a high pH may cause infections as it can allow bacteria and yeast to thrive.  In this article, learn more about normal vaginal pH levels, how to test them at home, and what to do to restore vaginal pH balance.  A normal vaginal pH is between  3.8 and 4.5 . A pH level within this range can help to keep bacterial and fungal infections at bay.   Lactobacilli  bacteria live in the vagina and secrete lactic acid and hydrogen peroxide, which give the vagina its acidic pH level.  Vaginal pH can change throughout a person's lifetime. It is usually  higher than 4.5  before a person has their first menstrual period and after  menopause .  Vaginal pH is usually less than 4.5 during a woman's reproductive years unless a condition or infection raises it.  Several conditions and infections can affect the vaginal pH balance, usually by increasing pH levels.  Causes of changes in vaginal pH include the following:   Bacterial vaginosis  is a medical condition that occurs when too much bacteria is present in the vagina. This can cause an increase in vaginal pH levels.  A person with bacterial vaginosis may experience itching, burning, or pain in the vagina. They may also feel a burning sensation when urinating and notice a white or gray discharge.  Douching refers to washing or cleaning the vagina using particular solutions, such as those containing vinegar or baking soda.  These solutions claim to reduce vaginal odor, but, in fact, they may worsen the smell. This is because they wash out good bacteria, which affects the vaginal pH balance and can make someone more prone to infections.   One study  found that women tend to have higher pH levels during menopause. In the study, women in menopause had an average vaginal pH of 5.3.  Reduced  estrogen  levels during menopause may affect a person's vaginal pH.  The presence of infections other than bacterial vaginosis may also increase the vaginal pH.  Examples include  Trichomonas vaginalis  and group B  Streptococcus  (GBS).  Blood has a higher pH than the vaginal environment. When a person is menstruating, the presence of menstrual blood can increase vaginal pH levels.  Semen is basic, which is the opposite of the vagina's acidic environment. When semen enters the vagina, it may temporarily increase the pH.  People use  antibiotics  to kill harmful bacteria, but these medications can kill good bacteria as well. This will include bacteria in the vagina. If a person is taking antibiotics, their vaginal pH may be out of balance.  UTIs do not cause a higher vaginal pH, but having a high pH can increase a person's risk of developing a UTI.  Reduced estrogen levels during perimenopause and menopause can put a person at risk of developing more frequent UTIs, as lower estrogen allows the vaginal pH to rise.  Doctors may prescribe estrogen treatments to lower the vaginal pH and to prevent further UTIs.   Researchers  have also linked higher vaginal pH with several other conditions, including  infertility , premature birth, and increased risks for  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs).  People can purchase home-testing kits that measure the pH balance of the vagina. These kits are available in some pharmacies and  online .  At-home testing can reveal elevated pH levels, which could indicate the presence of an infection.  The test involves placing a strip of paper that measures pH against the wall of the vagina for a designated amount of time.  After removing the paper, a person can compare the resulting color to those on a chart in the kit. Each color corresponds to a pH value.  People should read all of the information that the test kit includes. This will include recommendations on the timing of the test, including not performing the test while menstruating or too soon after sex.  If a person's vaginal pH levels are routinely high without any symptoms of an infection, they can take several steps at home to reduce their pH levels. These include:  Doctors can also prescribe creams, such as estrogen cream, which may help to reduce the vagina's pH levels.  Keeping vaginal pH levels in balance can help to reduce infections and prevent complications.  Doctors rarely rely just on measurements of vaginal pH to diagnose medical conditions, such as yeast infections, or to determine whether or not someone is approaching menopause. However, vaginal pH tests can help to confirm a suspected diagnosis.  People can take steps, such as using probiotic supplements and not douching, to help keep their vaginal pH levels balanced.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Hemalatha, R., Ramalaxmi, B. A., Swetha, E., Balakrishna, N., &amp; Mastromarino, P. (2013, September). Evaluation of vaginal pH for detection of bacterial vaginosis.  Indian Journal of Medical Research,  138  (3), 354–359.  Hemalatha, R., Ramalaxmi, B. A., Swetha, E., Balakrishna, N., &amp; Mastromarino, P. (2013, September). Evaluation of vaginal pH for detection of bacterial vaginosis.  Indian Journal of Medical Research,  138  (3), 354–359.  Miller, E. A., Beasley, D. E., Dunn, R. R., &amp; Archie, E. A. (2016, December 8). Lactobacilli dominance and vaginal pH: Why is the human vaginal microbiome unique?  Frontiers in Microbiology .  Nassos, P., &amp; Hooper, C. (2009, July). Vaginal pH test.  Panda, S., Das, A., Singh, A. S., &amp; Pala, S. (2014, January–March). Vaginal pH: A marker for menopause.  Journal of Mid-Life Health ,  5 (1), 34–37.  Preventing urinary tract infections: Frequently asked questions. (n.d.).  Vaginal pH. (2017, December 28).  Vulvovaginal health. (2015, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Vaginal pH balance: Symptoms, remedies, and tests."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322537.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, July 20). "Vaginal pH balance: Symptoms, remedies, and tests."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  