 While it is natural for stool to vary in appearance and consistency, poop that frequently appears stringy may require further medical investigation.  A person's stool and bowel habits are considered good indicators of overall health. A healthy stool is a couple of inches in diameter, but stringy poop appears much narrower in comparison. It may also be flat, solid, or liquid.  Poop can take on a stringy appearance for many reasons. Here are some of the common reasons for stringy stools.  A diet that is low in fiber or fluids increases the chance of  constipation . As a result, the stool can be less bulky and shrinks in size, taking on a stringy appearance.  Chronic constipation often leads to blockages that develop in the colon, leading to the passage of thin, stringy stools.  A simple way to counter constipation is to increase intake of fruits and vegetables, wholegrain bread and cereal, beans, and lentils.  Potatoes with the skins on, oats, almonds, and peas are other examples of high-fiber foods to include in your diet.  The  American Heart Association  recommend a daily intake of 25 grams of fiber, which helps soften the stool and aid bowel movement. The diets of most Americans, however, contain  less than half  this optimum amount.  Some bacteria or parasites cause infections in the digestive tract, particularly the intestines. Besides stringy stool, symptoms of intestinal infections include nausea, cramps,  fatigue , and weight loss.  In most cases, doctors can easily treat these infections with  antibiotics ,  antiparasitic  drugs, or medicines that neutralize stomach acidity. These treatments will both clear up the infection and resolve the issue of stringy stool.  IBS is a disorder of the large intestine and could be responsible for changes in a person's bowel habits. Common symptoms include abdominal pain,  diarrhea , bloating, and persistent discomfort.  The cause of IBS is not fully understood. Among the theories is an oversensitivity of nerves in the intestine, intestinal muscle disorders, and  inflammation  of the lining of the intestine.  Medicine cannot cure IBS, as yet, but many people experience relief by avoiding triggers and learning to manage their symptoms in other ways.  Although rare, stringy or narrow stool could be a sign of  colorectal cancer . This type of  cancer , however, is also accompanied by other symptoms that can include:  If any of these symptoms are present, it is wise to check with a doctor who can confirm or rule out the presence of  colorectal cancer  and start treatment, accordingly.  Other common conditions that are known to cause stringy stool include:  Depending on the frequency of the problem, and the presence of other symptoms, a doctor may need to carry out further investigation to determine the underlying cause of stringy stool.  The doctor will recommend one or more of the following tests:  Stringy stool is not usually a cause for concern and tends to resolve on its own.  If it continues for longer than a week and is present alongside other symptoms, people should check with a doctor.  Most cases of this type of stool have a good outlook, especially when diagnosed and treated early.    
 Antiparasitic agents. (n.d.).  Antiparasitic agents. (n.d.).  Colorectal cancer signs and symptoms. (2018, February 21).  Dietary guidelines for Americans 2015–2020 eighth edition. (2015, December).  Falcón, B. S., López, M. B., Muñoz, B. M., Sánchez, A. A., &amp; Rey, E. (2016, January 11). Fecal impaction: A systematic review of its medical complications.  BMC Geriatrics ,  16 , 4.  Increasing fiber intake. (n.d.).  Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). (n.d.).  Whole grains and fiber. (2016, October 11).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  D’Souza, Gillian. "What does it mean when your poop is stringy?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322502.php&gt;    APA  D’Souza, G. (2018, July 18). "What does it mean when your poop is stringy?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  