 Lexapro belongs to a class of drugs known as selective  serotonin  reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).  Serotonin  is a chemical messenger or neurotransmitter that affects mood. SSRIs help to restore the natural balance of serotonin in the brain.  Doctors consider SSRIs to be one of the safest types of  antidepressants . However, some people taking Lexapro may experience one or more of the following  side effects :  In this article, we look at the risks of drinking alcohol while taking Lexapro or other antidepressants, including how alcohol may worsen their side effects.  Doctors usually do not recommend drinking alcohol while taking Lexapro or any other antidepressant. This guidance is because alcohol can make  depression  worse and can counteract the benefits of a person taking antidepressants.  People who drink alcohol while taking Lexapro may feel more depressed or anxious, and these symptoms may then become more challenging to treat.  This worsening scenario is potentially dangerous as it can lead to some people having an increase in  suicidal thoughts .  Drinking alcohol may also worsen some of the side effects of Lexapro or other antidepressants, including drowsiness and dizziness. This is because alcohol can also cause these side effects.  Doctors also strongly recommend that people do not stop taking Lexapro or any other antidepressant to drink alcohol. Antidepressants require steady daily doses to work and stopping abruptly can cause withdrawal issues,  such as :  Alcohol can negatively impact the treatment of depression even when someone consumes it in moderation.  For people who are taking an SSRI antidepressant, such as Lexapro, and who are at low risk of alcohol use disorder, it may be safe to have a small amount of alcohol occasionally.  However, a person should always talk to their doctor before having any alcohol if they are also taking Lexapro or any other medicines.  In general, doctors consider  drinking in moderation  to be no more than:   Guidelines  in the United States consider one drink to be:  Doctors recommend that people who wish to drink alcohol while taking antidepressants should drink slowly and have the alcohol with food.  Alcohol can also interfere with other any other drugs a person may be taking, including many other-the-counter (OTC) medications. Some OTC treatments, such as cough syrups, also contain small amounts of alcohol. A person should always inform their doctor of all the medications they are taking.  Alcohol can affect the body in many ways. While it can temporarily relax a person and improve their mood, it can have serious effects on  mental health  in the longer-term and can worsen symptoms of depression and  anxiety .  Alcohol can disrupt the natural chemical balance of the brain and can interfere with the  central nervous system . Excessive alcohol consumption can:  In the longer-term, alcohol can cause depression and anxiety and increase the risk of self-harm and suicide.  Excessive alcohol consumption can also lead to alcohol use disorder. People with depression are at greater risk than others of developing alcohol use disorder.  Developing alcohol use disorder can affect a person's relationships and cause social problems, such as unemployment, divorce, and homelessness.  Long-term alcohol use can also increase the risk of chronic health conditions, including:  Lexapro is a safe and effective treatment for depression and anxiety. However, doctors strongly recommend that people avoid drinking while taking antidepressants. Alcohol can worsen symptoms of depression and anxiety and can increase the side effects of antidepressants.  Anyone who wishes to drink alcohol while taking Lexapro or any other medication should speak to their doctor first.    
 Alcohol’s damaging effects on the brain. (2004, October).  Alcohol Alert ,  63 .  Alcohol’s damaging effects on the brain. (2004, October).  Alcohol Alert ,  63 .  Beyond hangovers: Understanding alcohol’s impact on your health. (2010, September).  Escitalopram (Lexapro). (2017, June).  Frequently asked questions: Can I drink alcohol while taking antidepressants? (n.d.).  Lexapro (escitalopram oxalate). (2017, January).  Menkes, D. B., &amp; Herxheimer, A. (2014). Interaction between antidepressants and alcohol: Signal amplification by multiple case reports [Abstract].  International Journal of Risk &amp; Safety in Medicine ,  26 (3), 163–170.  Moderate drinking [Fact sheet]. (2017, July 25).  Ramsey, S. E., Engler, P. A., &amp; Stein, M. D. (2010, May 24). Alcohol use among depressed patients: The need for assessment and intervention.  Professional Psychology Research and Practice ,  36 (2), 203−207.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "Is it safe to drink alcohol while taking Lexapro?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322569.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, July 25). "Is it safe to drink alcohol while taking Lexapro?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  