 Before taking  magnesium  citrate, it is essential that a person understands how it works, its side effects, and how it interacts with other substances.  There are times when magnesium citrate may not be the best option for treating  constipation , and choosing other alternatives may help avoid any complications.  Constipation is when a person has  fewer than three  bowel movements a week. Stools are usually hard, dry, or lumpy, and may be difficult or painful to pass.  In many cases, addressing the underlying cause for constipation may reduce the need for medications, including magnesium citrate. These include a low fiber diet, immobility,  dehydration , or medical conditions.  Compounds such as magnesium citrate work by pulling water into the intestines. This water combines with the dry stool, making it easier to pass. Medications that work in this way are called osmotic laxatives.  When used correctly, many people find that magnesium citrate is a simple solution to occasional constipation.  Magnesium citrate is generally safe for adults who do not have any health issues, and who only use it from time to time.  Because magnesium citrate pulls water into the intestines from other areas in the body, people using it should drink plenty of water with it. They should also drink additional fluids throughout the day to prevent dehydration.  Magnesium is not a good choice for treating chronic constipation or constipation that requires ongoing treatment. Using it too often can lead to excessive dehydration and electrolyte imbalances.  Doctors often use higher doses of magnesium citrate as colon cleansers before surgery. The compound can have a powerful effect if a person takes too much. It is essential to read the manufacturer's instructions carefully whenever taking magnesium citrate.  Magnesium citrate may help treat constipation, but it might also cause a few side effects. Typical side effects from using magnesium citrate include:  When the stool does come out of the colon, there is also a chance it will be loose or watery.  Diarrhea  is common after taking magnesium citrate. These side effects are usually mild and do not pose a serious risk to otherwise healthy people.  Drinking alcohol along with magnesium citrate may make diarrhea and other intestinal side effects worse.  Magnesium citrate may interact with drugs, including specific  antibiotics  and medications that doctors prescribe to lower calcium concentration in the urine, such as potassium or sodium phosphate.  People on low-sodium or restricted-sodium diets should also avoid magnesium citrate.  Magnesium citrate can also decrease the body's ability to absorb some medications. People taking any medication should speak to their doctor before using magnesium citrate.  People should not use magnesium citrate if they have rectal bleeding.  People who have had certain procedures or have specific medical issues should also avoid magnesium citrate. Examples include:  People with a medical condition should talk with their doctor before using magnesium citrate to make sure it is safe to use.  Magnesium is safe to use for minor or occasional cases of constipation. It is not for long-term use. Anyone experiencing chronic, long-lasting episodes of constipation should avoid magnesium citrate.  Using magnesium citrate regularly may cause the body to become dependent on it, making it difficult for a person to pass stools without using laxatives. Anyone with chronic constipation should talk to their doctor to find long-term solutions for their symptoms.  Magnesium citrate is an active ingredient in many branded over-the-counter (OTC) laxatives. Liquid oral solutions without any other active ingredients may be best for treating constipation.  Dosages vary based on the brand or concentration of magnesium citrate in the bottle. Always follow the dosage and read the instructions on the label carefully.  It is essential to mix the solution with water and drink additional water when taking magnesium citrate. Mix the dose with at least 4 to 8 ounces of water, and drink a few extra glasses of water throughout the day. This may help replenish any fluids the body loses through the stool.  Very high dosages of magnesium  can cause  magnesium toxicity, so always use as directed.  Always consult a doctor before giving magnesium citrate or any other laxative to children. Pregnant or nursing mothers should talk to their doctor or pharmacist about the correct dosage. Doctors may recommend other medications or supplements to help with symptoms.  Apart from using magnesium citrate to relieve constipation, people can try:  Magnesium hydroxide is an ingredient in OTC products, such as Milk of Magnesia. It also draws water into the intestines to help soften stool and encourage a bowel movement.  People also use magnesium hydroxide to reduce stomach acid and treat other digestive symptoms, such as  heartburn  or an  upset stomach .  Also known as magnesium sulfate, people often use as Epsom salt to treat constipation.  Like the other forms of magnesium,  drinking dissolved Epsom salt  draws water into the intestines, softening the stool. However, if the appropriate amount of Epsom salt does not dissolve in water, this can lead to irritation. It is important to check how much water to use and to follow the instructions correctly.  People who are unable to take magnesium due to a medical condition or intolerance can try soluble fiber. Soluble fiber adds bulk to the stool, helping it get through the intestines.  People can choose from a variety of OTC fiber supplements, many of which contain fiber from plant sources, such as psyllium husk, glucomannan, or wheat germ.  People who experience occasional constipation can often improve their symptoms by increasing the amount of fiber they eat. Healthful sources of fiber include:  People can also try the following methods to relieve constipation:  While magnesium citrate may be an efficient way to relieve constipation quickly, it is not a long-term solution. Taking steps to prevent constipation from developing may be the best way to avoid future symptoms and reduce the need for remedies, such as magnesium citrate.  Some tips to help prevent constipation naturally include:  Most people will experience constipation from time to time, and it does not usually cause concern. It is generally okay to take magnesium citrate for occasional constipation, and it typically works quickly.  However, people should never use magnesium citrate to treat chronic constipation. People with frequent constipation should talk with their doctor.  Anyone experiencing side effects from magnesium citrate, or who finds that it does not work for them, should contact their doctor to talk about alternative treatments.  The constipation remedies listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Citro-Mag lemon lime flavor. (n.d.).  Citro-Mag lemon lime flavor. (n.d.).  Citroma magnesium citrate – citroma magnesium citrate liquid. (2018, January 12).  Constipation. (n.d.).  Magnesium. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Multum, C. (2018, March 27). Epsom salt.  Portalatin, M., &amp; Winstead, N. (2012, March). Medical management of constipation.  Clinics in Colon and Rectal Surgery ,  25 (1), 12–19.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Does magnesium citrate work for constipation?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322588.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, July 26). "Does magnesium citrate work for constipation?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  