 While many people know about the effects of  anxiety  on  mental health , fewer people are aware of the physical side effects, which can include digestive issues and an increased risk of infection. Anxiety can also change the function of the cardiovascular, urinary, and respiratory systems.  In this article, we discuss the most common physical symptoms and side effects of anxiety.  Anxiety describes a group of disorders that cause worry, nervousness, and fear. These feelings of anxiety interfere with everyday life and are out of proportion to the triggering object or event.  In some cases, people are unable to identify a trigger and feel anxious for what seems like no reason.  While mild anxiety can be expected in some situations, such as before an important presentation or meeting, persistent anxiety can interfere with a person's well-being.  According to the  Anxiety and Depression Association of America , anxiety disorders represent the most common mental illness in the United States and affect 40 million adults in the country every year.  While these disorders respond well to treatment, but only 36.9 percent of people with an anxiety disorder receive treatment.  Types of anxiety disorders include:  People with anxiety can experience a range of physical and psychological symptoms. The most common include:  Some anxiety disorders have additional symptoms. For example,  OCD  also causes:  Anxiety can have a significant effect on the body, and long-term anxiety increases the risk of developing chronic physical conditions.  The medical community suspects that anxiety develops in the amygdala, an area of the brain that manages emotional responses.  When a person becomes anxious, stressed, or frightened, the brain sends signals to other parts of the body. The signals communicate that the body should prepare to fight or flee.  The body responds, for example, by releasing adrenaline and cortisol, which many describe as  stress  hormones.  The fight or flight response is useful when confronting an aggressive person, but it is less helpful when going for a job interview or giving a presentation. Also, it is not healthy for this response to persist in the long term.  Some of the ways that anxiety affects the body include:  During periods of anxiety, a person's breathing may become rapid and shallow, which is called hyperventilation.  Hyperventilation allows the lungs to take in more oxygen and transport it around the body quickly. Extra oxygen helps the body prepare to fight or flee.  Hyperventilation can make people feel like they are not getting enough oxygen and they may gasp for breath. This can worsen hyperventilation and its symptoms, which include:  Anxiety can cause changes to the heart rate and the circulation of blood throughout the body.  A faster heart rate makes it easier to flee or fight, while increased blood flow brings fresh oxygen and nutrients to the muscles.  When blood vessels narrow, this is called vasoconstriction, and it can affect body temperature. People often experience hot flashes as a result of vasoconstriction.  In response, the body sweats to cool down. This can sometimes be too effective and make a person feel cold.  Long-term anxiety may not be good for the cardiovascular system and heart health. Some  studies  suggest that anxiety increases the risk of heart diseases in otherwise healthy people.  In the short-term, anxiety boosts the immune system's responses. However, prolonged anxiety can have the opposite effect.  Cortisol prevents the release of substances that cause  inflammation , and it turns off aspects of the immune system that fight infections, impairing the body's natural immune response.  People with chronic anxiety disorders may be more likely to get the common cold, the  flu , and other types of infection.  Cortisol blocks processes that the body considers nonessential in a fight or flight situation.  One of these blocked processes is digestion. Also, adrenaline reduces blood flow and relaxes the stomach muscles.  As a result, a person with anxiety may experience nausea,  diarrhea , and a feeling that the stomach is churning. They may also lose their appetite.   Some research  suggests that stress and  depression  are linked to several digestive diseases, including  irritable bowel syndrome  (IBS).  One  study , of outpatients at a gastroenterology clinic in Mumbai, reported that 30–40 percent of participants with IBS also had anxiety or depression.  Anxiety and stress can increase the need to urinate, and this reaction is more common in people with  phobias .  The need to urinate or a loss of control over urination may have an evolutionary basis, as it is easier to flee with an empty bladder.  However, the link between anxiety and an increased urge to urinate remains unclear.  Having anxiety can lead to long-term negative effects. People with anxiety may experience:  The medical community has yet to identify the cause of anxiety, but several factors may contribute to its development. Causes and risk factors may include:  To make a diagnosis, a doctor will evaluate symptoms and check for any underlying medical conditions that may be triggering the anxiety.  Anxiety is highly treatable, and doctors usually recommend a combination of some of the following:  Anxiety is the most common mental health disorder in the U.S. It causes both physical and psychological symptoms, and it can be very distressing.  Long-term anxiety increases the risk of physical illnesses and other mental health conditions, such as depression.  However, anxiety can respond very well to treatment. Most people who receive treatment recover well and can enjoy a good quality of life.    
 5 things you should know about stress. (n.d.).  5 things you should know about stress. (n.d.).  Anxiety disorders. (2016, March).  Blumenthal, J. A., &amp; Smith, P. J. (2010, November). Risk factors: Anxiety and risk of cardiac events.  Nature Reviews Cardiology ,  7 (11), 606–608.  Facts &amp; statistics. (n.d.).  Kabra, N., &amp; Nadkarni, A. (2013, January–March). Prevalence of depression and anxiety in irritable bowel syndrome: A  clinic based  study from India.  Indian Journal of Psychiatry ,  55 (1), 77–80.  Lee, S. P., Sung, I.-K., Kim, J. H., Lee, S.-Y., Park, H. S., &amp; Shim, C. S. (2015, April). The effect of emotional stress and depression on the prevalence of digestive diseases.  Journal of Neurogastroenterology and Motility ,  21 (2), 273–282.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "The effects of anxiety on the body."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322510.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, July 18). "The effects of anxiety on the body."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  