 The sounds of the lungs can provide clues that help a doctor to diagnose an underlying condition.  In this article, learn about the conditions that cause bibasilar crackles. We also describe how a doctor diagnoses and treats them.  Bibasilar crackles are abnormal sounds from the base of the lungs. They indicate that something is interfering with airflow.  Two issues often cause bibasilar crackles. One is the accumulation of mucus or fluid in the lungs. Another is a failure of parts of the lungs to inflate properly.  The crackles themselves are not a disease, but they can be a sign of an illness or infection.  The crackles sound like brief popping when a person breathes. Some people describe the sound as similar to wood burning in a fireplace.  Bibasilar crackles are more common during inhalation, but they can occur when a person exhales.  Doctors classify the crackles as fine or coarse, depending on their volume, pitch, and duration.  For example, fine crackles are often soft and high-pitched. Coarse crackles are usually louder and low-pitched, with a wet or bubbling sound.  Bibasilar crackles may occur with additional symptoms, depending on the underlying cause. Possible accompanying symptoms include:  Many conditions can cause bibasilar crackles, and they are usually based in the heart or lungs. Below are some potential causes of bibasilar crackles.   Pneumonia  is an infection in the lungs, which can result from a virus, bacteria, or fungus.  The infection can cause shortness of breath, fatigue, and coughing, as well as bibasilar crackles. In some cases, pneumonia can be life-threatening.  According to the United States  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , pneumonia is the leading infectious cause of death in children under age 5 worldwide.   Heart failure  occurs when the heart is too weak to pump blood efficiently to the rest of the body.  If the heart is not working correctly, the blood does not exit the lungs as quickly as it should. This can cause fluid to build up, and it can pool in the lungs.  Heart failure can affect both children and adults. Heart failure affects approximately  5.7 million  people in the U.S.  Beyond bibasilar crackles, symptoms may include swelling in the abdomen, coughing, and shortness of breath.   Bronchitis  involves  inflammation  of the bronchi, which are the tubes leading to the lungs. Bronchitis can be acute or chronic.  Acute bronchitis often results from a virus, and it typically lasts for  3–10 days .  Exposure to lung irritants, such as tobacco, is often the cause of chronic bronchitis.  Some symptoms of bronchitis include coughing, chest congestion, and fatigue.   Pulmonary edema  involves a buildup of fluid in the alveoli, which are small air sacs in the lungs.  Possible causes of pulmonary edema include:  Pulmonary edema can result from altitude sickness, which occurs when a person unaccustomed to altitudes ascends to  2,500 meters  or higher.  In addition to bibasilar crackles, symptoms of pulmonary edema include coughing, trouble breathing, blue-tinged lips, and spitting up pink, frothy mucus.  Pulmonary fibrosis is a type of interstitial lung disease characterized by scarring of the lungs.  In most cases, the underlying  cause  is unknown.  However, pulmonary fibrosis can result from exposure to hazardous materials, such as radiation, animal droppings, and asbestos.  Symptoms include a dry cough, shortness of breath, and unexplained weight loss.  A doctor can diagnose bibasilar crackles using lung auscultation, which involves listening to lungs sounds with a stethoscope.  Several characteristics can help a doctor to determine the cause of the crackles, including whether they occur when a person inhales or exhales.  For example, crackles that occur late in the inspiratory phase (when a person inhales) may indicate heart failure or pneumonia.  A doctor may also ask for:  Treatment for bibasilar crackles will depend on the underlying cause. The crackles may fade or disappear after treatment.  However, if the cause is a chronic condition, the crackles may occur on and off for an extended period.  Below are some treatments for common causes of bibasilar crackles.   Medication   A doctor may prescribe diuretics for a person with heart failure. Diuretics are medications developed to reduce levels of fluid in the lungs.  A person may require  antibiotics  if the crackles have resulted from bacterial pneumonia or bronchitis.  Doctors may also prescribe steroids to decrease inflammation in the lungs.   Oxygen therapy   Many causes of bibasilar crackles lead to shortness of breath. Oxygen therapy can help to make breathing easier.   Lifestyle changes   In some instances, crackles result from chronic lung disease.  Making certain lifestyle changes, such as stopping smoking, may help to treat the underlying condition and prevent long-term complications.  Anyone with symptoms of bibasilar crackles should speak to a doctor as soon as possible.  The crackles are an abnormal sound, and they usually indicate that an underlying condition requires treatment.  Bibasilar crackles can result from a severe lung problem. Prompt diagnosis and treatment may help to prevent long-term complications.  Anyone who experiences bibasilar crackles and shortness of breath, chest pain, or blood-tinged mucus should seek immediate medical attention.    
 Acute bronchitis. (n.d.).  Acute bronchitis. (n.d.).  Bärtsch, P., &amp; Swenson, E. R. (2013, June 13). Acute high-altitude illnesses [Preview].  The New England Journal of Medicine ,  368 , 2,294–2,302.  Heart failure. (n.d).  Pneumonia. (2017, August 29).  Sarkar, M., Madabhavi, I., Niranjan, N., &amp; Dogra, M. (2015, July–September). Auscultation of the respiratory system.  Annals of Thoracic Medicine ,  10 (3), 158–168.  Types, causes, and risk factors of pulmonary fibrosis. (2018, January 17).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  de Pietro, MaryAnn. "Everything you need to know about bibasilar crackles."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322597.php&gt;    APA  de Pietro, M. (2018, July 27). "Everything you need to know about bibasilar crackles."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  