 The body needs water to survive and drinking enough is crucial for maintaining optimal health.  Water ensures the human body is adequately hydrated. People stay hydrated by drinking liquids and consuming foods with high water content.  The amount of water a person needs to drink varies according to:  Many people do not drink enough water. In fact, many people drink more sweetened beverages than plain water.  Some people might find that a squeeze of lime improves the taste of the water, encouraging them to drink more of it. By drinking lime water, people can also take advantage of the many health benefits it offers.  This small citrus fruit with origins in Asia packs a large nutritional punch. According to the  United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) , one lime with a 2-inch diameter contains just 20  calories .  The same size lime also contains the following nutrients:  In addition to the nutritional value of limes, lime water has the following benefits:  The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  suggest that people who do not drink enough water could add a squeeze of lime to enhance the flavor, which may encourage them to drink more water.  A recent study in  Nutritional Epidemiology  showed that people who drank more water instead of sugary drinks, such as soda or juice, improved their diet.  People who drank water instead of sweetened drinks reduced the amount of sugar and fat they consumed on a daily basis.  Adding lime to water can help aid digestion. Limes contain compounds that help stimulate digestive secretions in the stomach. Also, the acid in the lime juice helps the saliva break down food.  Several studies show a link between citrus fruit and a reduced risk of some types of  cancer . A  2015 study  in  Medicine (Baltimore)  showed a possible link between increased citrus fruit consumption and a diminished risk of esophageal cancer. However, more research is required.  Limes contain vitamin C and  antioxidants , both of which are ingredients in many commercial skin products. When consumed with water, the natural ingredients in the lime juice can help improve the appearance of aging skin.  Nutritionists often recommend drinking a glass of water with a meal to help prevent overeating.  Lime water has an additional benefit. The citric acid found in lime juice helps boost a person's metabolism, helping them burn more calories and store less fat.  The vitamin C combined with the antioxidants contained in limes provide support to the body's immune system.  When drunk regularly, lime water might help prevent and shorten the lifespan of colds and cases of  flu .  Limes contain high levels of  magnesium  and potassium.  Both of these elements help support the overall health of the heart. In particular, potassium can improve blood flow and reduce  blood pressure .  There is also limited  research  indicating that limes may also help reduce  cholesterol  levels.  According to some  research , vitamin C can help lower morning and post-meal blood sugar changes. Though the study focused on people taking supplements of vitamin C, the conclusion indicated that vitamin C offers excellent potential for improving a person's sugar levels.  According to some  research , the limonins found in limes can help prevent the accumulation of  Streptococcus  bacteria.   Streptococcus  is a type of bacteria responsible for a variety of infections and health conditions, including respiratory and mouth infections.  Drinking lime water may help stop these harmful organisms from developing and prevent bacterial illnesses.  Limes provide a good source of vitamin C. Among many other potential benefits, vitamin C acts as an anti-inflammatory agent in the body.   Oregon State University  conducted a review of research that focused on the positive effect vitamin C has on reducing  inflammation .  They concluded that the majority of studies indicated that the use of vitamin C showed favorable results in reducing inflammation.  Limes contain both citric acid and vitamin C. A  2014 study  showed that both vitamin C and citric acid helped break up or prevent the formation of some types of  kidney stones .  The researchers concluded that by including vitamin C and citric acid in their diet, a person could reduce their risk of developing specific stones again in the future.  Lime water is easy to make:  For people who have trouble drinking the recommended amount of water each day, lime water may be a good alternative.  In addition to extra flavor, lime water also offers additional nutrients that may have a variety of health benefits.  Lime water is easy to prepare, and almost everyone can add it to their diet.    
 An, R., &amp; McCaffrey, J. (2016, February 22). Plain water consumption in relation to energy intake and diet quality among US adults, 2005–2012 [Abstract].  Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics ,  29 (5), 624–632.  An, R., &amp; McCaffrey, J. (2016, February 22). Plain water consumption in relation to energy intake and diet quality among US adults, 2005–2012 [Abstract].  Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics ,  29 (5), 624–632.  Basic report: 09159, Limes, raw. (2018, April).  Dakhale, G. N., Chaudhari, H. V., &amp; Shrivastava, M. (2011, December 28). Supplementation of vitamin C reduces blood glucose and improves glycosylated hemoglobin in type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized, double-blind study.  Advances in Pharmacological Sciences .  Gul, Z., &amp; Monga, M. (2014, December). Medical and dietary therapy for kidney stone prevention.  Korean Journal of Urology ,  55 (12), 775–779.  Inflammation. (n.d.).  Manners, G. D. (2007, October 17). Citrus limonoids: Analysis, bioactivity, and biomedical prospects [Abstract].  Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry ,  55 (21), 8285–8294.  Popkin, B. M., D'Anci, K. E., &amp; Rosenberg, I. H. (2011, August 1). Water, hydration, and health.  Nutrition Reviews ,  68 (8), 439–458.  Subramenium, G. A., Vijayakumar, K., &amp; Pandian, S. K. (2015, August 1). Limonene inhibits streptococcal biofilm formation by targeting surface-associated virulence factors.  Journal of Medical Microbiology ,  64 (8), 879–890.  Wang, A., Zhu, C., Fu, L., Wan, X., Yang, X., Zhang, H., … Zhao, H. (2015, October 2). Citrus fruit intake substantially reduces the risk of esophageal cancer: A meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies.  Medicine ,  94 (39), e1390.  Water &amp; nutrition. (2016, October 5).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What are the benefits of drinking lime water?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322556.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, July 23). "What are the benefits of drinking lime water?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  