 During pregnancy, the body retains extra water to support the baby, and this water is gradually released through sweating and urination.  In the meantime, various home remedies and exercises can reduce the swelling and associated symptoms.  In this article, we look at the causes and symptoms of postpartum swelling. We also explore natural ways to eliminate it.  Postpartum swelling happens when water weight from pregnancy builds up in the body and remains after the pregnancy has ended.  The swelling usually affects the legs, feet, ankles, and face.  According to the American Pregnancy Association, a woman's body produces  50 percent  more blood and body fluids during pregnancy to support the developing baby.  Some research suggests that a woman may retain more than  3.0 kilograms , or 6.6 pounds, of fluid throughout the body.  Postpartum swelling can occur after abdominal or vaginal delivery.  After childbirth, the body needs time to recover. Eating properly, resting, and sleeping more than usual will help the body to return to a healthy state.  The following home remedies can help to reduce postpartum swelling by increasing circulation:  It may be counterintuitive, but staying hydrated can help with losing water weight. This is because  dehydration  makes the body hold on to extra water.  Water also helps to push waste products through the kidneys, which can keep the body's systems healthy and speed up recovery after pregnancy.  To reduce swelling in the legs and improve circulation, spend some time with the legs elevated above the level of the heart. This encourages the water to flow throughout the body.  Fluids naturally rush to the feet when a person stands, so elevating the feet can reduce swelling temporarily.  Also, avoid cutting off blood flow to the legs, which can happen when a person crosses their legs or sits in restrictive positions.  Many people find that light exercise can reduce swelling and related symptoms. Moving around helps blood and water to circulate and prevents it from pooling.  However, people should always listen to their bodies and avoid movements that cause pain.  The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists  recommends  activities such as:  Authors of a 2017  study  found that wearing compression stockings helped to reduce swelling in the 24-hour period after giving birth. However, they noted that further research was necessary.  Compression stockings help to  increase blood flow  by reducing the size of blood vessels in the legs. This encourages the vessels to circulate more blood in a shorter amount of time.  A range of compression stockings is available for  purchase online .  Tight-fitting clothing can cut off circulation to various parts of the body. This can stop the body from shedding water weight and encourage the fluid to pool.  Wearing loose-fitting clothing can help to prevent these issues.  The body needs to maintain a balance of sodium and water. If people eat too much sodium, or salt, they will retain more water.  Common sources of sodium include table salt and processed foods, such as cakes, chips, prepackaged meals, and soft drinks.  The 2015–2020  Dietary Guidelines for Americans  recommends that people eat no more than 2,300 milligrams of sodium per day.  Checking the sodium contents on food packaging can help a person to keep their salt intake within a healthful range and reduce  water retention .  Sodium and  potassium  work together, and the body requires a balance. Consuming more potassium naturally lowers the amount of sodium in the body.   Foods  rich in potassium include:   Coffee  and other caffeinated products can make the body lose water, increasing the risk of dehydration. The body may respond by retaining fluids.  Replace caffeinated drinks with herbal teas or water to stay hydrated and reduce postpartum swelling.  Foam rollers can improve circulation and reduce the buildup of water in the body.  Using a foam roller on the legs, for example, can help to speed up blood flow by encouraging the blood to move through the veins at a quicker pace.  A healthcare provider can help to advise about the effectiveness of a foam roller for postpartum swelling. The rollers are available for purchase at athletic stores or  online .  The American Pregnancy Association  recommend  a postpartum massage for relaxation, pain relief, and reduced swelling. Massage can promote circulation and help the body to lose excess water weight.  Postpartum massage can also help to rebalance hormone levels and regulate levels of  stress  hormones such as cortisol, according to the organization.  When choosing a massage therapist or acupuncturist, find someone who is certified and who specializes in or is familiar with treating postpartum clients.  People should see a doctor if:  Postpartum swelling is common. There are several natural ways to reduce this swelling more quickly, involving massage, changes to the diet, and light exercise.  These remedies can also improve a woman's physical and  mental health  after pregnancy.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Akpinar, G., Ipekci, A., Gulen, B., &amp; Ikizceli, I. (2015, September–October). Beware postpartum shortness of breath.  Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences ,  31 (5), 1280–1282.  Akpinar, G., Ipekci, A., Gulen, B., &amp; Ikizceli, I. (2015, September–October). Beware postpartum shortness of breath.  Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences ,  31 (5), 1280–1282.  Committee opinion: Physical activity and exercise during pregnancy and the postpartum period. (2015, December).  Obstetrics and Gynecology ,  126 (6), 135–142.   Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2015–2020 . (2015, December). Eighth edition. Available from  https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/resources/2015-2020_Dietary_Guidelines.pdf   Fluid retention. (2018, February).  Hotfiel, T., Swoboda, B., Krinner, S., Grim, C., Engelhardt, M., Uder, M., &amp; Heiss, R.U. (2017, April). Acute effects of lateral thigh foam rolling on arterial tissue perfusion determined by spectral doppler and power doppler ultrasound.  The Journal of Strength &amp; Conditioning Research ,  31 (4), 893–900.  Lim, C. S., &amp; Davies, A. H. (2014, July 8). Graduated compression stockings.  Canadian Medical Association Journal ,  186 (10), E391–E398.   Nutrition During Pregnancy: Part I Weight Gain: Part II Nutrient Supplements . (1990). Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. Available from:  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK235244/   Ochalek, K., Pacyga, K., Curyło M., Frydrych–Szymonik, A., &amp; Szygula, Z. (2017, June 1).  Lymphatic Research and Biology ,  15 (2).  Park, J., Kwock, C. K., &amp; Yang, Y. J. (2016, August). The effect of the sodium to potassium ratio on hypertension prevalence: A propensity score matching approach.  Nutrients ,  8 (8), 482.  Postpartum massage. (2015, August).  Potassium and your CKD diet (n.d.).   Pregnancy, childbirth, postpartum and newborn care: A guide for essential practice . 3rd edition. Geneva: World Health Organization. (2015). Available from:  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK326673/   Romano, M., Cacciatore, A., Giordano, R., &amp; La Rosa, B. (2010, April–June). Postpartum period: Three distinct but continuous phases.  Journal of Prenatal Medicine ,  4 (2), 22–25.  Swelling during pregnancy. (2015, July).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Stinson, Adrienne. "Natural treatments for postpartum swelling."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322504.php&gt;    APA  Stinson, A. (2018, July 18). "Natural treatments for postpartum swelling."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  