 Often, using simple home remedies will reduce penis odor. However, some conditions require medical treatment.  In this article, we look at common causes of a smelly penis, as well as how to treat them.  Causes of a smelly penis can include:  Smegma is an accumulation of dead skin cells and the natural oils that keep the penis moist. If a person does not clean their penis regularly, the smegma can build up, resulting in a thick white substance.  This buildup is more common on uncircumcised penises as it forms around the head of the penis.  In addition to a bad smell, smegma can:   Balanitis  is skin irritation on the tip of the penis. Some of the primary causes of balanitis include:  If a person suspects balanitis may be the cause of a bad smell, they should talk to a doctor about possible treatments.  STIs may cause a smelly penis, in some cases. The two STIs most likely to cause penis odors are  chlamydia  and  gonorrhea .  Symptoms of chlamydia include:  Symptoms of gonorrhea include:  Anyone who suspects they may have an STI should seek medical attention and refrain from sexual activity until they have finished treatment.  NGU is inflammation of the urethra, which is the tube connecting the tip of the penis to the bladder.  In most cases, inflammation of the urethra is due to an STI, such as chlamydia. However, in cases of NGU, the cause of the swelling is unknown.  Symptoms of NGU may include:  A yeast infection occurs when too much of the  Candida  fungus is present on the penis. While vaginal yeast infections are much more common, yeast infections can also affect the penis.  In addition to a bad smell, other symptoms of a yeast infection include:  It is essential to seek medical treatment for a yeast infection, as it may lead to further infections and complications.  A UTI occurs when bacteria or a virus gets into the urinary tract. UTIs can cause:  Risk factors for developing UTIs include:  Treating a UTI can help prevent further complications, including kidney problems or the infection spreading beyond the urinary tract.  Practicing proper hygiene can help avoid infections and reduce any odor coming from the penis. It is essential to wash the genitals at least once a day with a gentle cleanser and warm water.  After cleaning the penis, a person should make sure the area is completely dry before putting on clothing.  In addition to daily washing, a person should consider taking some additional steps to keep the penis odor-free. These steps include:  Treating a smelly penis depends largely on what is causing the smell. If a lack of correct hygiene is an issue, a person can gently wash their penis more regularly with warm water.  It is best to avoid heavily scented products on the genitals, as they can irritate the skin and increase a person's risk of infections. People should also refrain from using cologne, scented cream, or other perfumes directly on the penis.  If a person suspects they have an infection, they should see a doctor for a diagnosis and treatment. Treatment may include  antibiotics , antifungal medications, or other medications.  A person should see a doctor if any of the following symptoms accompany a smelly penis:  In most cases, a person can treat a smelly penis with simple techniques at home, starting with better hygiene.  If other symptoms are present, such as pain, irritation, or discharge, it is best to see a doctor for a proper diagnosis.    
 Achkar, J. M., &amp; Fries, B. C. (2010, April 1).  Candida  infections of the genitourinary tract.  Clinical Microbiology Reviews ,  23 (2), 253–273.  Achkar, J. M., &amp; Fries, B. C. (2010, April 1).  Candida  infections of the genitourinary tract.  Clinical Microbiology Reviews ,  23 (2), 253–273.  Borelli, S., &amp; Lautenschlager, S. (2015, January). Differential diagnosis and management of balanitis [Abstract].  Hautarzt ,  66 (1), 6–11.  Chlamydia symptoms &amp; treatment. (2018, July 5).  Penile discharge, gonorrhea. (n.d.). Retrieve from  https://www.cdc.gov/std/training/picturecards/penile-discharge-gonorrhea.pdf   Urinary tract infection in men. (2014, October).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What to do about a smelly penis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322562.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, July 24). "What to do about a smelly penis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  