 Managing a newborn's sleep is one of the most challenging tasks of looking after a newborn. Newly-born babies are not accustomed to schedules or the rhythms of a typical day. For this reason, they might not sleep at the appropriate times.  Some people may worry that the baby is sleeping too little or too much. Anyone concerned about a baby's sleep habits could try keeping a sleep log. They might find that the newborn is sleeping much less — or much more — than they thought.   The National Sleep Foundation  recommend that newborns get 14-17 hours of sleep per day.  However, this timescale varies widely, and some newborns may only sleep for 11 hours while others will sleep for up to 19 hours per day. Newborns may sleep more or less than usual when they are sick or experience a disruption in their regular routines.  Most newborns sleep in bursts of  30–45 minutes to as long as 3–4 hours . In the first couple of weeks, it is standard for a newborn to wake up to feed and then go right back to sleep.  As a newborn grows into an infant, it begins to develop a schedule. They eventually start sleeping at night, though they may still wake several times to feed. Most babies do not have a regular sleep schedule until they are about  6 months  old. Even then, there is a significant variation from baby-to-baby.  Newborns are not typically awake for longer than  3 hours  at a time.  A baby who occasionally sleeps more than usual is not a cause for concern unless there are other symptoms. Some of the most common reasons why a healthy baby sleeps more than usual include:  Some babies sleep too much  because they have jaundice  or are not getting enough food. A newborn who has  jaundice  will have a yellow color to their skin and a yellow cast to the whites of their eyes.  Other signs of more severe jaundice include:  Babies who do not eat enough can become dehydrated, lose too much weight, and even suffer from a failure to thrive. Some people may struggle to work out whether the baby is getting enough to eat, especially if they are breast-feeding.  The good news is that early intervention from a pediatrician and breast-feeding consultant can ensure babies get enough food and reassure people that breast-feeding is possible.  A baby, whether breast-fed or formula-fed,  may not be getting enough to eat  if:  In very rare instances, a baby may have a medical condition that causes them to sleep too much. Breathing and heart disorders may affect sleep, and premature babies often have different sleep patterns from full-term infants.  Newborns often cluster-feed, which means they may eat several times over the course of 1–2 hours or nurse for an extended period. Most newborns should eat every 2-3 hours (or 8-12 times every 24 hours), or more if a pediatrician recommends so or the baby is not gaining enough weight.  Feeding a newborn whenever the baby shows hunger cues, such as rooting, sucking, or sticking out their tongue, is the best way to ensure the baby gets enough food.  It is not necessary to wake up most older newborns to eat. But those younger than 1 month or so may not wake up when they feel hungry. Babies younger than 4 weeks should not go longer than  4 to 5 hours  without food.  To wake a baby to eat, try brushing the side of their cheek. This can trigger the rooting reflex. Most babies dislike having their feet stroked. So if stroking the cheek fails, try gently wiggling the baby's toes or gently stroking the bottom of their feet.  Food needs vary from baby-to-baby. Parents should consult a pediatrician or breast-feeding expert, who can offer individual advice based on the needs and development of the baby.  Usually, a newborn who appears to be sleeping too much is just sleeping on an irregular schedule.  Nevertheless, health issues, such as respiratory infections that are minor annoyances in older babies can be much more dangerous in newborns. So anyone who is concerned about a baby's sleeping schedule should consult a pediatrician.  Some strategies to try before calling the doctor include:  When in doubt, see a doctor. Only a doctor can diagnose for sure the reason why a newborn is sleeping too much. In many cases, a pediatrician may be able to assess the problem over the phone.  Excess sleep in a newborn is not typically an emergency unless the baby shows signs of respiratory problems.  Call a doctor or go to the emergency  room if:  Finding the rhythm of a newborn's sleep patterns is a constant challenge. Most babies settle into a comfortable routine sooner or later. Parents and carers eventually understand what is and is not normal for their babies.  It is common to worry about a baby's sleep. This concern often helps people to detect problems early and encourages them to seek expert advice. Anyone who is worried that a baby may be sleeping too much should talk to a pediatrician.    
 Bonyata, K. (2018, January 14). Is my older baby getting enough milk?  Bonyata, K. (2018, January 14). Is my older baby getting enough milk?  Bonyata, K. (2018, January 15). Hunger cues — when do I feed baby?  Children and sleep. (n.d.).  DeJeu, E. (n.d.). Newborn baby sleep and feeding schedule.  DeJeu, E. (n.d.). Wonder Weeks chart: How the wonder weeks affect baby and toddler sleep.  Newborn jaundice: Causes, symptoms, and treatment. (2017, July 27).  Reuter, S., Moser, C., &amp; Baack, M. (2014, October). Respiratory distress in the newborn.  Pediatrics in Review ,  35 (10), 417–429.  Sleep. (n.d.).  Sleep duration recommendations [Fact Sheet]. (n.d.). National Sleep Foundation.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Is my newborn sleeping too much?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322565.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, July 24). "Is my newborn sleeping too much?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  