 On most days, people will replace fluids easily by drinking and eating as usual. However,  diarrhea , vomiting, illness, and hot weather can all increase fluid loss and make  dehydration  more likely.  Caregivers should be aware of the warning signs of dehydration in toddlers because it can lead to serious health complications. In severe cases, it can even be fatal.  Read on to learn more about the signs, symptoms, and causes of dehydration. We also cover treatment and when to see a doctor. With proper care, treating dehydration is straightforward and leads to full recovery.  If a toddler has a stomach virus, is vomiting, has diarrhea, or refuses to drink or eat, caregivers should monitor them for signs of dehydration.  Caregivers should bear in mind that the toddler may not understand the initial symptoms of thirst or dehydration or be able to communicate them to others. It is vital not to wait until the toddler is excessively thirsty before taking action.  Signs of dehydration in toddlers may include:  Dehydration in toddlers occurs when there is more fluid leaving the body than coming in.  Some cases may result from toddlers not drinking enough water. However, it is sometimes possible that an infection, illness, or disease will lead to dehydration.  Risk factors for dehydration in toddlers include:  To understand the cause and severity of a toddler's dehydration, the doctor will consider their medical history, discuss their signs and symptoms with a caregiver, and carry out a physical examination.  The doctor may also order specific laboratory tests to help them determine the optimal treatment. The tests for causes of dehydration may include:  Caregivers can usually treat dehydration in toddlers at home. The first step in treatment is to replace lost fluids with oral rehydration liquids that are designed to replace electrolytes and sugar.  People can find over-the-counter (OTC) oral rehydration products in grocery stores, drug stores, or  online .  Clear soups, popsicles, and ice chips can help with rehydration, especially if a toddler refuses to drink water. If the toddler is still breast-feeding, they should continue to do so alongside the rehydration solution and their solid diet.  If a toddler needs medical treatment, their doctor may provide rehydration in the form of an IV solution.  Toddlers who have been ill can begin eating again when they have not vomited for 4 hours. For decades, people have used the BRAT diet, which consists of  bananas , rice, applesauce, and toast, to ease diarrhea and vomiting in children.  Although this diet is safe and gets positive anecdotal feedback, there has not been any comprehensive research to confirm how well it works.  However, a  2016 single-blind randomized controlled trial  found that rice soup was effective alongside a prescription oral rehydration solution for children aged 8–24 months with acute diarrhea.  Caregivers should take a toddler with any of the  following symptoms  to see a doctor:  Dehydration can become severe.  If it is not possible to reach a doctor, it is vital to contact the emergency services or go to the local emergency room if the toddler:  By being aware of the risk factors for dehydration and replacing fluids promptly, caregivers can often prevent dehydration in toddlers. The following techniques can also help:  In most cases, toddlers become dehydrated because of a simple viral infection. Dehydration during illness can cause unpleasant side effects and serious complications, and it can be fatal without treatment. Therefore, it is crucial to prevent and treat dehydration.  Giving the toddler enough fluids using oral rehydration fluids, or an IV when necessary, should ensure that they make a complete recovery.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Churgay, C. A., &amp; Aftab, Z. (2012, June 1). Gastroenteritis in children: Part I. Diagnosis.  American Family Physician ,  85 (11), 1059–1062  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2012/0601/p1059.html  
 Churgay, C. A., &amp; Aftab, Z. (2012, June 1). Gastroenteritis in children: Part II. Prevention and management.  American Family Physician ,  85  (11), 1066–1070  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2012/0601/p1066.html  
 Diagnosis of diarrhea. (2016, November).  Churgay, C. A., &amp; Aftab, Z. (2012, June 1). Gastroenteritis in children: Part I. Diagnosis.  American Family Physician ,  85 (11), 1059–1062  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2012/0601/p1059.html   Churgay, C. A., &amp; Aftab, Z. (2012, June 1). Gastroenteritis in children: Part II. Prevention and management.  American Family Physician ,  85  (11), 1066–1070  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2012/0601/p1066.html   Diagnosis of diarrhea. (2016, November).  Eating, diet, &amp; nutrition for diarrhea. (2016, November).  How to treat diarrhea in infants and young children. (2018, January 12).  Kianmehr, M., Saber, A., Moshari, J., Ahmadi, R., &amp; Basiri-Moghadam, M. (2016, June). The effect of G-ORS along with rice soup in the treatment of acute diarrhea in children: A single-blind randomized controlled trial.  Nursing and Midwifery Studies ,  5 (2), e25852.  Rehydration therapy. (2018, May 15)  Signs of dehydration in infants &amp; children. (2015, November 21)  Symptoms &amp; causes of chronic diarrhea in children. (2017, February).  Yu, C., Lougee, D., &amp;  Murno , J. R. (n.d.). Diarrhea and Dehydration.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gal, Kat. "How can you tell when a toddler is dehydrated?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322553.php&gt;    APA  Gal, K. (2018, July 23). "How can you tell when a toddler is dehydrated?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  