 Skin contains melanin, which is the pigment that gives the skin its color. Having more melanin makes the skin darker, while less of it results in lighter skin. Melanin is also responsible for hair and eye color.  Patches of discolored skin are noticeable because they differ from a person's normal skin tone. They may be lighter, darker, or a different color, such as red, gray, or blue.  It is important that people with this symptom understand the cause of their discolored skin patches in case treatment is necessary.  This article explores the various causes of discolored skin patches and explains which of them require treatment.  Discolored skin patches have many different causes, including:  We look at each one of these in more detail below.  Birthmarks are patches of discoloration that people have when they are born. Some types of birthmark fade over time, while others may be permanent.  Birthmarks are either vascular or pigmented. Vascular birthmarks are red, and they occur due to abnormal blood vessels in the skin.  Types of vascular birthmark include:  Pigmented birthmarks are generally white, brown, blue, or gray. They result from a problem with the melanin in the skin.  Types of pigmented birthmark include:  If a person has lighter or darker skin patches, this may signify a skin pigmentation disorder. Type of skin pigmentation disorder include:   Melasma.  This is a common skin condition that usually affects facial skin and causes brown patches. It affects  women more often than men . Triggers of melasma can include sun exposure and hormonal changes.   Vitiligo.  This disease can affect any part of the body. It causes the cells that produce melanin, known as melanocytes, to stop working correctly, which results in patches of lighter skin. Sometimes, it will also change a person's hair color. The exact cause of  vitiligo  is unknown, but a problem with the immune system may be responsible.   Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation.  This is a temporary increase or decrease in skin pigment following skin trauma, such as a blister or burn.   Albinism.  People with  albinism  do not produce enough melanin. This leads to little or no pigment in the skin, hair, or eyes. Albinism is a genetic disorder, meaning that a person inherits a faulty gene from one or both of their parents.  Some types of skin rash can also cause patches of discolored skin. These include:  Certain skin infections may also cause discoloration, such as:  In rare cases, skin cancer can cause patches of discoloration. Types of skin cancer include:  Certain medical conditions, including the following, may cause discolored patches of skin:  Undiagnosed or untreated  diabetes  can also cause changes in the skin, such as:  If discolored skin patches appear suddenly and then disappear, there may be a simple explanation.  Causes of temporary patches or blotches of red skin include:  Causes of temporary patches of pale skin include:  If a new patch of discolored skin appears and does not go away, it is best to see a doctor. It is also important to seek medical attention if a mole changes size, shape, or texture.  To diagnose discolored patches of skin, a doctor may ask the individual about:  The doctor may examine the affected skin under a lamp. They may also need to carry out further tests, such as blood tests and a skin biopsy. The skin biopsy will involve the doctor taking a small sample of skin and examining it under a microscope.  The treatment for discolored skin depends on the cause.  If a person has an underlying health condition, the doctor will recommend the best course of treatment for that condition. Treating the underlying condition often resolves any associated skin problems.  If the underlying cause is skin cancer, it is vital that the person has treatment as soon as possible.  Birthmarks and skin pigmentation disorders do not usually require treatment. However, some people may wish to have treatment for cosmetic reasons. Treatment options include laser treatment, chemical peels, and topical creams.  Lemon juice or castor oil may also help to reduce the appearance of discolored skin patches. Alternatively, people can use makeup to camouflage the affected skin.  It is not possible to prevent all causes of discolored patches of skin.  However, sun protection may reduce the risk of melasma, sunburn, and skin cancer. People can protect themselves from the sun by:  There are many possible causes of discolored skin patches. Some causes, such as birthmarks, are not harmful and may not require treatment. Others, such as skin cancer and cyanosis, are likely to require immediate treatment.  It is essential to see a doctor if any new discolored patches of skin appear or if existing moles change in any way. This helps to make early diagnosis and treatment possible, which often leads to a better outlook.    
 Aaron, D. M. (2017, April). Candidiasis (mucocutaneous).  Aaron, D. M. (2017, April). Candidiasis (mucocutaneous).  Diabetes: 12 warning signs that appear on your skin. (n.d.).  Different kinds of birthmarks. (n.d).  Lupus. (2017, March).  Melasma. (n.d.).  Nevus simplex. (n.d).  Ringworm. (n.d).  Tinea versicolor. (n.d.).  Types of skin cancer. (n.d.).  Vascular birthmarks. (2014, January).  Vitiligo. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What causes patches of discolored skin?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322599.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, July 27). "What causes patches of discolored skin?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  