  Testosterone  is vital to a person's overall health and well-being. Low levels of testosterone can affect body composition unfavorably, and as people age, reduced testosterone levels can also cause weight gain.  Low levels of testosterone also affect sexual function, causing reduced sex drive, fewer erections, and  infertility .  According to a recent study of  9,054 men  aged between 19 and 39 who were of a healthy weight, normal testosterone levels range from between 264 and 916 nanograms per deciliters (ng/dL).  Drug companies promote products that are supposed to increase testosterone, and while these might help some people, they may also slow down the body's ability to naturally produce testosterone.  Also, these medications are not without risks.  A  2016 study  noted that the benefits and safety of long-term use of testosterone replacement products are not known.  The best way to improve testosterone levels is by adopting some lifestyle habits that can improve overall health and well-being.  Lack of sleep can adversely affect the levels of hormones and chemicals that the body needs to function correctly, including testosterone.  One study from the  University of Chicago  found that testosterone levels can drop in men who do not get enough sleep.  Ten healthy men aged around 24 years old spent 1 week sleeping for 8 hours per night at home, they then spent the next 11 nights in a lab. They slept for 10 hours per night for 3 nights, followed by 8 nights of restricted sleep, when they slept for only 5 hours. Doctors checked their blood every 15 to 30 minutes during the last night that they slept 10 hours, as well as on the sleep-restricted session.  The researchers found that after only 1 week of restricted sleep, daytime testosterone levels dropped by up to 15 percent. By contrast, normal aging sees testosterone decreases of just 1 to 2 percent per year.  Making sleep a priority may help maintain testosterone levels. People should aim to sleep at least 7 to 8 hours each night. Anyone having problems getting good quality sleep on a regular basis should talk to their doctor.  Research has long shown that eating well is essential to maintaining testosterone levels and overall health. According to one report in the   Journal of Neuroinflammation  , low testosterone levels and being overweight may contribute to a variety of inflammatory conditions and impaired neurological function.  Additional  research  showed overeating and yo-yo dieting disrupted hormone levels. This effect is most evident in athletes and people who are very active.  The best diets are ones that include mostly whole foods and offer a healthful balance of fats,  carbohydrates , and proteins. Eating a healthful and nutritious diet can keep all hormones levels in the body balanced and promote optimal long-term health.  Research has shown that men who carry more weight have lower levels of testosterone. One study in the journal   Clinical Endocrinology   reported that some obese males between the ages of 14 and 20 have up to 50 percent less testosterone than those who are not overweight.  A study in the   European Journal of Applied Physiology   found that the more active an individual is, the more testosterone they will have.  Another  study  suggested that increasing physical activity was more beneficial than weight loss for improving testosterone levels.  However, it is a good idea not to overdo it, as higher levels of exercise may cause low testosterone.  In fact, the same study found that long-distance runners may experience low testosterone levels. The researchers speculated that this might be due to inadequate energy and improper  nutrition .  Long-term and chronic  stress  is dangerous and can lead to many issues in the body.  Stress elevates the hormone cortisol, which is responsible for managing a variety of processes, including immune response and metabolism.  Elevated cortisol negatively impacts testosterone. One  2016 study  found that stressful events contributed to erratic changes to testosterone levels in males.  In the 2 months before their final exams, 58 male and female medical students filled in questionnaires and gave saliva samples while under exam stress.  The men in the study showed significant increases in salivary testosterone under exam stress, while the women had substantially decreased testosterone levels.  The researchers suggest the stress response in the male study participants resulted in aggression, emotional inhibition, and rumination, and this could explain the differences in the sexes.  One study published in the   Journal of Hormone and Metabolic Research   found that taking  vitamin D  supplements might correct a deficiency and even contribute to increased testosterone levels.  Getting at least 15 minutes of direct sunshine each day can also keep  vitamin  D levels managed. Food sources high in vitamin D include salmon and other fatty fishes or fortified milk and cereal products.  DHEA is a hormone that helps to produce testosterone and other hormones that affect body composition. As a person ages, DHEA levels drop, as do testosterone levels. One  study  involved giving DHEA supplements to a group of older men. The researchers found that the supplements produced small but significant positive effects in body composition.  Eating healthful fats found in fish and flaxseed might help the body use the DHEA it produces.   Magnesium  supplementation can help return testosterone levels to normal if the cause of the decrease is a deficiency.  One study in the journal   Biological Trace Element Research   found that taking supplements for at least 1 month might increase testosterone in all people. The report added that people who exercise would see a more significant increase in testosterone levels than those who are not active.  As with magnesium, zinc deficiency may contribute to a drop in testosterone. One older study  from 2007  showed 4 weeks of zinc supplementation could prevent a decline in testosterone levels in sedentary men who do exercise.  It is possible to correct both magnesium and zinc deficiency through diet. Magnesium-rich foods include whole grains and dark leafy greens. Zinc is also an ingredient in dark greens, flax seeds, and  pumpkin  seeds.  Creatine is known for its small but reliable testosterone increases. A  research study  from 2006 found higher levels of testosterone in college football players after taking creatine supplements for at least 10 weeks. Creatine occurs naturally in salmon, tuna, and beef.  While prescription medications can help manage a variety of health conditions, they are one of the most common reasons for low testosterone.  According to one report in   BMC Medicine  , statins, which are medications that lower  cholesterol , may partially operate by reducing testosterone.  Anyone who suspects low testosterone is due to prescribed medications should bring these concerns to their doctor's attention.  Abuse of drugs and alcohol has been linked to lower testosterone.  According to the  National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism , alcohol use affects the glands and hormones involved in male reproductive health.  Further, alcohol can cause low testosterone levels due to the effects it has on the body, including causing hormonal reactions and cell damage.  According to a report in   Nature Reviews Endocrinology  , there is little evidence to prove that testosterone therapy or marketed testosterone supplements can help men with age-related testosterone problems.  Testosterone therapy may, however, be helpful when the body cannot produce testosterone on its own.  Because testosterone therapy is not suitable for everyone, the best way to increase testosterone levels is naturally.  Anyone concerned about their testosterone levels should see their doctor for a testosterone test but also to discuss lifestyle changes and whether testosterone therapy or supplementation may help.  Testosterone development starts before birth and assists in the development of the male sex organs.  Testosterone drives libido, production of sperm, distribution of body fat, muscle strength, and creation of red blood cells in males. Women also produce testosterone in their ovaries and adrenal glands, but they produce significantly lower levels than men.  People can boost testosterone naturally through diet and exercise, or in some cases, through supplementation.  However, there is no evidence to prove that testosterone therapy raises testosterone in healthy males.    
 Afrisham, R., Sadejh-Nejadi, S., SoliemaniFar, O., Kooti, W., Ashtary-Larky, D., Alamiri, F., … Khaneh-Keshi, A. (2016, November 24). Salivary testosterone levels under psychological stress and its relationship with rumination and five personality traits in medical students.  Psychiatry Investigations ,  13 (6), 637–643.  Afrisham, R., Sadejh-Nejadi, S., SoliemaniFar, O., Kooti, W., Ashtary-Larky, D., Alamiri, F., … Khaneh-Keshi, A. (2016, November 24). Salivary testosterone levels under psychological stress and its relationship with rumination and five personality traits in medical students.  Psychiatry Investigations ,  13 (6), 637–643.  Cinar, V., Polat, Y., Baltaci, A. K. &amp; Mogulkoc, B. (2011, April). Effects of magnesium supplementation on testosterone levels of athletes and sedentary subjects at rest and after exhaustion [Abstract].  Biological Trace Element Research ,  140 (1), 18–23.  Corona, G. Rasterlli, G., Giagulli, V. A., Sila, A., Sforza, A., Forti, G. … &amp; Maggi, M. (2013, September 1). A meta-analysis study of placebo-controlled trials.  The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism ,  98 (9), 3615–3626.  Emanuele, M. A. &amp; Emanuele, N. (n.d). Alcohol and the male reproductive system.  Hoffman, J., Ratamess, N., Kang, J., Magine, G., Faigenbaum, A. &amp; Stout, J. (2006, August). Effect of creatine and beta-alanine supplementation on performance and endocrine responses in strength/power athletes [Abstract].  International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism ,  16 (4), 430–46.  Hooper, D. R., Kraemer, W. J., Saenz, C., Schill, K. E., Focht, B. C., Volek, J. S. … Maresh, C. M. (2017, July). The presence of symptoms of testosterone deficiency in the exercise-hypogonadal male condition and the role of nutrition [Abstract].  European Journal of Applied Physiology ,  117 (7), 1349–1357.  Jayaraman, A., Lent-Schochet, D. &amp; Pike, C. J. (2014, September 16). Diet-induced obesity and low testosterone increase neuroinflammation and impair neural function [Abstract].  Journal of Neuroinflammation ,  11 , 162.  Kilic, M. (2007, October). Effect of fatiguing bicycle exercise on thyroid hormone and testosterone levels in sedentary males supplemented with oral zinc [Abstract].  Neuroendocrinology Letters ,  28 (5), 681–5.  Leproult, R. &amp; Van Cauter, E. (2011, June 1). Effect of 1 week of sleep restriction on testosterone levels in young healthy men.  JAMA ,  305 (21), 2173–2174.  Low testosterone. (2018, May).  McBride, J. A., Caron, C. C. &amp; Coward, R. M. (2016, February.) Testosterone deficiency in the aging male.  Therapeutic Advances in Urology ,  8 (1), 47–60.  Mogri, M., Dhindsa, S., Quattrin, T., Ghanin, H. &amp; Dandona, P. (2012, September 13). Testosterone concentrations in young pubertal and post-pubertal obese males [Abstract].  Clinical Endocrinology ,  78 (4), 593–599.  Pilz, S., Frisch, S., Koertke, H., Kuhn, J. Drier, J., Obermayer-Pietsch, B. … Zittermann, A. (2011, March). Effect of vitamin D supplementation on testosterone levels in men [Abstract].  Hormone and Metabolic Research ,  43 (3), 223–5.  Schooling, C. M. Au Yeung, S. L., Freeman, G. &amp; Cowling, B. J. (2013, February 28). The effect of statins on testosterone in men and women, a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials [Abstract].  BMC Medicine ,  11 (57).  Spitzer, M., Huang, G., Basaria, S., Travison, T. G., &amp; Bhasin, S. (2013, July). Risks and benefits of testosterone therapy in older men [Abstract].  Nature Reviews Endocrinology ,  9 (7), 414–24.  Testosterone and androgens. (2017, October).  Travison, T. G., Vesper, H. W., Orwoll, E, Wu, F., Kaufman, J. M., Wang, Y., …Bhasin, S. (2017, April1). Harmonized reference ranges for circulating testosterone levels in men of four cohort studies in the United States and Europe.  The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism ,  102 (4), 1161–1173.  Trexler, E. T., Smith-Ryan, A. E., &amp; Norton, L. E. ((2014, February 27). Metabloic adaption to weight loss: Implications for the athlete.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  11 (1), 7. Rwetrieved from  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24571926   Vaamonde, D., Da Silva-Grigoletto M. E., García-Manso J. M., Barrera, N. &amp; Vaamonde-Lemos, R. (2012, January 11). Physically active men show better semen parameters and hormone values than sedentary men [Abstract].  European Journal of Applied Physiology ,  112 (9), 3267–73.  Wein, H. (2013, September 23). Understanding how testosterone affects men.  What is low testosterone? (n.d).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "How do you boost testosterone naturally?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322508.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, July 18). "How do you boost testosterone naturally?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  