 Pasta is an enormously popular food. According to the  National Pasta Association , the average person in the United States eats 20 pounds (lb) of pasta every year.  However,  research from 2017  noted a decline in pasta's popularity, which is partly due to health and  nutrition  concerns.  In this article, learn about the benefits and drawbacks of pasta, as well as the different types that are available.  Pasta can be an excellent addition to a healthful diet.  A  recent study  reinforced this, finding that people on a low-GI diet still lost weight when they ate pasta. The study concluded that pasta did not cause any weight gain or increases in body fat.  GI is a measure of how quickly and significantly a carbohydrate-rich food may raise blood sugar. The faster the absorption, the higher and faster a person's blood sugar levels will spike.  Generally speaking, lower-glycemic foods can help a person control their weight and lower their risk of  heart disease  and  type 2 diabetes .  Furthermore, according to the  American Diabetes Association , starchy foods such as pasta can be part of a healthful diet for people with  diabetes .  However, it is essential to limit the portion size of pasta and to minimize the use of high-sugar and high-fat sauces. It is also better to opt for whole-grain pasta, or bean- or lentil-based pasta, which is more nutritious.  Some people eliminate pasta from their diet because they are trying to reduce their gluten intake. Unless a person has a gluten sensitivity or  celiac disease , there is no evidence that a gluten-free diet offers any health benefits.  In fact,  studies show  that many types of gluten-free pasta and other gluten-free products can be more expensive and less healthful than their non-gluten-free equivalents. They tend to be lower in fiber and protein, and higher in sugar and fat than regular foods.  Finally, whole-grain pasta is one of the foods that make up the  Mediterranean diet , which is a nutritional approach that many doctors and dietitians recommend for better weight control and a lower risk of disease.  Traditional enriched pasta only uses specific parts of the wheat kernel, which means that it loses key nutrients during the production process.  Manufacturers often artificially add some of these nutrients, which include iron and B  vitamins , to the final product.  Whole-grain pasta uses all of the wheat kernel, which means that the nutrients remain in the pasta, along with fiber and other beneficial components. Whole-grain pasta is also lower in  calories  and  carbohydrates .  Eating whole grains has been linked to a  lower risk of obesity  and the associated health risks.  Both types of pasta are available in many shapes and sizes. Some of the most popular varieties include:  While pasta can be healthful on its own, it can easily become a base for too many calories.  At the popular  Olive Garden restaurant chain , a spaghetti dish with a creamy mushroom sauce and meatballs contains 1,680 calories.  As an  adult's average daily calorie requirement  is 1,600–2,400 for women and 2,000–3,000 for men, this single meal contributes to at least half of the day's calories and possibly even the full amount.  The same principles apply at home, where adding pre-made sauces and common accompaniments such as garlic bread or spoonfuls of Parmesan cheese can make an otherwise healthful meal unhealthful.  However, pasta can also be an excellent base for healthful foods. Tips to make healthful pasta-based meals include:  It is also vital to limit the portion size. People should aim to fill  half their plate  with fruits and vegetables and just over a quarter with carbohydrates, such as pasta.  Alternatives to pasta include:  Is pasta healthy? When people eat the correct portion size and add nutritious toppings, yes it can be.  To make pasta-based meals more healthful, people should avoid rich, creamy sauces and high-calorie accompaniments and add more vegetables and lean proteins.    
 Appendix 2. Estimated calorie needs per day, by age, sex, and physical activity level. (n.d.).  Appendix 2. Estimated calorie needs per day, by age, sex, and physical activity level. (n.d.).  Chiavaroli, L., Kendall, C. W. C., Braunstein, C. R., Mejia, S. B., Leiter, L. A., Jenkins, D. J. A., &amp; Sievenpiper, J. L. (2018, April 2). Effect of pasta in the context of low-glycaemic index dietary patterns on body weight and markers of adiposity: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials in adults.  BMJ Open: Nutrition and Metabolism Research ,  8 (3), e019438.  Diabetes myths. (2017, July 5)  Dietary guidelines for Americans 2015–2020. (n.d.).  Fry, L., Madden, A. M., &amp; Fallaize, R. (2017, August 29). An investigation into the nutritional composition and cost of gluten‐free versus regular food products in the UK.  Journal of Human Nutrition and Dietetics ,  31 (1), 108–120.  Harland, J. I., &amp; Garten, L. E., (2008, June). Whole-grain intake as a marker of healthy body weight and adiposity.  Public Health Nutrition ,  11 (6), 554–563.  Italy's love of pasta goes off the boil: Sales of pasta fall by 2%. (2017, May 25)  Olive Garden Italian Kitchen: Nutrition information (U.S. restaurants). (n.d.)  Pasta facts. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Harris, Scott. "Is pasta good or bad for you?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322564.php&gt;    APA  Harris, S. (2018, July 24). "Is pasta good or bad for you?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  