 In this article, we examine what medullary thyroid  cancer  or MTC is, and the early signs and common symptoms. We also cover when to see a doctor and the outlook for people with this condition.  The American Thyroid Association says that the disease is present in  1–2 percent  of cancers of the thyroid in the United States. Elsewhere, a 2016 assessment put the prevalence of MTC at  3–5 percent  of all thyroid cancers.  The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland located at the base of the neck, immediately below the Adam's apple.  MTC starts in specialized thyroid cells known as parafollicular cells, or C cells. These C cells release a hormone called calcitonin, which controls the levels of  calcium  in a person's blood.  Unlike other types of thyroid cancer, MTC can sometimes run in families. When a person inherits MTC from a parent, it is known as familial medullary thyroid cancer (FMTC).  Nevertheless, around  75 percent  of MTC cases are sporadic, which mean that the individual with the condition did not inherit it from a parent.  Because MTC tends to develop slowly, people in the early stages of the disease usually have no symptoms. For this reason, early diagnosis of MTC is not common.  When symptoms do appear, they typically consist of a painless lump in the front of a person's neck or throat. This lump corresponds with the cancerous mass of cells that is growing inside the thyroid.  If the condition progresses, symptoms may become more severe, and people can also experience other signs. These may include:  People with cancer that has spread to the nerves that control the vocal cords may also experience hoarseness or changes in their voice.  In the advanced stages of MTC, high levels of calcitonin produced by the  tumor  can cause  diarrhea  and flushing.  Anyone who notices a persistent lump or swelling just below the Adam's apple should see a doctor, especially if the symptoms coincide with any of the following signs:  However, not all neck lumps are cancer. Many other less severe conditions can cause a lump in the neck, such as swollen lymph nodes.  If a doctor suspects that the lump may be cancer, they will usually refer the person to a specialist for further testing.  MTC usually progresses slowly. It is also a very treatable condition if caught early. According to a  2017 review , the 10-year survival rate for MTC is:  Treatment typically involves surgical removal of the entire thyroid gland and any affected lymph nodes near the thyroid gland. Following surgery, a person usually needs to take medication to replace the hormones the thyroid used to produce.  Other treatment options for MTC include  radiation therapy  if there is a risk of it returning, and  chemotherapy  if cancer has spread.    
 Cancer of the thyroid. (n.d.).  Cancer of the thyroid. (n.d.).  Hadoux, J., Pacini, F., Tuttle, R. M., &amp; Schlumberger, M. (2016, January). Management of advanced medullary thyroid cancer [Abstract].  The Lancet. Diabetes &amp; Endocrinology ,  4 (1), 64−71.  Hu, M. I., Ying, A. K., &amp; Jimenez, C. (2014, June). Update on medullary thyroid cancer [Abstract].  Endocrinology Metabolism Clinics of North America ,  43 (2), 423−442.  Kim, B. H., &amp; Kim, I. J. (2016, September). Recent updates on the management of medullary thyroid carcinoma.  Endocrinology and Metabolism (Seoul) ,  31 (3), 392−399.  Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC). (2016, July 19).  Priya, S. R., Dravid, C. S., Digumarti, R., &amp; Dandekar, M. (2017, October 6). Targeted therapy for medullary thyroid cancer: A review.  Frontiers in Oncology ,  7 , 238.  Wells, S. A., Asa, S. L., Dralle, H., Elisei, R., Evans, D. B., Gagel, R. F., ... Waguespack, S. G. (2015, June 1). Revised American Thyroid Association guidelines for the management of medullary thyroid carcinoma.  Thyroid ,  25 (6), 567−610.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "Signs and symptoms of medullary thyroid cancer."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322518.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, July 19). "Signs and symptoms of medullary thyroid cancer."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  