 In this article, we explain how people can choose the best toothpaste for their individual needs and preferences.  People can select the toothpaste that is most suitable for them using the 11 methods below.  Fluoride is a natural mineral that protects tooth enamel and fights cavities.   Experts credit  the fluoride in toothpaste and drinking water with the significant reduction in dental cavities over the past few decades. Numerous studies confirm that fluoride is a safe and effective treatment.  As a result, the American Dental Association (ADA) and most dentists consider fluoride to be an essential ingredient in toothpaste.  However, some people prefer to avoid fluoride in toothpaste and drinking water. Where this is the case, natural toothpaste may be a better option as many natural formulations are fluoride-free.  Some toothpaste products carry the ADA seal of approval. This means that they meet the ADA's strict requirements, which specify that  toothpaste must :  However, participation in the ADA program is voluntary, and not all good toothpaste brands will carry the seal. People can view the list of ADA-approved toothpaste products  here .  It is advisable to check labels carefully. Not all types of toothpaste are suitable for everyone. For example, some products are unsuitable for younger children.  Manufacturers should include any flavorings and sweeteners on the label. Being aware of the ingredients allows people to avoid specific chemicals if they are sensitive to them.  Common ingredients include:  People who get frequent mouth ulcers, or canker sores, may wish to avoid products that contain SLS, as  some research  suggests that it increases the risk of mouth ulcers.  Individuals with dental problems should choose a toothpaste that meets their specific needs. Some people, for example, may require a desensitizing toothpaste.  Desensitizing toothpaste contains specific compounds, such as  potassium  nitrate, that block parts of the teeth to stop pain signals.  Many people want a whiter smile, and whitening toothpaste can provide a safe and effective remedy for off-white teeth.  These products contain abrasive ingredients that polish the teeth or remove stains from the tooth's surface.  People with sensitive teeth may wish to avoid whitening toothpaste that contains chemicals as these can make sensitivity worse.  A dentist can provide advice on whitening options that are safe for sensitive teeth.  Having sensitive teeth can make brushing very uncomfortable. Foods and beverages such as ice cream and hot  coffee  can be painful to consume. Special types of toothpaste can alleviate the symptoms of sensitive teeth, and over-the-counter (OTC) options are usually effective.  However, some people may not get enough relief from OTC products. If this is the case, a dentist may be able to prescribe a stronger product.  Toothpaste contains abrasive agents to clean and whiten the teeth. The level of abrasiveness of a paste, known as its relative dentin abrasivity (RDA), varies from product-to-product.  Products under 250 RDA should be safe and effective. All ADA-approved toothpaste must have an RDA of 250 or less. Toothpaste that has a higher RDA may damage the teeth. If in doubt, it is best to stick to the ADA's list or contact the manufacturer.  A layer of bacteria, called plaque, forms on the teeth before and after brushing. When plaque hardens, it turns into tartar. Tartar is difficult to remove and can contribute to  gum disease . Proper oral hygiene and regular dental cleanings can prevent tartar deposits.  People who already have tartar on their teeth should see their dentist. They should also consider using a tartar-control toothpaste. This will contain chemicals, such as pyrophosphates and zinc citrate, that prevent further tartar build-up.  Natural toothpaste products typically do not contain fluoride.  Some holistic dentists may recommend natural toothpaste over conventional types, especially for people who have concerns about fluoride and other chemical ingredients in their toothpaste.  Several brands also contain natural abrasive agents, such as baking soda, rather than chemical ones.  Baking soda is a gentle alternative to other abrasive agents, but it can be just as effective at removing stains.  People who are considering using natural toothpaste should check the ingredients carefully and weigh up the pros and cons. The FDA do not regulate natural toothpaste products.  Sugar contributes to tooth decay, so using toothpaste that contains sugar is not advisable.  Children's toothpaste, in particular, may contain high levels of sugar to make it more palatable.  ADA-approved toothpaste will not contain sugar or any other substances that contribute to tooth decay.  Everybody has different needs and preferences. People should consider their own needs and the needs of their family when selecting a toothpaste brand.  If necessary, people can shop around and try different options.  Important factors to consider include:  With so many options on the market, it can be challenging to choose a toothpaste brand. If a person is unsure, they can speak with a dentist about the best available options. A dentist will factor in a person's oral health and individual needs when recommending products.  It is essential to remember that toothpaste is just one component of oral hygiene. Other oral hygiene products include toothbrushes, tongue scrapers, and mouthwashes.  Although choosing a toothpaste may seem like a simple task, using the right one will contribute to oral health. People should consider the different types of toothpaste on the market and weigh up the pros and cons of each before making a decision.  Reading labels carefully and understanding what each ingredient does will help. If in doubt, people should speak to a dentist or choose an ADA-recommended product.    
 Chahine, L., Sempson, N., &amp; Wagoner, C. (1997, December). The effect of sodium lauryl sulfate on recurrent aphthous ulcers: A clinical study [Abstract].  Compendium of continuing education in dentistry ,  18 (12), 1238–1240.  Chahine, L., Sempson, N., &amp; Wagoner, C. (1997, December). The effect of sodium lauryl sulfate on recurrent aphthous ulcers: A clinical study [Abstract].  Compendium of continuing education in dentistry ,  18 (12), 1238–1240.  O’Mullane, D. M., Baez, R. J., Jones, S., Lennon, M. A., Petersen, P. E., Rugg-Gunn, A. J., ... Whitford, G. M. (2016, June). Fluoride and oral health [Abstract].  Community Dental Health Journal ,  33 (2), 69–99.  Oral health topics: Toothpastes. (2017, November 29).  Toothpastes. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What is the best kind of toothpaste to use?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322577.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, July 25). "What is the best kind of toothpaste to use?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  