 Maca is a common ingredient in Peruvian cooking that gives dishes an earthy flavor. Maca root plant can be ground up into a powder and added to meals or smoothies.  Aside from its culinary uses, maca may also have several health benefits. This article will discuss 10 possible health benefits of maca root.  There is a range of potential benefits of maca root, including:  The most well-known benefit of maca root is its potential to increase libido. There is some scientific evidence to support this claim.  For example,  an older study from 2002  found that men who took 1.5 or 3 grams (g) of maca per day experienced increased libido compared to those who received a  placebo .  A  2010 review  of studies on maca and sexual functioning found some evidence to suggest maca could improve libido, but the authors cautioned that more research is required.  A  2015 study  found that maca root may help reduce sexual dysfunction in postmenopausal women who were taking an  antidepressant .  Maca root could also have benefits for people with  erectile dysfunction  (ED). A  small study in 2009  looked at the effect of consuming 2.4g of maca root per day for 12 weeks on participants' perception of their general and sexual well-being.  The study participants were males with mild ED. Those taking maca root experienced a more significant increase in sexual well-being than those taking a placebo.  Some athletes and bodybuilders use maca root as a supplement to increase energy and performance. Some evidence exists to support this.  A  pilot study in 2009  found that using maca extract for 14 days improved performance for male cyclists in a 40-kilometer time trial. However, the results were not significantly different from the improvement seen in those taking a placebo.  However, the same study found that maca extract improved libido in the participants who used it. However, the sample size of this study was very small, so more research is needed to confirm the results.  Another widespread use of maca root is to increase fertility, particularly in men.  A  2016 review  found some evidence that maca root may increase semen quality in both fertile and  infertile  men. However, more research is needed.  Maca contains flavonoids, which are thought to improve mood and reduce  anxiety . A  study  in 14 postmenopausal women found that maca may reduce feelings of anxiety and  depression .  Also, a  2015 study  found that maca could reduce symptoms of depression in Chinese postmenopausal women.  It is possible that maca root can also help to improve  blood pressure . The same  2015 study  also found that 3.3g of maca per day for 12 weeks lowered blood pressure in Chinese postmenopausal women.  An  older study  in an animal model found that maca might help protect the skin from UV rays. Another animal  study in 2011  found that extracts from maca leaves might help prevent the formation of  sunburn  cells.  Maca root also promotes natural  antioxidants  in the body, such as glutathione and superoxide dismutase.  Antioxidants help to fight off free radicals, which can damage cells in the body. Some people believe antioxidants can help prevent some health conditions, including  heart disease  and  cancer .  Some proponents of maca root believe it may help balance levels of the hormone  estrogen . During perimenopause, the stage before a woman reaches  menopause , estrogen levels fluctuate and cause a variety of symptoms.   One study  found that postmenopausal women who took two daily tablets containing maca experienced reduced symptoms, such as hot flashes and night sweats.  There is some evidence to suggest that maca can improve learning and memory. For example, a  2011 study  found that maca could improve memory in mice.  A  2014 review  of the literature suggested that maca may have benefits for learning and memory performance. Researchers suggested that it could be helpful in treating conditions that affect these processes, such as  Alzheimer's disease .  However, only research on animal models is currently available, so it is unclear whether maca will have the same benefits in humans.  Maca is not currently associated with any health risks in most people and is unlikely to cause any side effects in moderate doses.  However, due to its effect on hormones, people with thyroid problems should avoid taking maca. It is also better to avoid taking maca when undergoing treatments that modify hormonal levels, such as treatments for  breast cancer .  Maca has a range of potential health benefits, particularly for sexual health. However, the evidence behind these health benefits is weak, as many studies used small sample sizes or animal models.  Researchers need to carry out more large-scale studies in humans to determine if maca is effective. Although there are few health risks associated with taking maca, most people can try maca without experiencing any adverse side effects.  If a person is interested in trying maca root, they can find supplements in some natural food stores or  online .  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Brooks, N. A., Wilcox, G., Walker, K. Z., Ashton, J. F., Cox, M. B., &amp; Stojanovska, L. (2008). Beneficial effects of  Lepidium meyenii  (Maca) on psychological symptoms and measures of sexual dysfunction in postmenopausal women are not related to estrogen or androgen content.  Menopause ,  15 (6), 1157–1162.  Brooks, N. A., Wilcox, G., Walker, K. Z., Ashton, J. F., Cox, M. B., &amp; Stojanovska, L. (2008). Beneficial effects of  Lepidium meyenii  (Maca) on psychological symptoms and measures of sexual dysfunction in postmenopausal women are not related to estrogen or androgen content.  Menopause ,  15 (6), 1157–1162.  Dording, C. M., Schettler, P. J., Dalton, E. D., Parkin, S. R., Walker, R. S. W., Fehling, K. B., … Mischoulon, D. (2015, April 14). A double-blind placebo-controlled trial of maca root as treatment for antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction in women.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2015 .  Gonzales, G. F., Córdova, A., Vega, K., Chung, A., Villena, A., Góñez, C., &amp; Castillo, S. (2002, 11 December). Effect of  Lepidium meyenii  (MACA) on sexual desire and its absent relationship with serum testosterone levels in adult healthy men [Abstract].  Andrologia ,  34 (6), 367–372.  Gonzales-Castañeda, C., &amp; Gonzales, G. F. (2008, February). Hypocotyls of Lepidium meyenii (maca), a plant of the Peruvian highlands, prevent ultraviolet A-, B-, and C-induced skin damage in rats [Abstract].  Photodermatology, Photoimmunology and Photomedicine ,  24 (1), 24–31.  Gonzales-Castañeda, C., Rivera, V., Chirinos, A. L., Evelson, P., &amp; Gonzales, G. F. (2011, August). Photoprotection against the UVB-induced oxidative stress and epidermal damage in mice using leaves of three different varieties of Lepidium meyenii (maca) [Abstract].  International Journal of Dermatology ,  50 (8), 928–938.  Jivad, N., &amp; Rabiei, Z. (2014, October). A review study on medicinal plants used in the treatment of learning and memory impairments.  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  4 (10), 780–789.  Lee, M. S., Lee, H. W., You, S., &amp; Ha, K. T. (2016, October). The use of maca (Lepidium meyenii) to improve semen quality: A systematic review [Abstract].  Maturitas ,  92 , 64–69.  Meissner, H. O., Mscisz, A., Reich-Bilinska, H., Mrozikiewicz, P., Bobkiewicz-Kozlowska, T., Kedzia, B., ... Barchia, I. (2006, December). Hormone-balancing effect of pre-gelatinized organic Maca (Lepidium peruvianum Chacon): (III) clinical responses of early-postmenopausal women to Maca in double blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover configuration, outpatient study.  International Journal of Biomedical Science ,  2 (4), 375–394.  Rubio, J., Yucra, S., Gasco, M., &amp; Gonzales, G. F. (2016, July 30). Dose–response effect of black maca (Lepidium meyenii) in mice with memory impairment induced by ethanol.  Toxicology Mechanisms and Methods ,  21 (8), 628–634.  Shin, B. C., Lee, M. S., Yang, E. J., Lim, H.-S., &amp; Ernst, E. (2010, August 6). Maca ( L. meyenii ) for improving sexual function: A systematic review.  BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  10 (1), 44.  Stojanovska, L., Law, C., Lai, B., Chung, T., Nelson, K., Day, S., ... Haines, C. (2015, February). Maca reduces bloodpressure and depression, in a pilot study in postmenopausal women.  Climacteric ,  18 (1), 69-78.  Stone, M., Ibarra, A., Roller, M., Zangara, A., &amp; Stevenson, E. (2009, December 10). A pilot investigation into the effect of maca supplementation on physical activity and sexual desire in sportsmen.  Journal of Ethnopharmacology ,  126 (3), 574–576.  Zenico, T., Cicero, A. F. G., Valmorri, L., Mercuriali, M., &amp; Bercovich, E. (2009, February 26). Subjective effects of  Lepidium meyenii  (Maca) extract on well-being and sexual performances in patients with mild erectile dysfunction: A randomised, double-blind clinical trial [Abstract].  Andrologia ,  41 (2), 95–99.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What are the benefits of maca root?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322511.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, July 18). "What are the benefits of maca root?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  