 Osteosarcoma is a relatively rare type of  cancer  with around  800 to 900  new cases reported in the United States each year. Children and young adults between 10 and 30 years of age are the most commonly affected group.  The bones most likely to be affected by osteosarcoma are:  Osteosarcoma is a rare type of  bone cancer  in children and usually appears in early adolescence, during growth spurts. Osteosarcoma is slightly  more common  in African-Americans than in others.  The symptoms of osteosarcoma vary from person-to-person and can differ, depending on where the  tumor  is growing.  Typical symptoms include:  Osteosarcoma causes pain that can be a dull, aching sensation or so intense it interferes with sleep. People often mistake these pains for growing pains.  A person should see a doctor if they experience:  While it is not possible to prevent this cancer from occurring, there are several risk factors, such as:  Doctors think a mutation of the p53 gene, which they believe affects the development of tumors in young people, might be connected with osteosarcoma.  Osteosarcoma could also be related to the retinoblastoma gene, which experts have linked to eye cancer in children.  If a person has undergone  radiation therapy  in the past, they may be at higher risk of developing osteosarcoma, though it could take years for this to occur.  When bones enlarge quickly due to growth spurts, this may leave them more susceptible to tumors.  There are several ways a doctor may diagnose osteosarcoma. These include:  If a doctor suspects that osteosarcoma is causing a person's symptoms, they may recommend further tests. These include:  If osteosarcoma is present it will be classified in one of two ways:  1.  Localized : Where doctors find cancer in one area only, such as the bone where it first developed.  2.  Metastatic : Where cancer has spread to other areas of the body.  The stage the cancer is at determines how much disease is present in the body. The  Musculoskeletal Tumor Society Staging System  and the American Joint Commission on Cancer  TNM  system provide details of what each stage means.  People diagnosed with osteosarcoma are likely to undergo  chemotherapy  treatment.  Chemotherapy is a standard cancer treatment where doctors give a patient drugs that destroy cancer cells in the body. People take several cycles of the drugs and may need more extended treatment periods if cancer has spread.  After a course of chemotherapy, a person may then require surgery to remove any tumors that remain. A doctor will try to remove tumors during an operation, as well as the surrounding bone, and will then insert an artificial replacement.  In most cases, surgeons can save the affected limbs. There are, however, instances when they need to amputate the arm or leg that has cancer.  A person may require further rounds of chemotherapy after surgery to destroy any cancer cells that remain.  It is possible for bone cancer to recur after treatment, and further scans and X-rays will be necessary to check that no new tumors are growing.  There are no guarantees that chemotherapy and surgery will cure cancer. If these treatments fail, amputation may be necessary to stop the cancerous cells from spreading elsewhere.  Chemotherapy is an intense treatment and can cause unpleasant side effects, including:  The prognosis for people with osteosarcoma is dependent on several factors, including:  Some  3 out of 4  people make a full recovery from osteosarcoma if their cancer has not spread.  The survival rate for people whose tumors have spread elsewhere is around  30 percent .    
 Bone cancer. (2008, March 13).  Bone cancer. (2008, March 13).  Bone scan. (2015, April 14).  Cancer stat facts: Oral cavity and pharynx cancer. (n.d.).  Key statistics for osteosarcoma. (2018, January 24).  Osteosarcoma. (n.d.).  Osteosarcoma. (n.d.).  Osteosarcoma. (n.d.).  Osteosarcoma and malignant fibrous histiocytoma of bone treatment (PDQ®)–Patient version. (2018, May 7).  Osteosarcoma stages. (2018, January 30).  Osteosarcoma treatment. (2014, May 1).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What is osteosarcoma?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322540.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, July 23). "What is osteosarcoma?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  