 The diet involves limiting or avoiding the intake of certain foods and beverages in favor of more healthful alternatives.  While a low-purine diet is designed to ease symptoms of certain illnesses, it can also improve general health and well-being.  In this article, learn which foods a person on a low-purine diet should eat and which they should avoid.  Purines are organic compounds that are not necessarily harmful. In fact, it is natural for the body to contain some purines at all times.  However, purines break down into a waste substance called uric acid. Most uric acid dissolves harmlessly in the blood before the kidneys filter it and remove it from the body.  The breakdown of purines is responsible for about  15 percent  of the uric acid in the body.  When levels of uric acid exceed the amount that the body can process, the acid can form crystals in the blood. These can cause  gout ,  kidney stones , and other issues.  A low-purine diet helps to minimize the number of purines in the body and reduce the amount of uric acid in the blood.  There are two key parts of a successful low-purine diet. The first involves recognizing and avoiding foods that contain high levels of purines.  The second consists in changing the diet to help the body get rid of uric acid more efficiently.  Uric acid crystals can form kidney stones or cause gout if they build up in the joints and tendons.  According to the  American Academy of Family Physicians , a low-purine diet can lower the levels of uric acid in the bloodstream and reduce the risk of severe complications.  People with high levels of uric acid in the blood have a condition called hyperuricemia, and a low-purine diet can help.  Foods that contain high levels of purines include:  Other foods and beverages can change how the body retains or eliminates uric acid.  A person should significantly limit or avoid the following foods to help the body process purines more effectively:  People on a low-purine diet can still enjoy plenty of foods and beverages. Good choices include:  While a low-purine diet can help to prevent kidney stones or flare-ups of gout, the diet is not a cure for either condition. A person should discuss further treatment options with a doctor.  Medication can also help to lower chronically high uric acid levels. Two common drugs that doctors prescribe are probenecid and allopurinol. These medications can regulate uric acid levels in the long term.  A low-purine diet cannot ease a gout flare-up while it is happening, but over-the-counter medications, such as naproxen (Aleve), can help. Prescription-strength treatments are also available.  There is also  scientific evidence  that the  Mediterranean diet  may lower levels of uric acid. The Mediterranean diet involves eating mainly fish, nuts, fruits, vegetables, legumes, and whole grains.  A low-purine diet can reduce uric acid levels. It may also help people who are overweight or obese to lose weight. These changes can prevent kidney stones and flare-ups of gout.  Always speak with a doctor before embarking on a new diet, especially one that aims to address a health issue.  The doctor can provide tips, and they may recommend additional medical treatments to reduce symptoms.    
 Abhishek, A., &amp; Doherty, M. (2018, January 1). Education and non-pharmacological approaches for gout.  Rheumatology ,  57 (Suppl. 1), i51–i58.  Abhishek, A., &amp; Doherty, M. (2018, January 1). Education and non-pharmacological approaches for gout.  Rheumatology ,  57 (Suppl. 1), i51–i58.  Álvarez-Lario, B., &amp; Alonso-Valdivieslo, J. L. (2014, April 1). Hyperuricemia and gout: The role of diet.  Nutrición Hospitalaria ,  29 (4), 760–770.  Gout diet: Do's and don'ts. (n.d.).  Kontogianni, M. D., Chrysohoou, C., Panagiotakos, D. B., Tsetsekou, E., Zeimbekis, A., Pitsavos, C., &amp; Stefanadis, C. (2012, July 24). Adherence to the Mediterranean diet and serum uric acid: The ATTICA study [Abstract].  Scandinavian Journal of Rheumatology ,  41 (6), 442–449.  Low-purine diet. (n.d.).  Low-purine diet. (2017, February 15).  Seki, S., Oki, Y., Tsunoda, S., Takemoto, T., Koyama, T., &amp; Yoshimura, M. (2016, November). Impact of alcohol intake on the relationships of uric acid with blood pressure and cardiac hypertrophy in essential hypertension [Abstract].  Journal of Cardiology ,  68 (5), 447–454.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Harris, Scott. "Foods to eat and avoid on a low-purine diet."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322590.php&gt;    APA  Harris, S. (2018, July 26). "Foods to eat and avoid on a low-purine diet."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  