 Dates grow on date palms in small clusters. The term date comes from the Greek word  daktulos , which means fingers.  Farmers harvest dates in the fall and early winter, so dates usually taste freshest at this time of year. However, many people eat dried dates, which can last for a long time in a sealed container.  In this article, learn about the health benefits of dates and how to incorporate them into a well-balanced diet.  Deglet Noor dates are one of the most common types of dates that people can find in the supermarket.  The following is the nutritional information for one  average-sized  Deglet Noor date:  Another common variety is the Medjool date. Medjool dates have a  similar nutritional content  and are often larger than Deglet Noor dates.  In addition to tasting great, dates contain protein, vitamins, and minerals. They are also:  Dates have a very high sugar content relative to the rest of their nutritional value. People who are trying to manage their blood sugar, such as those with  diabetes , should be mindful of their total sugar intake when consuming dates.  Eating dates in moderation is unlikely to raise a person's blood sugar excessively, even if they have diabetes.  According to  one study , dates are a low glycemic index food that does not result in significant increases in blood sugar in people with or without diabetes.  Although the researchers had only a small sample size, their findings do indicate that eating dates in moderation should not dramatically impact a person's blood sugar.  Dates can be eaten fresh or dried, much like raisins. People can also add them to a variety of sweet or savory dishes.  Some examples of dishes that incorporate dates include:  When shopping for dates, people should look for those that are shiny and unbroken.  A person can store fresh dates in an airtight container in the refrigerator for many months and even longer in the freezer. If refrigerated, dried dates will last for about 1 year in an airtight container and many years if frozen.  A person should not eat dates that have a sour smell, are very hard, or have crystallized sugar on their surface. These signs can indicate the dates have gone bad.  Eating dates can be an easy way for a person to incorporate a new fruit into their diet.  When eaten in moderation, dates can also contribute essential nutrients, such as potassium,  magnesium , iron, and manganese.    
 Alkaabi, J. M., Al-Dabbagh, B., Ahmad, S., Saadi, H. F., Gariballa, S., &amp; Ghazali, M. A. (2011, May 28). Glycemic indices of five varieties of dates in healthy and diabetic subjects.  Nutrition Journal ,  10 , 59.  Alkaabi, J. M., Al-Dabbagh, B., Ahmad, S., Saadi, H. F., Gariballa, S., &amp; Ghazali, M. A. (2011, May 28). Glycemic indices of five varieties of dates in healthy and diabetic subjects.  Nutrition Journal ,  10 , 59.  Basic Report: 09087, Dates, deglet noor. (2018, April).  Basic Report: 09421, Dates, medjool. (2018, April).  Dates: Nutrition, selection, storage. (n.d.).  Marzolo, G. (2016, July). Dates.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Are dates healthful?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322548.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, July 23). "Are dates healthful?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  