 When a medical professional performs an abortion, it is a safe procedure that carries few risks. However, women should be aware of what to expect after an abortion and how to plan their rest and recovery.  According to one analysis, it is likely that  nearly 1 in 4 women  of childbearing age will have an abortion before the age of 45.  In this article, we talk about what women can expect after an abortion. We also provide tips for taking care of yourself and discuss recovery time and when to see a doctor.  A doctor may recommend different methods of abortion according to a woman's medical needs and stage of pregnancy. These include:  Women may experience similar symptoms regardless of the method. However, if a woman has an abortion later in pregnancy, especially during the second trimester, the symptoms may be more severe.  After an abortion, it is normal for women to experience the  following symptoms :  The usual menstrual period should return within 4–8 weeks, although the flow of the bleeding may be slightly different initially.  Some women feel very emotional or experience mood swings. The change in pregnancy hormones can be responsible for this, or it might result from their feelings about the abortion or the pregnancy. Sometimes it will be a combination of both factors.  It is possible to get pregnant very soon after an abortion, or as soon as  ovulation  occurs, which will happen before the first period. Therefore, it is important to use  birth control  or to abstain from sex when trying to avoid pregnancy.  In the days immediately after an abortion, some women feel unwell or exhausted. Pain from cramping is common and may feel intense at times.  Women should ask someone for a ride home from the clinic and then ensure that they get plenty of rest to let their body recover and to reduce the risk of side effects. They should avoid doing anything that is emotionally or physically strenuous.  After an abortion, a woman may be more prone to infection as it can take some time for the cervix to close. To reduce the risk of infection, women should avoid:  Women may also wish to try the following self-care tips after an abortion:  Abortion recovery times vary from woman to woman. Women who have first trimester abortions and those who do not have any complications will usually feel normal within a few days. The bleeding usually stops within 6 weeks.  Recovery may take longer for late-term abortions. If complications develop, recovery can take much longer, and people may need hospitalization or surgery. This is unusual though, and most women will recover within a few weeks.  Most women who have abortions will have a follow-up with a doctor within a few weeks. If there are no signs of complications, further medical care will not be necessary.  Women who experience any symptoms of complications may need an immediate appointment with a doctor. Although it is not common, some abortion complications may require a trip to the emergency room.  Many abortion clinics provide a 24-hour advice line that can help women to determine whether or not their symptoms need treatment. Women should call the advice line, the emergency services, or go to the emergency room if they are:  Women who have recently had an abortion should see a doctor within a day if they are:  For most women, an abortion is a straightforward medical procedure that does not cause any lasting complications.  Some women worry that an abortion might have long-term effects. However, doctors  generally agree  that an abortion does not affect a woman's chances of becoming pregnant in the future or increase the likelihood of pregnancy complications.  Abortion can be a difficult decision, and it is normal to experience a range of emotions. It is best to speak with a doctor about what to expect after an abortion and to follow their advice about the best steps to take.  Women can also get support from close friends and family or an abortion support group.    
 After an abortion... (2011, June 10).  After an abortion... (2011, June 10).  Induced abortion. (2015, May).  Jones, R. K. &amp; Jerman, J. (2017, November 8). Population group abortion rates and lifetime incidence of abortion: United States, 2008–2014.  American Journal of Public Health ,  107 (12), 1904–1909.   O’Donnell, A. T., O’Carroll, T., &amp; Toole, N. (2018, January 30). Internalized stigma and stigma-related isolation predict women's psychological distress and physical health symptoms post-abortion [Abstract].  Psychology of Women Quarterly ,  42 (2), 220–234.  Practice Bulletin No. 143: Medical management of first-trimester abortion [Abstract]. (2014, March).  Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  123 (3), 676–692.  Rocca, C. H., Kimport, K., Gould, H., &amp; Foster, D. G. (2013, September). Women's emotions one week after receiving or being denied an abortion in the United States [Abstract].  Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health ,  45 (3), 122–131.  Sech, L., Segall-Gutierrez, P., Silverstein, E., &amp; Mishell Jr, D. R. (2013, June). Induced abortion (termination of pregnancy).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "How to care for yourself after an abortion."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322533.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, July 20). "How to care for yourself after an abortion."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  