 Although their size can vary naturally from person to person, ovaries can also become enlarged for several reasons.  Although some causes of enlarged ovaries are harmless, such as  ovulation , others may require treatment.  This article will review the symptoms, causes, and treatment of enlarged ovaries.  While enlarged ovaries do not always cause symptoms, people with this condition may experience:  Sometimes, the ovaries may become so enlarged that a person or doctor can feel the ovary in the pelvis, but this is not often the case.  When someone has symptoms that could indicate enlarged ovaries or another ovarian condition, a doctor is likely to recommend an  ultrasound .  An ultrasound uses sound waves to create images of the pelvic organs. Doctors may do the ultrasound across the abdomen (transabdominal) or insert the probe into the vagina (transvaginal).  Enlarged ovaries have many potential causes, including:  Ovulation is when an ovary releases an egg for fertilization. During ovulation, the ovaries can become hyperstimulated by hormones and may temporarily enlarge.  Enlarged ovaries may be more likely during ovulation if a person is taking fertility drugs.  PCOS is a common condition in which a hormonal imbalance causes small  cysts  to develop on the ovaries.  People with PCOS may experience  irregular periods  and might find it difficult to get pregnant, as the ovaries may not release eggs regularly. PCOS can also cause weight gain and excess hair growth on the body.  This rare condition occurs when fluid builds up in the ovarian tissue. Most of the time, ovarian  edema  occurs in only one ovary.  Ovarian edema  may occur  due to partial ovarian torsion, which blocks the blood flow and prevents lymph fluid from draining. As a result, fluid builds up, and the ovary enlarges.  Ovarian torsion refers to the ovary becoming partially or fully rotated around the supporting tissues. It is a medical emergency.  Ovarian torsion cuts off the blood flow to the ovary and can cause significant nausea, pelvic pain, and vomiting. It requires prompt surgery to correct the rotation and restore blood flow.  The ovaries are subject to several types of benign, or non-cancerous, growths or cysts. These include mature cystic teratomas, fibrothecomas, and cystadenoma.  Cysts are common and usually resolve without treatment.   Ovarian cancer  occurs when cancerous cells grow on the ovaries. It is  more common  after  menopause .  Symptoms of ovarian cancer are non-specific and include pelvic pain, bloating, and fatigue.  A doctor will consider a person's medical history, symptoms, and ultrasound images before testing for ovarian cancer. A biopsy can definitively diagnose the disease.  Ovaries may look enlarged during pregnancy due to a luteoma. A luteoma is a benign growth on the ovary that only occurs during pregnancy.  Doctors are not sure why some women develop luteomas while others do not, but they believe that the increased hormone levels during pregnancy may play a role.  Most luteomas do not cause symptoms. A doctor will usually detect one during a routine ultrasound or when performing a cesarean delivery.  Women who have luteomas during the first half of their pregnancy tend to experience more severe symptoms and may even require surgery to remove the growths.  Possible symptoms of luteomas include difficulty urinating, high levels of  testosterone , and  virilization , which is the appearance of typically male characteristics, such as a deeper voice and increased body hair.  Luteomas usually resolve after a woman gives birth, so doctors try to avoid surgery whenever possible.  The treatment for enlarged ovaries will depend on the underlying cause.  For example, steps for managing PCOS may include:  Treatments for ovarian cancer may include the removal of the ovaries and any surrounding tissue that the disease affects.  A doctor may also recommend  chemotherapy  to kill  cancer  cells and radiation treatments to reduce the size of the tumors before removing them.  Enlarged ovaries related to the menstrual cycle do not require treatment unless they are causing uncomfortable symptoms.  Enlarged ovaries can have multiple causes, most of which do not lead to any long-term problems.  People who are experiencing pelvic pain and fullness or changes in their bowel and bladder habits should visit a doctor. A variety of treatments can help to reduce symptoms.    
 Dalloul, M., Sherer, D.M., Gorelick, C., Serur, E., Zinn, H., Sanmugarajah, J., … Abulafia, O. (2007, January 24). Transient bilateral ovarian enlargement associated with large retroperitoneal lymphoma.  Obstetrics &amp; Gynaecology ,  29 (2), 236–238.  Dalloul, M., Sherer, D.M., Gorelick, C., Serur, E., Zinn, H., Sanmugarajah, J., … Abulafia, O. (2007, January 24). Transient bilateral ovarian enlargement associated with large retroperitoneal lymphoma.  Obstetrics &amp; Gynaecology ,  29 (2), 236–238.  Huang, C., Hong, M.-K., &amp; Ding, D.-C. (2017, July–September). A review of ovary torsion.  Tzu Chi Medical Journal ,  29 (3), 143–147.  Lynn, K. N., Steinkeler, J. A., Wilkins-Haug, L. E., &amp; Benson, C. B. (2013, July 1). Hyperreactio luteinalis (enlarged ovaries) during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy.  Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine ,  32 (7), 1285–1289.  Ovarian cancer. (n.d.).  Polycystic ovary syndrome. (2018, May 22).  Tests for ovarian cancer. (2018, April 11).  Wu, D., Kimura, F., Takashima, A., Shimizu, Y., Takebayashi, A., Kita, N., … Murakami, T. (2013). Intake of vinegar beverage is associated with restoration of ovulatory function in women with polycystic ovary syndrome.  The Tohoku Journal of Experimental Medicine ,  230 (1), 17–23.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Written by Rachel Nall. "Enlarged ovaries: Everything you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322528.php&gt;    APA  Written by Rachel Nall. (2018, July 20). "Enlarged ovaries: Everything you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  