 Tongue  cancer  is a type of  mouth cancer , or  oral cancer , that usually develops in the squamous cells on the surface of the tongue. It can cause tumors or lesions. The most noticeable signs of tongue cancer are a sore on the tongue that does not heal and a painful tongue.  Cancer can develop in two different areas of the tongue. Tongue cancer develops at the front of the tongue, while cancer at the back of the tongue is known as oropharyngeal cancer.  Symptoms of oral cancer can include:  Many of the early signs of mouth cancers can be hard to spot, so people may not notice any signs or symptoms when the cancer develops initially.  People who are more at risk of mouth cancer, such as those who smoke or drink excessively, should stay vigilant to any early signs. They should also schedule regular appointments with a doctor or dentist who can examine their mouth and identify any issues.  The most common type of tongue cancer is called squamous cell  carcinoma . Squamous cells are thin, flat cells that are present on the surface of the skin and the tongue, in the lining of the digestive and respiratory tracts, and in the lining of the mouth, throat, thyroid, and larynx.  The primary symptoms of tongue cancer are a painful tongue and the development of a sore on the tongue. Additional symptoms may include:  The symptoms of tongue cancer are similar to those of other oral cancers, and they may also not be evident in the early stages of the disease.  It is also possible for people to have some of these symptoms without having tongue cancer or another type of oral cancer.  Doctors classify most cancer types into stages according to how much cancer is present and whether or not it has spread, or metastasized, to other parts of the body.  The classification system uses letters and numbers. The letter T indicates a  tumor , and the letter N refers to neck lymph nodes. These letters each have a grading from 1–4 or 0–3 respectively.  People with a T1 tumor have the smallest grade of tumor, while people with a T4 tumor have the largest grade.  An N0 classification signifies that the tongue cancer has not spread to any neck lymph nodes. Tongue cancer that has spread to a significant number of lymph nodes has an N3 classification.  It is also possible to grade tongue cancer in the following ways:  This grading denotes how aggressively the cancer is growing and how likely it is to spread to other parts of the body.  Experts do not fully understand why some people get tongue cancer. However, specific risk factors can increase a person's likelihood of developing this disease.  Known risk factors include:  Older men are the group most at risk of tongue cancer. Oral cancers are  most common  in those aged 50 or above.  Smokers who also drink heavily are 15 times  more likely  to develop oral cancers than other people.  Additional risk factors include:  Anyone who is concerned that they might have tongue cancer should make an appointment with a doctor as soon as possible.  At the appointment, the doctor is likely to spend time:  If a doctor suspects that tongue cancer is present, they will perform a biopsy. This will involve them removing some tissue and sending it off for testing.  If the biopsy results confirm cancer, a doctor may recommend a  CT scan  or  MRI scan , which will show whether or not cancer has spread to other parts of the body.  It is possible to cure tongue cancer, and the outlook is better for people who get an early diagnosis. People who have cancer that has not spread have a higher rate of survival.  The 5-year relative survival rate for tongue cancer is  78 percent  before cancer spreads, compared with  36 percent  once it has.  It is not possible to prevent tongue cancer from developing. However, if people notice any of the signs or symptoms of tongue cancer they should make an appointment with their doctor as soon as possible. The earlier a doctor can diagnose the disease, the sooner treatment can begin and the more favorable the outlook.  There are also lifestyle factors that people can control to minimize their risk of developing tongue cancer. These include:  People with tongue cancer will usually require surgery to remove the cancerous tissue. Surgeons can generally remove smaller tumors in a single operation.  Multiple and more complicated operations may be necessary if larger tumors are present or if the cancer has spread. The surgeon may also need to remove part of the tongue. If this is the case, they will attempt to rebuild the tongue using skin or tissue from other parts of the body.  Surgery that involves the removal of part or all of the tongue is called a glossectomy. Although doctors will attempt to minimize the damage to the mouth during the procedure, some side effects are inevitable.  Glossectomy can affect:  In addition to surgery, some people may have radiation or  chemotherapy  treatment to kill any cancerous cells that remain.  The outlook for a person with tongue cancer depends on its stage at diagnosis, and the success of the treatment.  According to statistics,  83.7 percent  of people with stage 1 cancer of the mouth or pharynx will survive for 5 years or more. This compares to  39.1 percent  of people who have cancer that has spread.    
 Cancer stat facts: Oral cavity and pharynx cancer. (n.d.).  Cancer stat facts: Oral cavity and pharynx cancer. (n.d.).  Head and neck cancers. (n.d.).  Mouth and oropharyngeal cancer: Coping. (2018, May 11).  NCI dictionary of cancer terms: Squamous cell carcinoma. (n.d.).  Oral cancer. (n.d.).  Oral cancer facts. (n.d.).  Oral cancer incidence (new cases) by age, race, and gender. (2018, February).  Oropharyngeal cancer treatment (Adult) (PDQ®) — patient version. (2018, June 28).  Risk factors for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers. (2018, March 9).  Survival rates for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer. (2018, March 9).  Taghavi, N., &amp; Yazdi, I. (2007, April). Type of food and risk of oral cancer.  Archives of Iranian Medicine ,  10 (2), 227–232.  Tongue cancer. (2018, June 12).  Tongue cancer. (n.d.).  Tongue cancer. (n.d.).  Weber, A. L., Romo, L., &amp; Hashmi, S. (2003, August). Malignant tumors of the oral cavity and oropharynx: clinical, pathologic, and radiologic evaluation.  Neuroimaging Clinics ,  13 (3), 443–464.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What are the early signs of tongue cancer?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322519.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, July 19). "What are the early signs of tongue cancer?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  