 Night sweats happen when a woman experiences a hot flash during the night. Many people associate hot flashes and night sweats with  menopause , but pregnancy, which is also a time of significant hormonal change, can cause them too.  According to a  2013 study , pregnancy-related hot flashes are common, affecting 35 percent of women during pregnancy and 29 percent of women after pregnancy.  In this article, we discuss what causes postpartum night sweats and how to find relief.  Postpartum night sweats happen because of low levels of  estrogen . The levels of hormones, including estrogen, change as the woman's body adjusts to not being pregnant anymore.  The body releases two key hormones, called  progesterone  and estrogen, in large amounts during pregnancy. Changes in these hormone levels can prompt an increase or decrease in body temperature.  Women may also sweat more after pregnancy to get rid of excess fluid. According to the  American Pregnancy Association , a woman's body takes on 50 percent more blood and bodily fluid during pregnancy to support the baby's growth.  This fluid is no longer useful after birth, and the body gets rid of it through sweat and urine, so both of these may increase after childbirth.  In some cases, night sweats can disturb a woman's sleep, cause irritability, and affect her quality of life.  Women should talk to their doctor about postpartum night sweats. It is important to rule out other causes of low estrogen after delivery, as it can be related to a thyroid condition called  hyperthyroidism .  According to a  2013 study , postpartum night sweats are at their worst 2 weeks after delivery. They should gradually decline after this time.  Medical professionals agree that the postpartum period, or the time after childbirth, typically lasts 6 weeks, although some symptoms may continue longer. During this time, women's bodies go through many changes, and side effects such as night sweats,  constipation , and  fatigue , are common.  In many cases, women can relieve their symptoms by using home remedies until they go away. If the night sweats do not improve, they may wish to see their doctor to find out the cause and discuss treatment options.  Here, we suggest nine home remedies that may help to relieve the symptoms of postpartum night sweats:  Keeping the body cool will help reduce sweating.  During the night women can try:  After delivery, and particularly when experiencing postpartum night sweats, women's bodies may need more water than usual, as fluids or "water weight" leaves the body as sweat or urine.  Drinking water whenever thirsty will prevent  dehydration , and it also helps with normal body functions and recovery after pregnancy.  Studies into hot flashes in pregnancy and postpartum are limited, though a  2017 study  that looked at 50 perimenopausal and postmenopausal women concluded that taking soy supplements had the potential to improve flashes for menopausal women.  The researchers found that the participants taking soy isoflavone supplements for 12 weeks had significant improvements in their hot flash symptoms.  People can increase their soy intake using supplements or by eating the following high-soy foods:  Always talk to a doctor before making dietary changes or introducing supplements, especially while breastfeeding.  Natural fabrics, including cotton, linen, or silk, help the body's heat to escape. If possible, use cotton or linen sheets when sleeping.  Try to avoid synthetic fabrics, such as polyester or Lycra, or tight clothes, which can make people sweat more by preventing the body from losing heat.  For some people, certain foods or drinks can trigger or worsen symptoms of hot flashes and night sweats.  People can track their symptoms to see if they appear after eating specific foods so that they know which ones to avoid.   Common triggers  for hot flashes include:   Stress  is related to many health conditions. Learning how to manage stress effectively has many positive results, not just for postpartum sweats.  According to a  2014 review study , relaxation training, paced breathing, and hypnosis may help with hot flashes, though the authors say that more research is needed to confirm the link.  When trying to get to sleep at night, or when experiencing night sweats, women can try the following relaxation techniques:  Keeping up a healthful lifestyle with good  nutrition  and frequent exercise can be a powerful tool for improving the body's ability to recover after pregnancy, and improving both physical and  mental health .  Dietitians recommend that people eat a healthful diet of mainly vegetables, with some fruit, whole grains, lean protein, and healthy fats to promote health.  Because of night sweats and other causes of discomfort during the night, it can be difficult for women to get enough sleep after delivery.  According to a  2013 study , there is some evidence that the following methods can help people to sleep during the postpartum period:  Valerian root is an herbal remedy. People often use valerian root to encourage sleep or to treat sleep conditions. Based on this popularity, people may also want to try it to assist them to sleep through night sweats.  Despite valerian's widespread use, however, the existing scientific evidence is  not clear  whether valerian root helps people to sleep or not. More high-quality research is needed. People may want to ask their doctor for more information about this herbal remedy.  People should see a doctor if experiencing any of the following symptoms:  Postpartum sweats are common and not usually a sign of anything to cause serious alarm.  Using breathable natural fabrics, drinking cold water, and keeping the bedroom cool will bring some relief from sweating.  If postpartum night sweats are not improving over time, or if people are experiencing other symptoms, they should contact a doctor.    
 Ahsan, M., &amp; Mallick, A. K. (2017, September 1). The effect of soy isoflavones on the menopause rating scale scoring in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women: A pilot study.  Journal of Clinical &amp; Diagnostic Research ,  11 (9), FC13–FC16.  Ahsan, M., &amp; Mallick, A. K. (2017, September 1). The effect of soy isoflavones on the menopause rating scale scoring in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women: A pilot study.  Journal of Clinical &amp; Diagnostic Research ,  11 (9), FC13–FC16.  Ashrafinia, F., Mirmohammadali, M., Rajabi, H., Kazemnejad, A., Haghighi, K. S., &amp; Amelvalizadeh, M. (2015, March). Effect of pilates exercises on postpartum maternal fatigue.  Singapore Medical Journal ,  56 (3),   169–173.  Barton, D. L., Fee Schroeder, K. C., Banerjee, T., Wolf, S., Keith, T., &amp; Elkins, G. (2018, July 1). Efficacy of a biobehavioral intervention for hot flashes: A randomized controlled pilot study.  Menopause ,  24 (7), 774–782.  Hot flashes and night sweats (PDQ®): Health professional version (2018, March 14).  Ko, Y.-L., &amp; Lee, H.-J. (2014, January). Randomised controlled trial of the effectiveness of using back massage to improve sleep quality among Taiwanese insomnia postpartum women.  Midwifery ,  30 (1), 60–64.  Martin, A., Horowitz, C., Balbierz, A., &amp; Howell, E. A. (2015, January 23). Views of women and clinicians on postpartum preparation and recovery.  Maternal and Child Health Journal ,  18 (3), 707–713.  Mirabi, P., &amp; Mojab, F. (2013, Winter). The effects of valerian root on hot flashes in menopausal women.  Iranian Journal of Pharmaceutical Research : IJPR ,  12 (1), 217–222.  Nonhormonal management of menopause-associated vasomotor symptoms: 2015 position statement of The North American Menopause Society. (2015).  Menopause ,  22 (11), 1155–1174.  Nowakowski, S., Meers, J., &amp; Heimbach, E. (2015, February 13). Sleep and women’s health.  Sleep Medicine Research ,  4 (1), 1–22.  Sideras, K., &amp; Loprinzi, C. L. (2014, February 12). Nonhormonal management of hot flashes for women on risk reduction therapy.  Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network ,  8 (10), 1171–1179.  Swelling during pregnancy. (2015, July).  Thurston, R. C., Luther, J. F., Wisniewski, S. R., Eng, H., &amp; Wisner, K. L. (2013, December). Prospective evaluation of hot flashes during pregnancy and postpartum.  Fertility and Sterility ,  100 (6), 1667–1672.  Valerian [Fact sheet]. (2013, March 15).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Stinson, Adrienne. "How to relieve postpartum night sweats."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322589.php&gt;    APA  Stinson, A. (2018, July 26). "How to relieve postpartum night sweats."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  