 There are several potential reasons for the testes shrinking, including aging, underlying medical conditions, or infections.  In this article, learn more about the causes, symptoms, and treatment of testicular atrophy.  Testicular atrophy is when the testes shrink. In the case of testicular atrophy, the testes get smaller due to a loss of some of the germ cells and Leydig cells.  Germ cells produce sperm while Leydig cells produce  testosterone .  If the testes shrink, a person could have a lower sperm count, lower testosterone levels, or both, due to the loss of these cells.  Testicular atrophy differs from the shrinking that occurs due to cold temperatures. In cooler temperatures, the scrotum retracts or shrinks, pulling the testes closer to the body to maintain warmth. In warmer temperatures, it loosens, allowing the testes to cool.  Possible causes of testicular atrophy include:  Over time, the testes will likely begin to shrink. This is a natural process, as the body produces less testosterone or sperm after the peak reproductive years.  Hormonal imbalances can sometimes cause testicular atrophy. If the body is driven to produce less testosterone, the testicles may begin to shrink.  Some potential causes of a hormone imbalance that suppress testosterone production include:  Orchitis is an infection that causes pain and  inflammation  in the testicles. Either a virus or bacterial infection may cause orchitis.  Some of the common causes of orchitis include:  Certain diseases or infections may increase the risk of testicular atrophy, including mumps and  HIV .  Treatment may reverse the atrophy, depending on the severity of the shrinkage.  Regularly consuming excessive amounts of alcohol may cause a decrease in testosterone levels.  Excessive alcohol consumption can also cause testicular tissue damage, which may result in testicular atrophy.  Testicular torsion happens if a testicle rotates, twisting the spermatic cord that connects the testes to the rest of the reproductive tract.  In addition to pain and swelling, the twisted cord causes blood loss to the testicles. If a person does not receive prompt treatment, the loss of oxygen and blood flow could lead to permanent testicular atrophy.  Varicocele refers to when the veins that run through the scrotum become enlarged. Varicocele typically occurs on the left side only.  In many cases, a person may not realize they have varicocele, as it may not cause any symptoms. However, they may notice that the left testicle appears smaller than usual.  In rare cases, testicular cancer can cause testicular atrophy. According to the  American Cancer Society , the average age for a diagnosis of testicular cancer is 33.  While testicular cancer tends to affect younger men, it is highly treatable.  Often the most obvious symptom of testicular atrophy is the noticeable shrinkage of one or both testicles.  However, depending on the person's age and underlying conditions, a person may notice some additional symptoms.  Those who have not yet gone through  puberty  may notice a:  If testicular atrophy occurs after puberty, additional symptoms may include:  If an underlying medical condition is causing testicular atrophy, a person may also experience:  A doctor will normally start to diagnose testicular atrophy by asking questions about the individual's lifestyle and medical history. They will also ask about any medications a person is taking.  A doctor will also likely conduct a physical examination of the testicles, looking at the following qualities:  Finally, a doctor may order some additional tests to help determine what is causing the testicular atrophy. Possible tests include:  How a doctor treats testicular atrophy depends on its underlying cause. Possible treatments may include:  If a person discovers testicular atrophy early and receives treatment as soon as possible, it might be possible to reverse the shrinkage.  Some conditions, such as testicular torsion, require immediate treatment to avoid permanent damage to the testicle.  Some people claim there are natural treatments for testicular atrophy. There is no clinical evidence to suggest that any natural remedies can correct testicular atrophy or its underlying causes.  People should be aware of the regular size and shape of their testicles. If one or both of the testicles become noticeably smaller, it is best to speak to a doctor as soon as possible.  There is more chance to reverse testicular atrophy with early intervention and treatment.    
 Bassil, N., Alkaade, S., &amp; Morley, J. E. (2009, June 22). The benefits and risks of testosterone replacement therapy: A review.  Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management ,  5 , 42–448.  Bassil, N., Alkaade, S., &amp; Morley, J. E. (2009, June 22). The benefits and risks of testosterone replacement therapy: A review.  Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management ,  5 , 42–448.  Borst, S. E., &amp; Mulligan, T. (2007, December). Testosterone replacement therapy for older men.  Clinical Interventions in Aging ,  2 (4), 561–566.  Brookings, C., Goldmeier, D., &amp; Sadeghi-Nejad, H. (2013, March 15). Sexually transmitted infections and sexual function in relation to male fertility.  Korean Journal of Urology ,  54 (3), 149–156.  Conditions treated. (n.d.).  Key statistics for testicular cancer. (2018, May 17).  What is testicular cancer? (2018, May 17).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What causes testicular atrophy?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322544.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, July 23). "What causes testicular atrophy?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  