 This article will look at whether essential oils can benefit babies, as well as if they are safe to use.  There is some evidence for the benefits of essential oils, but very little research on how these oils may affect babies.  It is crucial to note that the  American Association of Naturopathic Physicians  do not recommend using essential oils at all on babies younger than 3 months.  People can use diluted essential oils or undiluted sunflower or grapeseed oil during a baby massage.  Studies show  that baby massage can improve weight gain in pre-term infants, encourage development, and decrease irritability and sleep disturbances.  While it is not necessary to use oil or cream to massage a baby, it will make the process easier by helping the parent or caregiver's hand glide more smoothly over the skin.   Lavender oil   A 2016 review found  some evidence  that lavender oil could help treat pain in babies.  One study  found that newborns who smelled lavender while having a heel prick test experienced less pain and a lower heart rate than those in a control group.   Another study  concluded that a lavender oil aromatherapy massage could reduce  colic  symptoms.   Chamomile oil   Chamomile is a common home remedy for sleeplessness in adults, and may also help infants.  While there is  little scientific evidence  to prove that chamomile aids sleep, some people find that adding a few drops of chamomile oil to a warm bath or diffuser can have a calming, sedative effect.   Sunflower oil   Sunflower oil is a popular choice for a carrier oil. The vegetable oil is high in linoleic acid, which makes it an excellent choice for a baby with sensitive skin.  Many babies have sensitive skin and may develop  eczema .  One study  found that while sunflower oil improved skin hydration, olive oil damaged the skin barrier and could make existing skin problems worse.  There is a range of ways to use essential oils for babies, including:   In a baby massage   While baby massage routines vary according to the baby's preferences, the following steps are a good starting point:   In bath water   A few drops of chamomile or lavender oil in the water at bath time can help to soothe and calm baby. In turn, this may help the baby sleep if bedtime follows soon after.   In a diffuser at bedtime   A range of diffusers, which release the aroma of the essential oils into the air, is available in stores and  online . Some also have soothing colored lights to help the baby sleep.  It is essential to follow the instructions on the diffuser and keep the room well-ventilated. Do not use any essential oils that may be harmful to the baby, such as those listed below.  People should not use essential oils on or around babies who are younger than 3 months.  In the case of premature babies, people should avoid using essential oils until at least 3 months after their due date.  People should never apply undiluted essential oils to the skin of babies and infants.  Instead, dilute the oil with an appropriate carrier oil. Sunflower oil, grapeseed oil, and  coconut oil  are examples of suitable carrier oils.  The National Association for Holistic Aromatherapy (NAHA) recommends diluting the essential oil to just  0.5 to 2.5 percent .  It is also unsafe to eat or drink essential oils.  Babies have sensitive skin, so people should avoid using essential oils that are  known skin irritants , such as:  Researchers also recommend that people do not use  olive oil  as a carrier oil as it can damage the skin.  The  NAHA also recommend  avoiding the following common essential oils during pregnancy and while breast-feeding:  It is also vital to keep essential oils away from a baby's airways. It is okay to apply diluted oils to the baby's feet as long as the baby does not put their feet near their mouth.  Correctly diluting oils before using them in a diffuser will also reduce the risk of adverse respiratory reactions.  People should not use aroma diffusers if the infant has  asthma  or is at risk of developing asthma due to a family history of the condition.  Few studies that look at how effective aromatherapy is for babies. Some oils, such as lavender and chamomile oil, have been shown to have some impact.  Many essential oils are safe for use with babies, as long as a person takes certain precautions. These include never using undiluted essential oils on a baby's skin and keeping oils out of reach.  People should never ingest or allow a baby to ingest essential oils.  Some oils can be toxic or irritate a baby's skin, so it is vital to research the oil first and speak to a doctor if in doubt.  The oils listed in this article are available for purchase online:  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Akcan, E., &amp; Polat, S. (2016, June 17). Comparative effect of the smells of amniotic fluid, breast milk, and lavender on newborns' pain during heel lance.  Breastfeeding Medicine .  Akcan, E., &amp; Polat, S. (2016, June 17). Comparative effect of the smells of amniotic fluid, breast milk, and lavender on newborns' pain during heel lance.  Breastfeeding Medicine .  Cates, T. H. (n.d.). Get your child to sleep naturally.  Çetinkaya, B., &amp; Başbakkal, Z. (2012, March 21). The effectiveness of aromatherapy massage using lavender oil as a treatment for infantile colic [Abstract].  International Journal of Nursing Practice ,  18 (2), 164–169.  Danby, S. G., AlEnezi, T., Sultan, A., Lavender, T., Chittok, J., Brown, K., &amp; Cork, M. J. (2013, January–February). Effect of olive and sunflower seed oil on the adult skin barrier: Implications for neonatal skin care [Abstract].  Pediatric Dermatology ,  30 (1), 42–50.  Exploring aromatherapy: Safety information. (n.d.)  Field, T. (2017, June 12). Massage therapy research review.  Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice ,  20 (4), 224-229.  Lakhan, S. E., Sheafer, H., &amp; Tepper, D. (2016, December 14). The effectiveness of aromatherapy in reducing pain: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  Pain Research and Treatment  ,  2016 .  Soltani, R., Soheilipour, S., Hajhashemi, V., Asghari, G., Bagheri, M., &amp; Molavi, M. (2013, September). Evaluation of the effect of aromatherapy with lavender essential oil on post-tonsillectomy pain in pediatric patients: A randomized controlled trial.  International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology ,  77 (9), 1579–1581.  Srivastava, J. K., Shankar, E., &amp; Gupta, S. (2011, February 1). Chamomile: A herbal medicine of the past with bright future.  Molecular Medicine Reports ,  3 (6), 895–901.  Tisserand, R., &amp; Young, R. (2013).  Essential Oil Safety—A guide for health care professionals: 2nd edition . London, UK: Churchill Livingstone.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "Are essential oils safe for babies?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322532.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, July 20). "Are essential oils safe for babies?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  