 In the same way that bacteria are now starting to become resistant to  antibiotics , many fungi are becoming  unresponsive  to antifungals.  This antifungal resistance is particularly serious for people with a reduced immune system.  Currently, drug-resistant yeast infections are likeliest to be caused by fungi of the genus  Candida .  There are five pathogenic species of  Candida . The least understood, as far as genetics are concerned, is  Candida krusei .  By comparison, the fungus  Pichia kudriavzevii  is considered to be a good guy; it has been used for centuries in the manufacture of foods and as part of the fermentation process of products such as cassava, maize beverages, and fermented milk.  It is "generally recognized as safe" by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). In fact, usage of  P. kudriavzevii  has steadily increased over recent years thanks to its role in the production of bioethanol and other useful chemicals.  Despite the importance and prevalence of both fungi mentioned above, little is known about their genetic makeup. So, a team of researchers from University College Dublin in Ireland decided to inspect their DNA in detail. What they found came as a surprise to both medical scientists and biotechnology experts.  They published their findings in the journal   PLOS Pathogens  .  In all, they sequenced the genome of 30 clinical and environmental strains of the two species. They found that, in fact,  P. kudriavzevii  and  C. krusei  are one and the same species, with a 99.6 percent match of their DNA.  Also, and even more worryingly, both species showed similar resistance to antifungal medications.  In other words,  P. kudriavzevii  has the potential to cause serious diseases in humans. The findings are surprising and worrying in equal measure.   " If I suggested using drug-resistant  Candida albicans  to make food, I would be stopped immediately. But with drug-resistant  Candida krusei , nobody bats an eyelid because the food makers use a different name for it."  Principal investigator Prof. Kenneth Wolfe  Lead author Alexander Douglass makes some recommendations: "It may be advisable to consider non-pathogenic  Pichia  species as possible alternatives for some industrial applications."  "It would also be advisable," he goes on, "to set limits on the levels of drug-resistance permissible in  P. kudriavzevii  strains that are used in industry, particularly the food industry."  The scientists also identified a third and fourth name for the fungus:  Issatchenkia orientalis , which is now obsolete; and  Candida glycerinogenes , which has been used in China to produce glycerol since the 1970s.  The authors recommend that all of the above should, from now on, be referred to as  P. kudriavzevii  to avoid confusion.  