  Oral cancer  is caused by the uncontrolled growth and reproduction of cells in some regions of the mouth. It can occur inside the cheeks, under the middle and front of the tongue, or on the tissue lining of the mouth or gum.  There are about  49,700  new cases of oral cancer each year in the United States, which accounts for around 3 percent of all  cancer  diagnoses. More men than women receive a diagnosis of oral cancer.  The symptoms of oral cancer vary, but anyone experiencing any of the following for more than 2 weeks should see a doctor for a diagnosis:  However, it is important to remember that these are not definitive signs of oral cancer, but may be caused by other conditions, such as an allergy or an infection.  Experts think that mutations in the DNA of a cell cause cancers by stimulating abnormal growth and cell death.  While it remains unclear what triggers the initial mutation in many cases, specific factors can increase the risk of oral cancer.  These include:  As with most other cancers, it is not always possible to prevent oral cancer.  Some risk factors for oral cancer, such as being male or aging, are not preventable. However, some lifestyle factors that can reduce the risk of oral cancer include:  In most forms of cancer, early diagnosis is crucial.  Treatment for oral cancer usually involves using a combination of therapies, such as giving  radiation therapy  and  chemotherapy  together, which are much more effective in the early stages. If the cancer has spread to other areas, it becomes much more difficult to isolate and treat.  If cancer has not spread to surrounding tissues, the 5-year survival rates for oral cancer of the lip, tongue, and floor of the mouth range from  75 to 93 percent . These figures fall if the cancer has spread to surrounding tissues.  Early warning signs of oral cancer include mouth sores, white or red patches, and tenderness or pain. Anyone who experiences these symptoms should see their doctor. Early diagnosis means there is a higher chance of successful treatment.  Stopping smoking and the use of tobacco products can reduce the risk of developing oral cancer.    
 Head and neck cancers. (2018, June 12).  Head and neck cancers. (2018, June 12).  Key statistics for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers. (2018, March 9).  Oral cancer. (2014, August 4).  Oral cancer. (2018, February).  Oral and oropharyngeal cancer: Statistics. (2017, September).  Survival rates for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer. (2018, March 9).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What are the early signs of oral cancer?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322575.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, July 25). "What are the early signs of oral cancer?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  