 The oatmeal diet became popular online. It involves eating only or mostly oatmeal. In this article, learn whether the oatmeal diet is safe and effective.  Online advocates have described several variations of the oatmeal diet. Most are divided into phases, such as:   Phase 1   The first phase of the oatmeal diet usually involves eating oatmeal for three meals a day.  The oats should be whole rather than instant because instant oats often include added sugar. Some people also include fruit in this phase.   Phase 2   The second phase of the diet involves eating oatmeal for three meals a day and adding one-half cup of fruit or raw vegetables to each meal.   Phase 3   During the third phase, a person can resume a regular, healthful diet, but one meal should involve oatmeal.  A person can add fruits, nuts, and natural flavorings to the oatmeal to enhance its flavor.  Proponents of the diet describe it as an easy, cheap, and effective way to lose weight. However, many risks are associated with eating only one type of food.  Advocates of the diet claim that it provides the fiber,  calories , and  vitamins  that a person needs to maintain energy while losing weight. However, the diet is dangerously restrictive.  Oatmeal is nutritious when a person eats it in moderation. According to the  Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics  in the United States, oats contain a type of fiber called beta-glucan, which can help to reduce  cholesterol  levels while strengthening the immune system.  Oatmeal is a good option for breakfast because it can help a person to feel full for a long time.  However, it does not provide the nutrients that a person needs on a daily basis. This makes the oatmeal diet a poor strategy for long-term weight loss.  Following the oatmeal diet would be challenging because it does not provide the calories that a person needs to feel energetic.  People on the diet may feel ill, nauseated, and tired.  Also, a person may be able to lose weight, but they will likely have difficulty keeping this weight off after they return to their regular eating habits.  The oatmeal diet is potentially harmful to a person's health. Like other fad diets that focus on a single type of food, the oatmeal diet is a highly unbalanced approach to  nutrition .  The diet promises fast weight loss, but it does not ensure a person's safety. No research supports its use.  Other examples of fad diets include:  Like the oatmeal diet, these involve eating a very limited selection of foods, with no sustainable plan for maintaining weight loss in the long term.  Fad diets tend to make people feel hungry, lightheaded, and tired. They can also cause health problems and make existing conditions worse.  Possible risks of the oatmeal diet and other fad diets include:  Instead of trying a fad diet, a person should talk to a doctor or dietitian about effective weight-loss programs. A doctor can help a person to establish healthful targets.  A diet can help a person to lose weight if it includes a variety of lean proteins, fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and healthful fats.  A person is also more likely to stick to a diet that is nutritious and varied, which will help them to keep the weight off in the long term.  The oatmeal diet and other fad diets can be dangerous. Also, they are usually ineffective for long-term weight loss.  While oatmeal can be a beneficial part of the diet, it is not healthful as a sole source of nutrients.  Instead, a person should aim to eat a variety of fresh, whole foods, while spending more time being physically active.  A well-rounded approach to weight loss will help a person to keep the weight off in the long term while feeling full and nourished.    
 Esposito, S., &amp; Fierstein, D. (n.d.). When does "healthy" eating become dangerous?  Esposito, S., &amp; Fierstein, D. (n.d.). When does "healthy" eating become dangerous?  Fad diets. (n.d.).  Giancoli, A. (2017, April 18). 5 whole grains to keep your family healthy.  Rasane, P., Jha, A., Sabikhi, L., Kumar, A., &amp; Unnikrishnan, V. S. (2015, February). Nutritional advantages of oats and opportunities for its processing as value added foods - a review.  Journal of Food Science and Technology ,  52 (2), 662–675.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "Does the oatmeal diet work for weight loss?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322546.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, July 23). "Does the oatmeal diet work for weight loss?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  