 Cold temperatures, circulation problems, and tight jewelry are common causes of peripheral cyanosis.  In this article, we take a close look at peripheral cyanosis, including its causes, symptoms, and treatment. We also look at another type of cyanosis called central cyanosis that affects central parts of the body, the lips, or the tongue.  Cyanosis gets its name from the word cyan, which means a blue-green color.  People with peripheral cyanosis may notice the following symptoms:  All organs and tissues of the body need oxygen to carry out their functions. A person's body absorbs oxygen from the air that they breathe. The blood contains a protein called hemoglobin that carries oxygen to the body's cells. If the body cannot deliver enough oxygen to parts of the body, cyanosis may occur.  Certain medical conditions can prevent oxygen-rich blood from reaching parts of the body. Sometimes, people are born with abnormal hemoglobin, which affects the hemoglobin's ability to bind to oxygen and carry it to the cells.  People tend to experience cyanosis in the extremities of their body, such as their fingertips and feet. This is because these body parts are furthest away from the heart, so the blood has further to travel.  Common causes of peripheral cyanosis include:  The key difference between peripheral and central cyanosis is how they affect the body.  Peripheral cyanosis affects a person's hands or legs, especially the extremities, such as fingertips, fingernails, and feet. It may affect just one side of the body or both sides equally.  Central cyanosis affects the core organs of the body, causing a blue-green tint across central areas of the body, the lips, or the tongue. The symptoms of central cyanosis do not get better when the body part is heated up.  Both central and peripheral cyanosis have similar causes, including problems with the heart, blood, lungs, or nervous system.  Doctors diagnose peripheral cyanosis through a combination of physical tests, imaging scans, such as X-rays, and blood tests.  These tests can identify the presence of other conditions that affect the heart or lungs or that alter the body's normal oxygen levels.  It is vital to follow the doctor's advice about diagnosing the underlying cause of peripheral cyanosis.  Treatment for peripheral cyanosis depends on the underlying cause of the problem.  Doctors may prescribe specific medicines to treat heart and lung conditions. These medications help improve blood flow and oxygen supply to the organs and tissues. Some people may need oxygen therapy to restore normal levels of oxygen supply.  Doctors may recommend that a person with peripheral cyanosis stops taking any medications that restrict blood flow. Medicines include  beta blockers ,  birth control  pills, and certain allergy medications. A doctor may also recommend that people make lifestyle changes, such as  quitting smoking  or drinking caffeine.  In most cases, peripheral cyanosis is a symptom of another condition rather than being a medical condition by itself.  Some of the underlying conditions could be life-threatening, so anyone experiencing any of the following signs and symptom must seek medical treatment immediately:  Peripheral cyanosis can occur in people of all ages, including newborns.  An estimated  4.3 percent  of newborns have cyanosis that requires oxygen therapy. Cyanosis can develop in babies and newborns for many reasons. It may be related to the heart, nerves, or lungs, or the result of abnormal or dysfunctional cell functioning.  It is sometimes difficult to detect peripheral cyanosis in babies, particularly newborns, because other factors, such as  jaundice  and skin color may mask the blue-green skin color.  Peripheral cyanosis is usually not a medical emergency. However, central cyanosis is more likely to be a sign of something more serious that requires immediate medical attention.  The outlook depends on the cause of peripheral cyanosis and the seriousness of the underlying cause  People should consult their doctor if their symptoms do not go away after they have warmed up their hands or feet or massaged them to increase blood flow. Timely diagnosis of the problem can provide the right treatment at an early stage, which helps avoid further complications.    
 Adeyinka A., Kondamudi N. P. (2017, December 31). Cyanosis.  Adeyinka A., Kondamudi N. P. (2017, December 31). Cyanosis.  Eichenwald, E. C. (2018, February 28). Overview of cyanosis in the newborn.  Hiremath, G. &amp; Kamat, D. (2015, February 1). Diagnostic considerations in infants and children with cyanosis.  Pediatric Annals ,  44 (2), 76–80.  Lechtzin, N. (n.d.). Cyanosis.  McGee, S. (2018). Evidence-based physical diagnosis (4th Edition). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier.  Steinhorn, R. H., (2018, June). Evaluation of cyanosis in the newborn.  .  Stubbs, M. J., Mouyis,  M.,  Mari, T. (2018, February 22). Deep vein thrombosis.  BMJ , 360, k351.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  D'Souza, Gillian. "Peripheral cyanosis: Causes of blue hands and feet."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322560.php&gt;    APA  D'Souza, G. (2018, July 24). "Peripheral cyanosis: Causes of blue hands and feet."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  