 There is a lot of conflicting information available about the link between saw palmetto and  testosterone . Many people believe that saw palmetto can boost testosterone levels, but others disagree.  Is there any truth to this idea and does saw palmetto affects men's health in any other ways?  Researchers have looked into a variety of roles that saw palmetto might play in men's health. Here, we look at eight of the facts and myths surrounding saw palmetto.  Scientists have found that saw palmetto can  slow down 5-alpha reductase . This enzyme converts testosterone into a potent androgen hormone called dihydrotestosterone ( DHT ). Androgen hormones regulate the development of male characteristics.  The production of androgen hormones occurs in the testes, ovaries, and adrenal glands. These hormones are also responsible for the development of primary sex organs in the womb and secondary male characteristics in  puberty .  By slowing down 5-alpha reductase, saw palmetto could reduce the effects of DHT as men get older.  While proponents of saw palmetto claim that it helps to regulate testosterone levels, there is little evidence confirming this. Much of the research on the connection between saw palmetto and testosterone levels is also very outdated.  One old report of multiple studies on saw palmetto in the  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition  did find that men taking saw palmetto over a 2-week period had  higher levels of testosterone  than those in the  placebo  control group.  However, there have not been enough studies since to either counter or confirm these findings.  Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is a non-cancerous condition that causes an enlarged prostate. The prostate is a small gland that sits just below the bladder. It is part of the male reproductive system.  An enlarged prostate puts pressure on the urethra, the long tube inside the penis that is responsible for draining urine from the bladder. BPH can be uncomfortable as it makes it harder to urinate even when the need is urgent. It can also make it difficult to empty the bladder completely and can cause leaking after urination.  Several small studies investigating saw palmetto as a treatment for the symptoms of BPH have shown modest results. At least one study shows that saw palmetto is beneficial in combination with other natural therapies to treat these symptoms.  A  double-blind, randomized study in 2011  divided 369 men into two groups. One group took up to three times the standard daily dose of saw palmetto while the other group took a placebo. The results showed that saw palmetto was no more effective than the placebo in reducing the lower urinary tract symptoms of BPH.  In addition, a  2012 Cochrane review  of 32 randomized controlled studies showed that taking a double or triple dose of saw palmetto did not lead to an improvement in prostate size or urinary symptoms in men with BPH.  A  2014 randomized study of 225 men  looked at the effectiveness of using a combination of saw palmetto, lycopene,  selenium  and tamsulosin to treat symptoms of BPH. The combination therapy was more effective than the single treatments and did not cause any adverse events.

  Low testosterone reduces sex drive, or libido, in both men and women. Some people believe that saw palmetto can improve libido by reducing testosterone breakdown, and there is some evidence to support this.  One study reported in the journal  Urologia Internationalis  found that men using saw palmetto were  experiencing improved sexual function .  In the study, which involved 120 men with enlarged prostate glands, researchers monitored the following over a 2-year period:  They found that saw palmetto improved prostate symptoms and sexual function after 2 years. This improvement was significant, especially in the first year.   Prostate cancer  affects  1 in 9 men in the United States , according to the American Cancer Society. The American Cancer Society estimate that there will be around 29,430 deaths from prostate cancer in 2018.  Research has suggested that  DHT may contribute to the development  of prostate cancer. Therefore, it is possible that saw palmetto might help to prevent this disease by slowing down the conversion of DHT.  Prescription medications can also slow down this conversion, but they often have severe side effects. Saw palmetto may inhibit DHT without serious side effects.  Some couples who are unable to conceive have tried taking saw palmetto to improve the likelihood of conception.  The common belief is that saw palmetto increases the sperm count in men and promotes healthier eggs in women.  However, there is no substantial evidence to suggest that saw palmetto can improve fertility.  It is normal for hair to fall out and grow back. However, high levels of DHT can reduce hair growth. As a result, some people believe that saw palmetto extracts and supplements may help to prevent  hair loss .  The research on saw palmetto and hair growth is varied and somewhat limited, but there are studies indicating that the plant extract might show some promise as a treatment.  One study in mouse models found that  saw palmetto promotes hair regeneration and repairs hair loss  by activating the signaling pathways responsible for hair growth.  A small  2014 study  of 25 men showed positive results when men used topical saw palmetto and 10-percent trichogen as a treatment. The study showed an 11.9 percent hair count increase after 4 months.  A  second small study  of 50 men confirmed the effectiveness of topical saw palmetto for treating male  baldness . Hair count increased at weeks 12 and 24 compared to the baseline.  Saw palmetto research often focuses on men's health, so many people believe that it cannot benefit women.  However, there is some evidence to suggest that saw palmetto may help to regulate specific female hormones. It may have an estrogen-like effect and balance out the effects of testosterone in women.  Saw palmetto may also help to reduce high levels of androgens and prolactin in women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Women with PCOS have elevated levels of male hormones. This causes a specific set of symptoms, including irregular and heavy menstrual periods, excess body and facial hair, and  acne .  Many of the studies are on animals so they cannot confirm a link between PCOS and saw palmetto in humans. However, they are still helpful as they show that  saw palmetto can block prolactin receptors  on ovarian cells that are over-expressing them. The regulation of these receptors may reduce the symptoms of PCOS.  Many people believe that because saw palmetto is a plant, it will not cause side effects. Saw palmetto can cause side effects, including:  Saw palmetto may also cause adverse effects in people taking anticoagulants, oral contraceptives, and iron supplements.  Much of the information on saw palmetto safety comes from studies on men. Researchers know little about the side effects of  saw palmetto in women and children .  The majority of studies suggest that saw palmetto might be beneficial to prostate health, especially in men with BPH. There is limited research confirming a positive effect on testosterone levels.  As with any supplement, it is a good idea to discuss the use of saw palmetto with a doctor first. While it is safe for most healthy adults, some people have reported side effects. Saw palmetto may also interfere with other medications.  The FDA do not monitor the quality and purity of herbs, so it is possible for marketed herbs to contain toxic metals and other contaminants.    
 Angwafor, F. &amp; Anderson, M. L. (2008). An open label, dose response study to determine the effect of a dietary supplement on dihydrotestosterone, testosterone and estradiol levels in healthy males.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  5 , 12.  Angwafor, F. &amp; Anderson, M. L. (2008). An open label, dose response study to determine the effect of a dietary supplement on dihydrotestosterone, testosterone and estradiol levels in healthy males.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  5 , 12.  Arca, E., Açıkgöz, G., Yeniay, Y., &amp; Çalişkan, E. (2014). The evaluation of efficacy and safety of topical saw palmetto and trichogen veg complex for the treatment of androgenetic alopecia in men.  Turkish Journal of Dermatology ,  4 , 210–215.  Barry, M. J., Meleth, S., Lee, J. Y., Kreder, K. J., Avins, A. L., Nickel, J. C., … McVary, K. T. (2011, September 28). Effect of increasing doses of saw palmetto extract on lower urinary tract symptoms: A randomized trial [Abstract].  JAMA ,  306 (12), 1344–1351.  Chittur, S., Parr, B., &amp; Marcovici, G. (2011). Inhibition of inflammatory gene expression in keratinocytes using a composition containing carnitine, thioctic acid and saw palmetto extract.  Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine ,  2011 , 985345.  Morgia, G., Russo, G. I., Palmieri, F., Gentile, M., Giannantoni, A., Blefari, F., &amp; Pareo, R. M. (2014, November). Serenoa repens, lycopene and selenium versus tamsulosin for the treatment of LUTS/BPH. An Italian multicenter double-blinded randomized study between single or combination therapy (PROCOMB trial) [Abstract].  Prostate ,  74 (15), 1471–1480.  Key statistics for prostate cancer. (2018, January 4).  Prostate cancer prevention trial (PCPT): Questions and answers. (2013, August 14).  Saw palmetto. (2016, December 1).  Sinescu, I., Geavlete, P., Multescu, R., Gangu, C., Miclea, F., Coman, I., … Fechiche, B. (2011, February 8). Long-term efficacy of  Serenoa repens  treatment in patients with mild and moderate symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia.  Urologia Internationalis ,  86 (3), 284–289.  Stansbury, J. (2016, August 4). Saw palmetto may reduce elevated androgens and prolactin in women in PCOS.  Tacklind, J., MacDonald, R., Rutks, I., Stanke, J. U., &amp; Wilt, T.J. (2012, December 12). Serenoa repens for benign prostatic hyperplasia [Abstract].  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , 12, Art. CD001423.  Wessagowit, V., Tangjaturonrusamee, C., Kootiratrakarn, T., Bunnag, T., Pimonrat, T., Muangdang, N., &amp; Pichai, P. (2016, August). Treatment of male androgenetic alopecia with topical products containing Serenoa repens extract [Abstract].  The Australasian Journal of Dermatology ,  57 (3), e76–82.  Zhu, H. L., Gao, Y. H., Yang, J. Q., Li, J. B., &amp; Gao, J. (2018, June). Serenoa repens extracts promote hair regeneration and repair of hair loss mouse models by activating TGF-β and mitochondrial signaling pathway [Abstract].  European Review for Medical and Pharmacological Sciences ,  22 (12), 4000–4008.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "Saw palmetto and testosterone facts."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322513.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, July 18). "Saw palmetto and testosterone facts."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  