 Laxatives are products that help people to poop by causing bowel movements. Stool softeners are a type of laxative that works by drawing water into the stool, making it softer and more comfortable to pass.  All laxatives work in different ways, each with the intention of helping to relieve  constipation . Understanding the differences between laxatives and stool softeners may help a person decide which one to use.  Anyone dealing with regular constipation may also choose to make a few changes to their diet and lifestyle, which might help regulate their bowel movements.  The term laxative refers to a wide range of substances, including stool softeners.  A laxative is any medicine or supplement that helps the body have a bowel movement. Each laxative works differently.  Stool softeners are a type of laxative that works to gently lubricate the stool by adding a compound to it that absorbs water. They are also called emollient laxatives.  There are many types of laxatives because there are many different causes of constipation. Doctors may recommend different types of laxative depending on the cause of constipation or side effects of the medications.  Stool softeners are a type of laxative, but not all laxatives are stool softeners. Although some other laxatives also soften the stool, they have different methods of action.  Other types of laxatives include:  Only take one type of laxative at a time, and talk to a doctor before switching between them to avoid any interactions or complications.  We discuss these types of laxatives in more detail below.  People can find a wide range of constipation relief methods online, including  stool softeners  and other  laxatives .  In most cases, a doctor will know which type of laxative they should prescribe based on the person's symptoms and what is causing them.  The following list will describe the uses, benefits, and risks of different forms of laxatives:  Stool softeners are gentle medications with a relatively mild effect. They soften the stool, making it easier to pass.  Over-the-counter stool softeners are useful when a person experiences mild occasional or chronic constipation.  Doctors may prescribe stool softeners after major surgeries, such as heart surgery or  hernia  repair. If straining to have a bowel movement might be harmful during recovery, people can take stool softeners to avoid complications.  Osmotic laxatives work by drawing water into the intestines. They may not be the best option for people experiencing constipation from  dehydration .  Anyone using osmotic laxatives should also drink more water throughout the day. When used correctly, doctors may recommend osmotic laxatives for long-term use.  Doctors may recommend a bulk-forming laxative containing soluble fiber if a person does not get a lot of fiber in their regular diet. Doctors may also recommend fiber-based laxatives for people who have chronic, long-lasting constipation.  Bulk-forming laxatives may be safer for long-term use than other options, as they have little risk of long-term side effects when taken correctly.  Like osmotic laxatives, saline laxatives pull water into the stool. Saline laxatives do this using mineral salts, such as  magnesium  citrate or magnesium oxide.  Saline laxatives are not right for everyone. For instance, people who are on medication to lower their sodium levels or are taking other mineral-based medications, such as medicines to reduce  calcium  in the kidneys, should avoid saline laxatives.  Saline laxatives are useful for short-term constipation. Using them for extended periods may lead to dehydration or cause an imbalance in other minerals.  Doctors may recommend laxatives containing oils, such as mineral oil for difficult short-term constipation, but they are not suitable for regular use. The oils in these laxatives may stick to fat-soluble  vitamins  and make them impossible to digest.  Stimulant laxatives are a good option for fast relief from painful constipation.  The stimulating effect in these laxatives makes the stool move faster through the colon while increasing the liquid in the stool. Many popular over-the-counter brand names contain stimulant laxatives.  Stimulant laxatives are not safe for regular use. Using them regularly may cause the body to become dependent on the laxative to have a bowel movement.  Doctors may prescribe guanylate cyclase-C agonist laxatives in cases of chronic constipation that has no known cause. These laxatives, along with lifestyle changes, may offer a solution for people who suffer from chronic constipation. Young children should not use them.  Stool softeners may be best when a person does not need immediate relief but is looking to regulate their bowel movements within the next few days.  The type of laxative the doctor recommends may also change based on how quickly the person needs relief. Individual result times may vary, but in general:  According to a  2015 study  looking at constipation in older adults:  Doctors often recommend that people struggling with constipation make lifestyle changes to help ease their symptoms.  Many people can find relief from constipation by drinking plenty of water and getting regular exercise.  People can also benefit from eating more fiber. A  study  from 2014 reports that increasing dietary soluble fiber intake speeds up the transit time and relieves symptoms in people with slow-moving constipation.  People can increase their daily fiber intake by including more fruits and vegetables in their diet. Fiber-rich foods that can help with constipation include:  All laxatives come with the risk of side effects. Some side effects are temporary, while others may be severe enough to warrant a change in medication.  Common side effects in all types of laxatives are:  Some oral stool softeners may cause throat irritation when swallowed.  Other side effects may vary based on the active ingredient in each laxative.  Misusing laxatives, such as taking laxatives for extended periods, may cause severe and potentially dangerous symptoms.  Allergic reactions are also possible with all laxatives. Anyone who is having an allergic reaction or is unsure about their reaction should stop using the laxative and call their doctor.  Importantly, laxatives may interact with other drugs a person is taking. People with constipation who take other drugs should speak with a doctor or pharmacist before taking any laxative.  Occasional constipation is normal. Both stool softeners and other laxatives may provide temporary relief from symptoms, and the choice between them may depend on how quickly a person needs relief.  People may experience side effects or complications from taking certain laxatives. Anyone experiencing side effects that last more than a few days should contact their doctor to find out the cause.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bae, S. H. (2014, December 31). Diets for constipation.  Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology &amp; Nutrition ,  17 (4), 203–208.  Bae, S. H. (2014, December 31). Diets for constipation.  Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology &amp; Nutrition ,  17 (4), 203–208.  Mounsey, A., Raleigh, M., &amp; Wilson, A. (2015, September). Management of constipation in older adults.  American Family Physician ,  92 (6), 500–504.  Randhawa, M. A., Khan, A. A., Javed, M. S., &amp; Sajid, M. W. (2015, May 1). Chapter 18 — Green leafy vegetables: A health promoting source [Abstract].  Handbook of Fertility , Cambridge, Mass: Academic Press.  Roque, M. V., &amp; Bouras, E. P. (2015, June 2). Epidemiology and management of chronic constipation in elderly patients.  Clinical Interventions in Aging ,  10 , 919–930.  Xu, L., Yu, W., Jiang, J., &amp; Li, N. (2014, December 30). Clinical benefits after soluble dietary fiber supplementation: A randomized clinical trial in adults with slow-transit constipation [Abstract].  Zhonghua yi xue za zhi ,  94 (48), 3813–3816.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Differences between stool softeners and other laxatives."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322621.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, July 30). "Differences between stool softeners and other laxatives."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  