 In some ways, turf may be  safer  than grass. For example, it provides more cushioning than grass during winter.  However, turf burn is a significant downside of playing on this surface. A fall onto the turf is likely to result in injury.  Sports that people commonly play on turf include football, soccer, lacrosse, and field hockey.  Turf burn is an injury that results from friction rather than heat. When people fall hard on the turf, the friction of the turf against their exposed skin causes red abrasions.  Friction can lead to the loss of skin layers, potentially allowing an open wound to develop. Turf burn is very painful, and touching the burn is likely to sting.  Turf burn is more likely to occur on the thighs, knees, palms of the hands, and the arms. It can be large or small, depending on the fall.  The immediate treatment of turf burn is essential for helping it heal. A medic or teammate can treat the turf burn on-site using a basic first aid kit.  Treating turf burn quickly may also reduce the risk of infection. People who play sports often have a  higher  risk of skin infections as they experience skin abrasions more frequently. The increased physical contact they have with other people and shared equipment can also make transmission more likely.  Skin wounds are prone to bacteria such as  Staphylococcus aureus  (staph). Everyone carries staph bacteria on their skin.  If the skin breaks, the bacteria can enter the body and cause an infection. People should  avoid touching  the burn with their bare hands.  People can treat a turf burn by following these steps:  People can speed the healing of a turf burn and lower the risk of infection by:  Preventing turf burns is not easy. Each time the players fall onto the artificial turf, they risk getting new turf burns.  To avoid turf burns, people can wear protective clothing that does not expose too much skin, such as long sleeve shirts, spandex shorts, and long socks.  Shin pads can offer additional protection, particularly for sports that make a person prone to leg injuries, such as soccer and field hockey. Wearing long socks over the shin pads can further protect the legs from turf burns.   Some studies  suggest using sliding pads or sticky bandages to form a barrier between the skin and the turf.  If the turf burn becomes infected, it is essential to visit the doctor immediately. Without proper treatment, an infection can spread to other parts of the body, putting the person's overall health at risk.  There is also the  risk  that bacteria, such as staph, may spread to other players.  The signs and symptoms of an infection include:  A turf burn may take a few weeks to heal, but it will not usually leave a scar.    
 Ashack, K. A., Burton, K. A., Johnson, T. R., Currie, D. W., Comstock, R. D., &amp; Dellavalle, R. P. (2016, April 1). Skin infections among US high school athletes: A national survey [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  74 (4), 679–684.  Ashack, K. A., Burton, K. A., Johnson, T. R., Currie, D. W., Comstock, R. D., &amp; Dellavalle, R. P. (2016, April 1). Skin infections among US high school athletes: A national survey [Abstract].  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  74 (4), 679–684.  Couvé-Deacon, E., Postil, D., Barraud, O., Duchiron, C., Chainier, D., Labrunie, A., … Ploy, M. C. (2017, December).  Staphylococcus aureus  carriage in French athletes at risk of CA-MRSA infection: A prospective, cross-sectional study.  Sports Medicine — Open ,  3 (1), 28.  Dhivya, S., Padma, V. V., &amp; Santhini, E. (2015, December). Wound dressings — a review.  BioMedicine ,  5 (4), 22.  Meyers, M. C. (2017, March). Incidence, mechanisms, and severity of match-related collegiate men's soccer injuries on  fieldturf  and natural grass surfaces: A 6-year prospective study [Abstract].  The American Journal of Sports Medicine ,  45 (3), 708–718.  Pickering, D., &amp; Marsden, J. (2015). Techniques for aseptic dressing and procedures.  Community Eye Health ,  28 (89), 17.  Prakoso, Y. A., Setiyo Rini, C., &amp; Wirjaatmadja, R. (2018, April 19). Efficacy of  Aloe vera ,  Ananas comosus , and  Sansevieria masoniana  cream on the skin wound infected with MRSA.  Advances in Pharmacological Science ,  2018 .  van den Eijnde, W. A. J.,  Peppelmen , M., Lamers, E. A. D., van de Kerkhof, P. C. M., &amp; van Erp, P. E. J. (2014, May 12). Understanding the acute skin injury mechanism caused by player-surface contact during soccer: A survey and systematic review.  Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine ,  2 (5).  Wound care guidelines. (2014, February).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "How to treat turf burn."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322605.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, July 30). "How to treat turf burn."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  