 While dizziness and vomiting might mean there is an underlying medical problem, the cause is often something temporary, such as  anxiety  or a minor stomach bug.  In this article, learn about a range of possible causes of dizziness and vomiting, as well as when to see a doctor.  Diagnosing the cause of dizziness and vomiting requires more than just looking at symptoms. Very intense symptoms do not necessarily indicate a serious health problem.  Instead, it is essential to look at risk factors, such as whether a person has recently been exposed to something dangerous, and take other symptoms into account.  Possible causes of vomiting and dizziness include:  Intense anxiety can trigger overwhelming nausea and vomiting. Some people may also feel dizzy, confused, and as if their thoughts are out of control.  This type of anxiety often comes before a specific event, such as a test or a difficult emotional situation. When the  stress  resolves, the anxiety should also go away.  When anxiety causes dizziness and vomiting, it may initiate a continuous cycle. A person feels anxious, then vomits, and then gets anxious about the cause of the vomiting.  Other  mental health  factors may also play a role in vomiting and dizziness. Some people with strong food aversions or  phobias  may vomit when exposed to these situations.  Depression  can also contribute to acute or chronic stomach problems.  Many stomach infections cause nausea and vomiting. The  inflammation  that often results from these infections is called  gastroenteritis . Gastroenteritis ranges from mild to severe. In rare cases, it can be life-threatening — especially in infants, older people, and those at risk of  dehydration .  Excessive vomiting can lead to dizziness, especially if a person ends up dehydrated. Some people also feel dizzy when they get nauseated.  Some of the most common causes of gastroenteritis include:   Diabetes  makes it more difficult for the body to metabolize glucose, potentially causing very high blood sugar. People with diabetes may vomit or feel dizzy when their blood sugar goes too high or too low.  In some cases, diabetes causes a life-threatening condition called diabetic ketoacidosis.  Symptoms of ketoacidosis  include:  The inner ear helps regulate balance. Problems with the inner ear, including infections and physical injuries, can cause dizziness or  vertigo .  Vertigo is the feeling that the body is moving in space, even when it is not. It may feel like a person is spinning or turning when they are standing still.  Some people may also become nauseated due to the dizziness and vomit. Inner ear problems can develop slowly over time, or come on suddenly.  If a person has inner ear problems that appear suddenly, they may have a condition called acute vestibular syndrome. A wide range of health issues can cause acute vestibular syndrome.  However,  about 4 percent  of people experiencing an ischemic  stroke  have symptoms of acute vestibular syndrome. If dizziness is intense or interferes with a person's ability to function properly, it is essential to see a doctor.  The liver acts as the body's detoxification system. If the liver is not working properly, a person may feel dizzy or vomit.  Liver problems may also cause very dark urine, intense pain in the upper right side of the body, and yellow skin and eyes.  Sometimes a  gallstone  can block a bile duct, causing liver issues. If the body can pass the gallstone, the symptoms may suddenly go away on their own.  If the gallstone cannot pass, symptoms tend to get progressively more intense. Liver health problems always warrant speaking to a doctor.  When something goes wrong in the brain, it can cause nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and a wide range of other symptoms.  Infections,  cysts , injuries, strokes, bleeds, or tumors can all affect various parts of the brain. People who become dizzy following a car accident or blow to the head should see a doctor.  Many people experience changes in vision and perception immediately before a  migraine . It is also common to feel dizzy, vomit, and be sensitive to bright lights.  It is possible to feel dizzy from a migraine with little or no  headache .  Moving in a car, boat, airplane, or another vehicle can confuse the body's balance system. For some people, this causes motion sickness and may trigger headaches, dizziness, or vomiting.  Symptoms usually go away after a person gets back on stable ground.  Frequent bouts of dizziness and vomiting may be due to a poorly understood condition is called  cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) .  CVS sometimes gets better with diet changes, but there is little research explaining what causes this syndrome.  While there is no standard treatment for CVS, medications for nausea, migraines,  acid reflux , and anxiety may provide some symptomatic relief.  A wide range of illicit drugs can cause nausea and vomiting, as well as dizziness. These symptoms are particularly likely following heavy use.  A night of binge drinking can also lead to a variety of symptoms including vomiting, dizziness, spinning, and headaches.  Sudden, unexplained dizziness and vomiting  can sometimes indicate  poisoning.  Poisoning is more likely when a person has been in contaminated areas, inhaled potentially toxic substances, been exposed to radiation, or consumed food or water that might be contaminated.  Organ failure and physical trauma can cause intense nausea and stomach pain, as well as vomiting and dizziness.  If a person has recently suffered a physical injury, had a severe infection, or is at risk of organ failure, they should consider the possibility of organ problems causing dizziness and vomiting.   A perforation in the intestines  can cause nausea and dizziness. Severe  appendicitis  and injuries to the pancreas can also cause similar symptoms.  Pregnancy hormones can cause dizziness and vomiting, particularly in the first trimester. Some people find that avoiding certain foods, resting, drinking more water, and preventing hunger help reduce symptoms.  A stroke can be a life-threatening emergency. Most strokes are due to a blood clot in the brain. A burst blood vessel in the brain can also cause a bleeding stroke.  Some people experience nausea and vomiting during a stroke. However, almost all people having strokes experience other symptoms, too. Nausea and vomiting alone are unlikely to mean a person is having a stroke.  Not all home remedies work for all forms of vomiting and dizziness. If either symptom is severe, it is vital to seek medical attention.  When symptoms are mild or come and go, a person can try some of the following strategies:  People should see a doctor within 24 hours if:  Go to the emergency room or seek urgent care if:  Dizziness and vomiting are never pleasant but often go away on their own. There is often no need to panic if these symptoms suddenly appear, but it is vital to be aware of possible causes that warrant medical attention.  If the dizziness and vomiting get worse or persist, a person should speak to a doctor for a proper diagnosis.    
 Boyce, T. G. (2017, May). Overview of gastroenteritis.  Boyce, T. G. (2017, May). Overview of gastroenteritis.  Cyclic vomiting syndrome. (n.d.).  Dhas, P. K., Chitra, P., Jayakumar, S., &amp; Mary, A. (2011, September–December). Study of the effects of hydrogen cyanide exposure in Cassava workers.  Indian Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine ,  15 (3), 133–136.  DKA (ketoacidosis) &amp; ketones. (2015, March 18).  Greenberger, N. J. (2018, May). Nausea and vomiting.  Stroke. (2017, October).  Venhovens, J., Meulstee, J., &amp; Verhagen, W. I. M. (2016, November). Acute vestibular syndrome: A critical review and diagnostic algorithm concerning the clinical differentiation of peripheral versus central aetiologies in the emergency department [Abstract].  Journal of Neurology ,  263 (11), 2151–2157.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What causes dizziness and vomiting?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322638.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, July 31). "What causes dizziness and vomiting?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  