 There are two main types of tendon:  People who may require tendon repair surgery include those with:  If a person visits the doctor with a tendon injury, a doctor will carry out an initial physical examination of the injured area.  They will check for:  The doctor will also compare the injured part of the body to the non-injured side, checking for a difference in the range of motion.  They will also likely ask the person to try to move the damaged part of their body in different directions to get a more accurate diagnosis of the injury.  Imaging tests, such as  ultrasounds  and MRIs, can also help diagnose the precise cause and location of the tendon injury.  Tendon injuries  often require  surgical treatment. The aims of tendon repair surgery are:  Before surgery for tendon repair, doctors will explain the procedure and provide anesthesia, which will prevent the person from feeling any pain.  There are three possible types of anesthetic a doctor may use:  The type of anesthetic a person receives will depend on:  The surgeon may want to see the person try to move their tendon as soon as possible after the surgery, or during, if they are awake, to ensure the procedure was successful.  The following steps occur during most tendon repair operations:  The tendon may be too short for the surgeon to sew it back together as it is. If this is the case, the surgeon will graft an extra piece of tendon between the ends to make them meet.  The surgeon will usually take the healthy tendon tissue for the graft from another part of the person's body.  A person may require a tendon transfer. A tendon transfer involves a surgeon removing a tendon that is close to the severed tendon and sewing it into the place of the broken tendon to restore function.  Surgeons usually take tendons from areas where the body has two tendons but can manage with just one.  There are three stages to the timeline of tendon healing after surgery.  In most cases, a person can go home shortly after having tendon repair surgery. The medical team will recommend some  physical therapy  or occupational therapy exercises to help bring back the range of motion slowly and safely. A person should not begin doing the exercises until a doctor says it is safe to do so.  It is essential to keep the area elevated to prevent pain and swelling for the first few days.  Common risks of tendon repair include:  Additional medical conditions can affect how successful tendon repair surgery is. These include:  A doctor will ask a person about their full medical history before the surgery and discuss the possibility of any risks and complications.  Tendon injuries are relatively  common  and often require surgery to repair them. Tendon repair surgeries are usually straightforward but come with some minor risks.  After the surgery, a person should slowly regain their range of motion. In some cases, however, the tendon can tear again.    
 Ariyan, S., Martin, J., Lal, A., Cheng, D., Borah, G. L., Chung, K. C., … Young, V. L. (2015, June). Antibiotic prophylaxis for preventing surgical-site infection in plastic surgery [Abstract].  Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery ,  135 (6), 1723–1739.  Ariyan, S., Martin, J., Lal, A., Cheng, D., Borah, G. L., Chung, K. C., … Young, V. L. (2015, June). Antibiotic prophylaxis for preventing surgical-site infection in plastic surgery [Abstract].  Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery ,  135 (6), 1723–1739.  Fennell, N., &amp; Tucker, S. (2016, March). Principles of tendon repair [Abstract].  Surgery ,  34 (3), 152–156.  Khan, H., &amp; Sivakumar, B. (2016). 7 soft tissue injuries of the hand.  Textbook of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery . London: UCL Press.  Klein, L. J., &amp; Crimmins, C. A. (2013). Surgery and rehabilitation for primary flexor tendon repair in the digit.  Rehabilitation for the Postsurgical Orthopedic Patient , 193–215.  Lalonde, D., &amp; Martin, A. (2014, July 15). Tumescent local anesthesia for hand surgery: Improved results, cost effectiveness, and wide-awake patient satisfaction.  Archives of Plastic Surgery ,  41 (4), 312–316.  Maffulli, G., Del Buono, A., Richards, P., Oliva, F., &amp; Maffulli, N. (2017, January). Conservative, minimally invasive and open surgical repair for management of acute ruptures of the Achilles tendon: A clinical and functional retrospective study.  Muscles, Ligaments and Tendons Journal ,  7 (1), 46–52.  Snedeker, J. G., &amp; Foolen, J. (2017, November). Tendon injury and repair – A perspective on the basic mechanisms of tendon disease and future clinical therapy.  Acta Biomaterialia ,  63 , 18–36.  Tang, J. B. (2015, September). Wide-awake primary flexor tendon repair, tenolysis, and tendon transfer.  Clinics in Orthopedic Surgery ,  7 (3), 275–281.  Thomopoulos, S., Parks, W. C., Rifkin, D. B., &amp; Derwin, K. A. (2015, June). Mechanisms of tendon injury and repair.  Journal of Orthopaedic Research ,  33 (6), 832–839.  Wu, F., Nerlich, M., &amp; Docheva, D. (2017, July 17). Tendon injuries: Basic science and new repair proposals.  EFORT Open Reviews ,  2 (7), 332–342.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Catterall, Jenn. "Tendon repair: What to expect."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322689.php&gt;    APA  Catterall, J. (2018, August 6). "Tendon repair: What to expect."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  