 Muscles, especially those important in maintaining an erection, sometimes lose tone and strength. As a result, exercises can help to reverse  erectile dysfunction  (ED).  Causes and risk factors for ED include:  Doctors may prescribe phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors, such as Viagra, for ED. Lifestyle changes, including exercise and weight loss, are also effective in treating ED.  Treating the cause of ED will have long-lasting results, while medication only provides temporary relief. Also, some people find medication to be ineffective.  Sometimes, psychological factors are responsible for ED. In these cases, a person can benefit from forms of talking therapy.  Exercises that strengthen the muscles of the pelvic floor  can benefit  people with ED.  The pelvic floor muscles are key in sustaining blood flow to the penis and maintaining erections.  The muscles do this by  putting pressure  on the penile veins. The pressure prevents blood from leaving the area, making an erection possible.  Pelvic floor exercises, or Kegels, are the most beneficial for ED.  These exercises target the muscles at the bottom of the pelvis, and particularly one called the pubococcygeus. This loops from the pubic bone to the tailbone and supports the pelvic organs.  When this muscle weakens, it is unable to prevent blood from flowing out of the erect penis.  Performing pelvic floor exercises will strengthen and improve tone in the pubococcygeus. It can take 4–6 weeks before a person notices a difference in erections.  This exercise is simple but important. It teaches a person to  activate their pelvic floor muscles .  Once a person is comfortable performing Kegel exercises three times a day, it can help to add exercises that involve more movement.  These Pilates exercises activate the right group of muscles and challenge a person to maintain pelvic floor strength while moving.  This is a beginners' exercise that involves small movements.      This exercise builds on knee fallouts and involves small movements.      This exercise is common in Pilates.      At first, a person may only be able to perform an exercise three or four times.  Build strength by practicing the exercises daily. Eventually, work up to 10 repetitions of each exercise per day.  If a person stops doing the exercises, the muscles may weaken, and ED may return.  Aerobic exercise can also benefit people with ED.  People who practiced an aerobic exercise four times a week saw the best results, according to the authors of a 2018  systematic review .  Each exercise session should be of moderate or high intensity and last a minimum of 40 minutes.  Some examples of aerobic exercises include:  A person should keep up their aerobic exercise routine for at least 6 months.  Exercise is essential for maintaining the health of the blood vessels and the heart. Also, people with cardiovascular disease have an increased risk of ED.  Diet and weight loss are also important aspects of ED treatment and prevention. People with ED are more likely to be  inactive  and overweight. Alcohol also plays a role.  Following dietary guidelines and limiting the intake of alcohol and foods with added salt, sugar, and fat will help to reduce the risk of developing ED.  These efforts will also reduce a person's risk of stroke, metabolic disease, and cardiovascular disease, all of which are linked to ED.  A person with ED will often see improvement after making lifestyle changes. These should also reduce the need for medication and benefit overall health in the long term.  Adjusting the diet and performing exercises, particularly those that target the pelvic floor muscles, can help to reduce or eliminate ED.    
 Cohen, D., Gonzalez, J., &amp; Goldstein, I. (2016). The role of pelvic floor muscles in male sexual dysfunction and pelvic pain.  Sexual Medicine Reviews ,  4 (1), 53–62.  Cohen, D., Gonzalez, J., &amp; Goldstein, I. (2016). The role of pelvic floor muscles in male sexual dysfunction and pelvic pain.  Sexual Medicine Reviews ,  4 (1), 53–62.  Geraerts, I., van Poppel, H., Devoogdt, N., de Groef, A., Fieuws, S., &amp; van Kampen, M. (2016, January–February). Pelvic floor muscle training for erectile dysfunction and climacturia 1 year after nerve sparing radical prostatectomy: A randomized controlled trial [Abstract].  International Journal of Impotence Research ,  28 (1), 9–13.  Gerbild, H., Larsen, C. M., Graugaard, C., &amp; Josefsson, K. A. (2018, June). Physical activity to improve erectile function: A systematic review of intervention studies.  Sexual Medicine ,  6 (2), 75–89.  Kegel exercises. (2014, April).  Kumar, G. N. J., &amp; Sharif, S. I. (2017). Effects of pelvic floor muscle strengthening exercises on penile erection and sexual quality of life in subjects with erectile dysfunction — a pilot study [Abstract].  Indian Journal of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation ,  1 (1).  Meldrum, D. R., Burnett, A. L., Dorey, G., Esposito, K., &amp; Ignarro, L. J. (2014, May). Erectile hydraulics: Maximizing inflow while minimizing outflow [Abstract].  The Journal of Sexual Medicine ,  11 (5), 1,208–1,220.  Shaeer, O. Shaeer, K., Serefoglu, E., &amp; Fode, M. (2017, January). The global online sexuality survey – erectile dysfunction in USA, 2015 [Abstract].  The Journal of Sexual Medicine ,  14 (1), S24.  Ramírez, R., Pedro-Botet, J., García, M., Corbella, E., Merino, J., Zambón, D., … Pintó, X. (2016, January). Erectile dysfunction and cardiovascular risk factors in a Mediterranean diet cohort.  International Medicine Journal ,  46 (1), 52–56.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "Do erectile dysfunction exercises help?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322600.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, July 27). "Do erectile dysfunction exercises help?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  