 The  World Health Organization (WHO)  define  diarrhea  as passing three or more liquid or loose stools in a day. However, a person may have diarrhea if they pass more loose stool than usual.  Diarrhea can result from infection, but there are also many noninfectious causes.  Under normal circumstances, the large intestine absorbs excess liquid. When a person has diarrhea, the digestion process moves too fast for the large intestine to absorb the extra liquid present.  In this article, we look at the causes of explosive diarrhea and describe what a person should do if they have it.  Infection is a common cause of explosive diarrhea, but other factors can be responsible.   Viral infections   The viruses most often responsible for diarrhea include  norovirus , rotavirus, or any number of the viruses that cause viral  gastroenteritis . This condition is what many people call the "stomach  flu ."  All of these viruses tend to spread in areas where people meet in groups, including:   Bacterial infections   A person can blame bacteria if their explosive diarrhea occurs after eating or drinking contaminated food or water. A person may mistakenly think that their illness is a result of  food poisoning  because the symptoms can be severe.  Bacteria that can cause diarrhea include  Salmonella ,  Campylobacter , and   Escherichia coli  , which is commonly called   E. coli .  These bacteria can spread from person-to-person via unwashed hands and surfaces. If someone has diarrhea, they should wash their hands thoroughly after using the bathroom, and take other steps to reduce the risk of passing on the infection.   Parasitic infection   Many types of parasites can cause diarrhea, severe or otherwise. Two of the more common are  Giardia lamblia  ( G. lamblia ) and  Cryptosporidium enteritis  ( C. enteritis ).  As with bacteria, a person can acquire parasites through unsanitary conditions. A person can become infected with  G. lamblia  or  C. enteritis  when their mouth directly or indirectly comes into contact with contaminated fecal matter. These parasites thrive in fresh, untreated water and in certain foods.  In developed countries, hikers, backpackers, and campers are among the  most likely  groups to come in contact with  G. lamblia . The parasites do not survive in chlorinated water.   Medications   Many medications can cause mild diarrhea, or loose stool. Occasionally, they can cause severe diarrhea. Some of these types of medications include:  Antibiotics and other medications that contain  magnesium  are a particular risk.   Food allergies   Some people have adverse reactions to certain foods, and these reactions can result in diarrhea.  A  common cause  is  lactose intolerance . If a person cannot tolerate lactose, and they eat or drink a dairy-based product, they may experience explosive diarrhea.   Bowel disease   People with some illnesses that affect the bowels often experience diarrhea. Bowel-related conditions that  can cause  explosive diarrhea include:  Diarrhea is a common condition that affects around  179 million  people in the United States every year.  Certain portions of the population are at  greater risk  of developing diarrhea than others.  These groups include:  Treatment for any form of diarrhea often involves staying hydrated and maintaining levels of electrolytes.  In many cases, the person will just need to wait for their diarrhea to pass. An individual can consume fluids and electrolytes in:  When experiencing diarrhea, a person should avoid:  Some people choose to take over-the-counter (OTC) medications that are anti-diarrheal.  A person should not take OTC medications if they have a  fever  or blood in their stool. A person with either symptom likely has a bacterial or parasitic infection, which could get worse with the introduction of medication.  Children under the age of 2 should not take OTC medications unless instructed by a healthcare provider.  In severe cases, people should speak to their healthcare providers about additional treatment options.  An individual may need treatment for serious infections or other underlying conditions, or they may require intravenous fluids to stay hydrated.  Taking the following steps can help a person to avoid getting explosive diarrhea:  Many cases of diarrhea will clear up within a few days. Usually, people require no medication.  However, if diarrhea does not go away  within 2 days  or the person feels dehydrated, they should see a healthcare provider.  Seek immediate medical attention if any of the  following symptoms  occur:  A healthcare provider will review a person's symptoms. They will often ask about medications and trips to other countries, and they may request stool and blood tests.  A few complications may develop due to explosive diarrhea.  A common complication is dehydration, which occurs because the body cannot readily replace the fluids and electrolytes lost through diarrhea. It is important that a person keeps taking in fluids throughout their illness.  Another complication of diarrhea is malabsorption, which involves the body failing to take in sufficient nutrients from food. Malabsorption can also result from some conditions that cause diarrhea, including infections and  food allergies .  Some people experience diarrhea for longer periods. When diarrhea lasts for  4 or more weeks , the medical community considers it to be chronic.  Most cases of explosive diarrhea are short-lived, and many people require no medical treatment.  Take in as much fluid as possible throughout the duration of diarrhea. Staying well hydrated helps fight off infection and replenish electrolytes. It also supports other bodily functions.  If other symptoms accompany diarrhea, or it lasts for more than 2 days, a person should seek medical care.    
 Definition &amp; facts for diarrhea. (2016, November).  Definition &amp; facts for diarrhea. (2016, November).  Diarrhoea. (n.d.).  Juckett, G., &amp; Trivedi, R. (2011, November 15). Evaluation of chronic diarrhea.  American Family Physician ,  84 (10), 1,119–1,126.  Ochoa, B., &amp; Surawicz, C. M. (2012, December). Diarrheal diseases — acute and chronic.  Parasites –  Giardia : General information. (2015, July 21).  Symptoms &amp; causes of diarrhea. (2016, November).  Treatment for diarrhea. (2016, November).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is explosive diarrhea?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322669.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, August 2). "What is explosive diarrhea?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  