 Spending time in freezing temperatures or coming into contact with something extremely cold, such as ice cubes or an ice pack, can damage the skin tissue and cause an ice burn.  In this article, learn about the symptoms and causes of ice burns, as well as how to treat them and when to see a doctor.  The symptoms of an ice burn can include:  When a person experiences an ice burn, several things happen to the tissue:  Exposure to extreme cold causes the blood vessels to narrow, diverting blood to the vital organs to protect them.  A reduced volume of blood will reach the parts of the body furthest from the central organs, which is why the hands, feet, fingers, and toes are particularly prone to injuries from the cold.  Causes of ice burns include:  Other factors that can increase a person's likelihood of getting an ice burn include:  Younger children and older people have a higher risk of cold injury, as they are unable to regulate their body temperature as efficiently and tend to lose heat more quickly.  People under the influence of alcohol or drugs may not be as alert to the cold and may not immediately notice the discomfort of cold exposure that can lead to ice burns.  To prevent ice burns, people should wear appropriate clothing for cold temperatures or high-velocity winds.  Also, when using an ice pack, people should ensure that it does not directly touch the skin. Placing a cloth or towel in between the ice pack and the skin can help to prevent ice burns.  Ice burns can cause scarring. The likelihood of scarring depends on many factors, including the area of the ice burn and how many layers of tissue are affected.  The skin consists of several layers. These include an outer layer, known as the epidermis, and a lower layer, called the dermis. Beneath these layers are tissues that include muscles, tendons, and other connective tissue.  If a burn only penetrates the epidermis, it may not cause significant scarring. However, injuries that affect the dermis or the tissues beneath it are more complex wounds that can leave scars.  There is little difference between ice burn and  frostbite . The term ice burn refers to burns that result from contact with ice or ice packs.  Frostbite occurs when the exposure of parts of the body to extremely cold temperatures freezes the skin and the tissue beneath it.  Frostbite that penetrates the deeper layers of the skin and damages tissue and bone can cause permanent damage.  Upon getting an ice burn, a person should immediately be taking the following actions:  Once the area is warm again, a person should try:  It is vital to warm up the skin gradually rather than using very hot water or air, as extreme heat could make the injury worse.  People can usually treat superficial ice burns at home using first aid. These burns often heal without the need for further medical attention.  If a person experiences a more severe ice burn, they should see a doctor and may require hospital treatment.  The signs and symptoms of a severe ice burn include:  These signs may indicate damage to the tissue underneath the skin. Tissue damage may require more intensive medical or surgical treatment.  Any signs of infection will also require medical treatment. A person should see a doctor if they experience the following symptoms:  If the affected area remains white, dark, or gray rather than pink or red and does not start tingling or burning as it warms up, this could signify more extensive damage that requires medical attention.  Anyone concerned about an ice burn should speak to a doctor for a proper evaluation.    
 Burns [Fact Sheet]. (2018, March 6).  Burns [Fact Sheet]. (2018, March 6).  Frostbite. (n.d.).  Harding, M. (2016, December 28). Frostbite.  Nizamoglu, M., Tan, A., Vickers, T., Segaren, N., Barnes, D., &amp; Dziewulski, P. (2016, November 11). Cold burn injuries in the UK: The 11-year experience of a tertiary burns centre.  Burns &amp; Trauma ,  4 , 36.  Zafren, K., &amp; Crawford Mechem, C. (2018, February 15). Frostbite.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Everything you need to know about ice burns."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322606.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, July 27). "Everything you need to know about ice burns."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  