 A faster metabolism burns  calories  more quickly than a slower one, making it less likely that a person will put on weight. A person's metabolism naturally slows down as they age.  Some  vitamins  and minerals may help keep the metabolism working effectively. While supplements can help, whole foods are the best source of vitamins and minerals.  The five best vitamins and minerals for maintaining and boosting body functions, including metabolism, and supporting good weight control, are as follows:  The B vitamins play many essential roles in energy metabolism in the body. The B vitamins include:  Deficiency in one of the B vitamins can affect other B vitamins, which can disrupt a person's metabolism.  The ability to process fats, proteins, and carbohydrates is essential. A healthy metabolism ensures that the body uses these nutrients for energy rather than storing them as fat.  People must regularly eat foods that contain B vitamins to meet their daily needs.  Good choices of foods that contain B vitamins include:  B-12 is present only in animal products, meaning vegetarians and vegans may have difficulty consuming enough of this vitamin.  In addition to dairy products, the following foods may contain B-12:  Two studies looked at  vitamin D  and weight in  older women  and  children . Both found those participants with more fat had lower vitamin D levels than those with less fat.  Researchers are  currently unsure  about whether low vitamin D contributes to  obesity  or vice versa. Diet, blood sugar control, and time spent outdoors may all play a role in a person's weight.   Research  suggests that vitamin D may help control blood sugar and improve  insulin resistance  in people with  diabetes .  Unlike other essential vitamins, people can get vitamin D from sunlight. Safe exposure to the sun is the fastest way to top up vitamin D.  Foods that contain vitamin D include:  If a person is overweight, vitamin supplementation alone may not improve weight. Weight loss has to come from lifestyle changes as well.  Nevertheless, a  study in 2016  found that postmenopausal women with  type 2 diabetes , eating vitamin D-fortified yogurt, improved their blood sugar levels and reduced  inflammation . They also experience reduced waist size.  An  older study  found that taking  calcium  with added vitamin D together slightly reduced the risk of weight gain in postmenopausal women.  People should have their vitamin D levels checked annually and talk to their doctor about supplements if their levels remain low.  Following on from the above, emerging research further suggests calcium may be vital to a healthy metabolism and blood sugar control, as well as healthy bones.   Some research  from 2010 suggests that higher calcium intake combined with vitamin D can assist diet-related weight loss.  An  older study in 2007  found that a diet high in dairy calcium enhanced weight loss in people with type 2 diabetes.  However, more recent research is needed to determine whether this is an effective weight loss strategy.  While calcium supplements are available, it is best for people to get enough calcium from food sources first.  Foods high in calcium are:  The body needs iron for healthy growth, development, and metabolism. Iron is also vital for correct cell functioning and the creation of some hormones.  Iron is  essential  for carrying oxygen in red blood cells. The red blood cells carry oxygen to and from muscles and tissues in the body.  If a person has low iron levels, they may not send enough oxygen to their muscles. Muscles that are low in oxygen cannot burn fat for fuel as well as they should. Low iron also interferes with optimum metabolism in the body.  Sources of iron include:  Although iron is vital, it is also toxic when consumed in high doses. People should, therefore, talk to a doctor or dietitian about whether they have an iron deficiency before they take supplements.  Without  magnesium , the chemical reactions that produce energy in the body cannot happen. This dependency means that magnesium is essential for metabolism and energy production.  Magnesium is available in a wide variety of foods, including:  People can also take magnesium supplements but should speak to a doctor first, as they may have adverse effects in people with some underlying health conditions.  Anyone thinking about taking new vitamin or mineral supplements to boost their metabolism and lose weight should speak to a doctor first.  Taking these vitamins and minerals will not necessarily improve metabolism. However, they will help ensure adequate  nutrition  and correct deficiencies if they exist, which may help prevent unintentional weight gain and maintain a healthy metabolism.  Some supplements may cause adverse effects in high doses, make health conditions worse, or interact with a person's medication is already taking.  The safest way to consume more metabolism-boosting vitamins and minerals is by eating a healthful, balanced diet that is varied and nutritious.  If necessary, vitamin and mineral supplements are available in many health food stores or online:  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Caan, B., Neuhouser, M., Aragaki, A., Lewis, C. B., Jackson, R., LeBoff, M. S., … LaCroix, A. (2007, May 14). Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of postmenopausal weight gain [Abstract].  Archives of Internal Medicine ,  167 (9), 893–902.  Caan, B., Neuhouser, M., Aragaki, A., Lewis, C. B., Jackson, R., LeBoff, M. S., … LaCroix, A. (2007, May 14). Calcium plus vitamin D supplementation and the risk of postmenopausal weight gain [Abstract].  Archives of Internal Medicine ,  167 (9), 893–902.  Hilger, J., Friedal, A., Herr, R., Rausch, T., Roos, F., Wahl, D. A., … Hoffmann, K. (2014). A systematic review of vitamin D status in populations worldwide.  British Journal of Nutrition ,  111 (1), 23–45.  Iron [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Jafari, T., Faghihimani, E., Feizi, A., Iraj, B., Javanmard, S. H., Esmaillzadeh, A., … Askari, G. (2016, February).  Clinical Nutrition ,  35 (1), 67–76.  Magnesium [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Mohammadi-Sartang, M., Bellissimo, N., Totosy de Zepetnek, J. O., Brett, N. R., Mazloomi, S. M., Fararouie, M., … Mazloom, Z. (2018, June). The effect of daily fortified yogurt consumption on weight loss in adults with metabolic syndrome: A 10-week randomized controlled trial [Abstract].  Nutrition, Metabolism, and Cardiovascular Diseases ,  28 (6), 565–574.  Okazaki, R. (2018). Body weight and bone/calcium metabolism. Obesity and vitamin D [Abstract].  Clinical Calcium ,  28 (7), 947–956.  Pelczyńska, M., Grzelak, T., Walczak, M., &amp; Czyżewska, K. (2016, September). Hypovitaminosis D and adipose tissue — cause and effect relationships in obesity [Abstract].  Annals of Agricultural and Environmental Medicine ,  23 (3), 403–409.  Rautiainen, S., Wang, L., Lee, I.-M., Manson, J. E., Buring, J. E., &amp; Sesso, H. D. (2016, April). Dairy consumption in association with weight risk of becoming overweight or obese in middle-aged and older women: A prospective cohort study.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  103 (4), 979–988.  Sanmiguel, C., Gupta, A., &amp; Mayer, E. A. (2016, June 1). Gut microbiome and obesity: A plausible explanation for obesity.  Current Obesity Reports ,  4 (2), 250–261.  Shahar, D. R., Schwarzfuchs, D., Fraser, D., Vardi, H., Thiery, J., Fielder, G. M., … Shai, I. (2010, November). Dairy calcium intake, serum vitamin D, and successful weight loss [Abstract].  American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  95 (5), 1017–1022.  Thiamin [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Vanderhout, S. M., Birken, C. S., Parkin, P. C., Lebovic, G., Chen, Y., O'Connor, D. L., &amp; Maguire, J. L. (2016, December 1). Relation between milk-fat percentage, vitamin D, and BMI z score in early childhood.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  104 (6), 1657–1664.  Vitamin A [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Vitamin B6 [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2). Retrieved from  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminB6-HealthProfessional/   Vitamin B12 [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "Vitamins and minerals that boost metabolism."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322644.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, July 31). "Vitamins and minerals that boost metabolism."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  