 Goji berries are also known as  Lycium barbarum . The goji berry is native to Asia, and people in Asia have been using this brightly colored fruit for more than 2,000 years as a medicinal herb and food supplement. Goji berries are widely available for purchase in health food stores and  online .  More recently, supporters have introduced goji berries to the rest of the world with claims of many potential health benefits. Modern science is investigating these claims, and researchers have backed many of them.  Here are seven possible benefits of the goji berry with the scientific evidence supporting them:  Goji berries are believed to protect against age-related eye diseases.  Goji berries can help vision because they contain high levels of healthy  antioxidants , especially zeaxanthin.  The same antioxidants can also stop damage from:   One study  reported in the  American Academy of Optometry's  journal  Optometry and Vision Science  found that seniors who drank goji berry juice for 90 days increased zeaxanthin and other antioxidant levels significantly.  A second study reported in the journal  Drug Design, Development and Therapy  shows goji berries protect the retina from the  ganglion cells responsible for glaucoma , a condition that can lead to vision loss.  Goji berries contain healthy antioxidants.  Antioxidants  are known for their immune-boosting qualities and their ability to fight harmful free radicals and  inflammation .  Goji berries contain large amounts of  vitamins  A and C, similarly to other berries, including  blueberries  and raspberries. Vitamins A and C are vital for building immunity and preventing illnesses, ranging from the common cold to  cancer .  High levels of antioxidants, including vitamin C, zeaxanthin, and carotenoids, are responsible for fighting cancer cells. Antioxidants slow  tumor  growth, reduce inflammation, and help to remove harmful substances from the body.   Research on mice , reported in the journal  Drug Design, Development and Therapy , finds goji berries may inhibit tumor growth and boost the effectiveness of cancer treatments.  Goji berries contain  beta-carotene , which is an essential plant phytochemical. Beta-carotene is known for its ability to promote healthy skin.  Beta-carotene is an ingredient used in skin creams to:  One  study  in mice found that when they drank 5 percent goji juice, it gave them enough antioxidants to protect against UV light damage and skin disorders.  Goji berries may be helpful in controlling the release of sugar into the blood.  Research  from 2015 shows that goji berries balance  insulin  and glucose levels in the blood.  The same study linked goji berries to  increased HDL levels  in people with  type 2 diabetes . HDL is known as good  cholesterol .  Research from 2016 that was done using rats shows goji berries can improve  depression and anxiety-like behaviors .   Another study  in the United States, using humans, also found drinking goji berry juice could improve energy, mood, and digestive health.  In this study, healthy adult participants consumed 120 milliliters of goji berry juice daily or a  placebo  drink for 14 days.  They completed questionnaires to record their feelings of wellbeing, neurological and psychological health, musculoskeletal symptoms, and digestive and cardiovascular complaints, as well as any adverse effects of the juice each day.  The researchers took measurements to record each participant's  blood pressure , body mass, weight,  pulse , and vision before and after the 14 days of study.  The group given the goji berry juice reported improved energy, ability to focus, enhanced athletic performance, mental acuity, and feelings of calmness and contentment by day 15.  The study also showed improved quality of sleep in those who consumed the goji berry juice, and none experienced negative effects related to drinking the juice.  Goji berries have been used to treat liver disease in traditional Chinese medicine.   Research on animal models  indicates goji berries can help with managing liver health and preventing the progression of alcohol-induced fatty liver disease.   Research on human liver cancer cells  has also found the goji berry can inhibit tumor growth.  Goji berries are often called a superfood because they contain chemical compounds called phytochemicals that are produced by plants. Phytochemicals in goji berries include polysaccharides, beta-carotene, and zeaxanthin.  Polysaccharides are a primary characteristic of the goji berry. These are an essential source of dietary fiber. A study using aging mice found that  polysaccharides in goji berries  helped with improving immune function and increasing total antioxidant activity in the body.  Beta-carotene is responsible for the orange-red color pigment in goji berries. Beta-carotene is vital for eye health, bone health, skin health, and cell development. The amount of beta-carotene in goji berries is among the  highest of all edible plants .  Zeaxanthin plays a crucial role in supporting the immune system. Many researchers believe that  zeaxanthin can prevent macular degeneration , a progressive vision impairment that occurs when the central part of the retina, or macula, deteriorates.  People can buy goji berries in most health food stores and Asian or European markets. They can easily add fresh and dry goji berries to:  It is also easy for people to carry some with them when they go out and  eat them by the handful  as a snack.  Goji berries are available fresh or dried and in trail mixes, superfood mixes, or as a juice. Goji berries are available in supplement form in health food stores and  online .  Goji berries are often expensive. However, the health benefits may be worth the cost. Prices will also depend on whether the product is organic, natural, or processed.  Goji berries may interact with some medications, including:  People taking these medications should talk to their doctor before adding goji berries to their diet.  Anyone with an allergy to other berries should discuss this with a doctor before consuming fresh or dry goji berries or taking any supplement containing goji berry extracts.  Fresh and dry goji berries do not usually cause any side effects or adverse reactions in healthy people.  Goji berry supplements have been shown to be safe for most people when consumed for up to 3 months, with only rare side effects, such as allergic reactions and sensitivity to sunlight.  It is safe for most people to eat goji berries in moderation. People considering using goji berry supplements should check with their doctor first.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Amagase, H., &amp; Nance, D. M. (2008, May). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical study of the general effects of a standardized  Lycium barbarum  (goji) juice, GoChi [Abstract].  Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine ,  14 (4), 403–412.  Amagase, H., &amp; Nance, D. M. (2008, May). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, clinical study of the general effects of a standardized  Lycium barbarum  (goji) juice, GoChi [Abstract].  Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine ,  14 (4), 403–412.  Bucheli, P., Gao, Q., Redgwell, R., Vidal, K., Wang, J., &amp; Zhang, W. (2011). Chapter 14. Biomolecular and clinical aspects of Chinese wolfberry. In  Herbal Medicine: Biomolecular and Clinical Aspects 2nd edition . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press/Taylor &amp; Francis.  Bucheli, P., Vidal, K. Shen, L., Gu, Z., Zhang, C., Miller, L. E., &amp; Junkuan, W. (2011, February). Goji berry effects on macular characteristics and plasma antioxidant levels.  Optometry and Vision Science ,  88 (2), 257–262.  Bunghez, I. R., Marius, A. S., Marian, N., Georgeta, R., &amp; Rodica-Mariana, I. (2012, April–June). Obtaining of carotenoid extract from  Lycuim Chinense  and characterization using spectrometrical analysis.  Digest Journal of Nanomaterials and Biostructures ,  7 (2), 523–528.  Cai, H., Lui, F., Zuo, P., Huang, G., Song, Z., Wang, T., … Sun, G. (2015, June). Practical application of antidiabetic efficacy of  Lycium barbarum  polysaccharide in patients with type 2 diabetes.  Medicinal Chemistry ,  11 (4), 383–390.  Chaey, C. (2015, June 11). All about dried goji berries, the superfood raisin.  Cheng, J., Zhou, Z. W., Sheng, H. P., He, L. J., Fan, X. W., He, Z. X., … &amp; Zhou S. F. (2015). An evidence-based update on the pharmacological activities and possible molecular targets of Lycium barbarum polysaccharides [Abstract].  Drug Design, Development and Therapy ,  9 , 33–78.  Endes, Z., Uslu, N., Özcan, M. M., &amp; Er. F. (2015). Physico-chemical properties, fatty acid composition and mineral contents of goji berry ( Lycium barbarum  L.) fruit.  Journal of Agroalimentary Processes and Technologies ,  21 (1), 36–40.  Gao, Y., Wei, Y., Wang, Y, Gao, F. &amp; Chan, Z. (2017, December 1).  Lycium barbarum : A traditional Chinese herb and a promising anti-aging agent.  Aging &amp; Disease ,  8 (6), 778–791.  Goji. (2017, December 21).  Hajian, S. (2014, November 17). Positive effect of antioxidants on immune system.  Immunopathologia Persa ,  1 (1), e02.  Kocyigit, E., &amp; Sanlier, N. (2017). A review of composition and health effects of  Lycuim barbarum .  International Journal of Chinese Medicine ,  1 (1), 1–9.  Li, X. M., Ma, Y. L., &amp; Liu, X. J. (2007, May 22). Effect of the  Lycium barbarum  polysaccharides on age-related oxidative stress in aged mice [Abstract].  Journal of Ethnopharmacology ,  111 (3), 504–511. Received from  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378874106006775   Pehlivan Karakas, F., Coskun, H., Saglam, K., &amp; Bozat, B. G. (2016, June 21).  Lycium barbarum  L. (goji berry) fruits improve anxiety, depression-like behaviors, and learning performance: The moderating role of sex.  Turkish Journal of Biology ,  40 , 762–771.  Protti, M., Gualandi, I., Mandrioli, R., Zappoli, S., Tonelli, D., &amp; Mercolini, L. (2017, September 5). Analytical profiling of selected antioxidants and total antioxidant capacity of goji ( Lycium  spp.) berries [Abstract].  Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis ,  143 (5), 252–260.  Reeve, V. E., Allanson, M., Arun, S. J., Domanski, D., &amp; Painter, N. (2010, April). Mice drinking goji berry juice ( Lycium barbarum ) are protected from UV radiation-induced skin damage via antioxidant pathways [Abstract].  Photochemical and Photobiological Sciences ,  9 (4), 601–607.  What is macular degeneration? (n.d).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "What are the health benefits of goji berries?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322693.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, August 7). "What are the health benefits of goji berries?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  