 This occurs due to a muscle imbalance in the lower half of the body. A combination of weak and tight muscles pulls the pelvis forward.  Tight, overactive muscles that may contribute to anterior pelvic tilt include:  Weak, underactive muscles that can cause this condition include:  Anterior pelvic tilt is often visible in a person as it gives the lower back an exaggerated arch and makes the buttocks stick out.  In this article, we provide seven anterior pelvic tilt exercises that may help to correct this condition.  The following exercises may help fix an anterior pelvic tilt:  It is vital to learn how to tilt the pelvis in the other direction. To do this, a person can follow these steps:  Practicing this move while standing up is also useful for activating the muscles in the buttocks and improving pelvic mobility.  In a person with anterior pelvic tilt, the muscles in the quadriceps group are overactive and tight. Trying to lengthen these muscles will prevent them from pulling on the pelvis. Performing this stretch will also lengthen the hip flexors.  To do a kneeling quadriceps stretch, a person should:  To target the hip flexors more, lean further into the stretch. It is essential to try to tuck in the pelvis.  A person will mainly feel this stretch in the quadriceps muscles and the hip flexors.  This is another quadriceps stretch that will also target the hip flexors. To perform this stretch, a person should:  Thinking about pushing the knee toward the floor can help a person feel the stretch more intensely.  This exercise strengthens the gluteus group. It is essential to focus on squeezing the buttocks when standing.  This exercise will improve core strength. The abdominals must remain tight and squeezed in toward the spine. Clenching the buttocks will also help stabilize the body.  This exercise will improve gluteus and abdominal strength while disengaging the hip flexors.  To do a bridge, a person should:  Abdominal curls or crunches work the rectus abdominis. The movement does not need to be significant, but it is crucial to activate the muscles in the correct position.  An abdominal curl involves the following series of movements:  Other ways that a person can help correct an anterior pelvic tilt include:  It is essential to test for an anterior pelvic tilt before starting corrective exercises. The Thomas Test is a simple method that people can use.  To do the Thomas Test, a person should:  Some people's muscles become tight as a result of certain lifestyle habits or muscular dysfunction.  Factors that can increase the risk of developing an anterior pelvic tilt include:  Anterior pelvic tilt  increases pressure  on the lower back bones. This pressure can cause muscle  fatigue  and other issues, such as:  People who experience neck and lower back pain alongside an anterior pelvic tilt should visit a physiotherapist or occupational therapist for a full treatment plan.  Even if this condition is not causing any pain, it is vital to work on lengthening tight muscles and strengthening weak muscles to correct the poor posture.  An anterior pelvic tilt can affect the whole body, causing pain or discomfort in other areas.  It is essential for people to establish whether or not they have this condition before doing the anterior pelvic tilt exercises. Once they confirm that they have a pelvic tilt, performing the specific exercises may help reduce symptoms.    
 Laird, R. A., Gilbert, J., Kent, P., &amp; Keating, J. L. (2014, July 10). Comparing lumbo-pelvic kinematics in people with and without back pain: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders ,  15 , 229.  Laird, R. A., Gilbert, J., Kent, P., &amp; Keating, J. L. (2014, July 10). Comparing lumbo-pelvic kinematics in people with and without back pain: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders ,  15 , 229.  Park, K., Kim, Y., Chung, Y., &amp; Hwang, S. (2016, March 31). Effects of the height of shoe heels on muscle activation of cervical and lumbar spine in healthy women.   Journal of Physical Therapy Science ,  28 (3), 956–959.  Pelvic tilt exercise. (n.d.).  Sadler, S. G., Spink, M. J., Ho, A., Janse De Jonge, X., &amp; Chuter, V. H. (2017, May 5). Restriction in lateral bending range of motion, lumbar lordosis, and hamstring flexibility predicts the development of low back pain: A systematic review of prospective cohort studies.  BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders ,  18 , 179.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "Exercises to fix anterior pelvic tilt."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322684.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, August 6). "Exercises to fix anterior pelvic tilt."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  