 Researchers have come to varied conclusions about the links between these symptoms and teething. While many experts agree that teething does not cause congestion or a runny nose, the  stress  involved with teething may make infants more susceptible to childhood illnesses.  In this article, we examine the links between teething and several symptoms, including a runny nose. We also describe what regularly occurs with teething, common causes of a runny nose in infants, and when to see a doctor.  An infant usually gets their first tooth at around 6 months. They tend to have a complete set of 20 teeth by 30 months.  The teething period for each tooth typically takes 8 days. It begins 4 days before the tooth comes through the gum and lasts for 3 days afterward. This process is known as tooth eruption.  Many parents and caregivers notice issues, such as a runny nose or a  fever , before a new tooth arrives. But some experts believe that these symptoms are not directly related to teething.  The  Seattle Children's Hospital  warns that teething does not cause a runny nose, fever,  diarrhea , or diaper rash.  However, some experts believe that there may be an indirect link and that the stress of teething may make infants more vulnerable to infections, which can cause symptoms such as a runny nose.  Between the ages of 6 and 30 months, the teeth come in, and the immune system changes. During this period, the protection that an infant was born with and may have received through breastmilk starts to decrease.  At the same time, babies are beginning to interact more with the wider world and are becoming increasingly exposed to childhood illnesses.  Infants also tend to chew on things during the teething process, and this can expose them to germs.  The main signals of teething are:  Teething is unlikely to cause:  The nose regularly produces mucus, a fluid that keeps the inside of the nose moist and traps germs before they penetrate further. The body usually sweeps mucus back into the throat and swallows it.  A runny nose, or rhinorrhea, happens when excess mucus flows through the nose rather than running down the throat.  Mucus can be thick or thin, and transparent or opaque. A runny nose will usually go away on its own.  Some causes of a runny nose in children  include :  The following  causes  are less common:  A doctor should check any baby who is inconsolable or who has a high fever. These symptoms can occur with illnesses such as an ear infection.  If a runny nose does not go away, this can point to an underlying health issue, such as those listed above. If an infant's nose is runny for more than 10 days, they should receive medical attention.  People often attribute a runny nose and other symptoms to teething. However, there is no evidence that teething causes a runny nose, a fever, diarrhea, vomiting, or excessive crying. These symptoms more likely result from exposure to the wider world and childhood illnesses.  If a baby is inconsolable, has a fever, or has severe or persistent symptoms, see a doctor. Speak to a medical professional any time an infant's symptoms are concerning.    
 Chronic rhinorrhea (runny nose). (n.d.).  Chronic rhinorrhea (runny nose). (n.d.).  Markman, L. (2009). Teething: Facts and fiction.  Pediatrics in Review,  30  (8), e59–e64.  Should your child see a doctor? Teething. (2018, March 19).  Teething. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "Is a runny nose during teething normal?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322686.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, August 6). "Is a runny nose during teething normal?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  