 A  fever  is not a disease but a sign that the body's immune system is fighting an infection. The body raises its core temperature to fight off the invading bacteria or viruses.  Children aged 1–3 years old, generally referred to as toddlers, often get illnesses because:  Fever usually goes away once the illness passes. However, toddlers sometimes develop a rash following a fever. Although this is rarely severe, it is important to see a doctor immediately.  In this article, we look at the possible causes of a rash after fever in toddlers, what to do about it, and when to see a doctor.  Several common childhood illnesses can cause a rash after fever. Most are not serious, but some do require medical treatment, so it is essential to discuss these symptoms with a doctor.  Common causes of post-fever rash in toddlers include:  Roseola infantum, which is also called roseola or sixth disease, is a viral infection. Babies and toddlers pass on the virus through saliva, coughing, and sneezing.  Roseola may cause a sudden, high fever of 102–105°F that lasts for 3–6 days. Some children are active and comfortable with no other symptoms during this stage of the illness, but others may also experience:  Typically, the symptoms of roseola go away suddenly on the sixth or seventh day of illness. After these symptoms have cleared up, the rash appears.  In most cases, the roseola rash:  The incubation period for roseola is 7–14 days, which means that symptoms may not appear until 1–2 weeks after becoming infected.  Antibiotics  do not work against roseola, but extra fluids and fever-reducing medicine can relieve symptoms.  Parents and caregivers should keep children with roseola out of school or day care until they have been free of fever for 24 hours without the use of medication. The rash from roseola is not contagious.  Up to  15 percent  of children with roseola may also experience a  febrile seizure , which can happen as a result of the high fever and the ability of the virus to cross into the brain.  During a febrile seizure, the child may:  Febrile seizures generally only last a few minutes. According to the  National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke , there is no evidence that short febrile seizures cause brain damage. Most children will recover without any problems.  However, the parent or caregiver should immediately call an ambulance if:  During the seizure, it is vital to:   Scarlet fever  results from an infection with group A  Streptococcus  bacteria. This type of bacteria can also cause  strep throat  and specific skin infections, such as  impetigo .  Infected children can pass on the bacteria through:  Symptoms of scarlet fever may include:  The rash from scarlet fever feels rough like sandpaper. It usually appears 1–2 days after the fever starts but can present up to 7 days later.  The area around the mouth usually remains pale, even if the rest of the face looks red. After the rash has faded, the skin may peel.  A child with symptoms of scarlet fever should see a doctor as soon as possible. In rare cases, group A strep infections can cause severe complications, such as heart or kidney problems.  Doctors treat scarlet fever with antibiotics. A child may return to school or day care once they have been taking antibiotics for at least 24 hours.  Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) is common in children under 5 years old. Several different viruses can cause this illness, and children can pass on the infection through:  HFMD often starts with a fever, but it may also cause a sore throat, lack of appetite, and malaise.  After about 1–2 days, sores and a rash may appear. The telltale signs of HFMD include:  Some toddlers might get all of these symptoms, while others may only get mildly sick without any other problems. A parent or caregiver should get advice from a doctor on when a child with scarlet fever should return to school or day care.  Although most cases of HFMD resolve on their own, the sores can be painful. If a child is unable to eat or drink, there is a risk of  dehydration . Children who are not eating or drinking or who seem very ill should see a doctor.  Fifth disease, known medically as  erythema infectiosum , is a viral infection that commonly occurs in toddlers. Parvovirus B19 is the virus responsible for the infection, which spreads easily through coughing and sneezing.  Symptoms of fifth disease may include:  Fifth disease is sometimes called slapped cheek syndrome because the rash causes the cheeks to appear red. Some toddlers may get a red, blotchy rash on their trunk, buttocks, arms, and legs a few days after the redness becomes apparent in the cheeks.  The rash may cause itching and tends to form a lacy pattern as it starts to fade. It can last for several weeks.  Most children recover from fifth disease without any problems. However, both children and adults with weakened immune systems can develop long-term complications.  As it is a viral illness, antibiotics are not effective against fifth disease. Plenty of fluids, rest, and pain relievers may be beneficial.  Usually, children can go back to school or day care once they have been fever-free for at least 24 hours. The rash is not contagious.  If a toddler is uncomfortable, medications that reduce pain and fever can relieve symptoms. Acetaminophen or ibuprofen are standard choices and are available over the counter (OTC).  When giving medication to a child:  Encourage the child to drink plenty of fluids. Popsicles or children's electrolyte drinks may be helpful if the child does not want water.  Fevers in toddlers are often due to illnesses that get better on their own. However, parents and caregivers should observe young children when they get a fever, rash, or other symptoms of an illness.  Call a doctor if a child of any age gets a rash after fever, or  if the child is :  This is essential even if the child does not seem unwell.  Fever and rashes are common in toddlers. Most of the time, the child will recover without any long-term problems. However, it is important to monitor symptoms closely.  If symptoms become worse or do not go away, see a doctor. Parents and caregivers who have any concerns about a child's illness should speak to a doctor.    
 Febrile seizures fact sheet [Fact sheet]. (2018, July 6).  Febrile seizures fact sheet [Fact sheet]. (2018, July 6).  Fever in infants and children. (2014, April 1).  Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD): Causes &amp; transmission (2017, December 22).  Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD): Signs &amp; symptoms (2017, December 22).  Infections: Fifth disease (2017, February).  Mullins, T. B., &amp; Krishnamurthy, K. (2017, December 4). Roseola infantum (exanthema subitum, sixth disease). In: StatPearls [Internet].  Parvovirus B19 and fifth disease: Fifth disease. (2015, November 2).  Roseola infantum. (2015, November 21).  Scarlet fever: A group A streptococcal infection. (2018, January 22).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "What can cause a rash after a fever in toddlers?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322690.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, August 6). "What can cause a rash after a fever in toddlers?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  