  Vitamin D  is fundamental in supporting several bodily processes, including:  There is no set consensus about how much  vitamin  D is necessary for good health. A person's daily requirement depends on individual factors, such as age, sex, and health status.  Many people get enough vitamin D from sun exposure.  Doctors tend to consider vitamin D levels to be  adequate  if there are at least 20 nanograms (ng) of the vitamin per milliliter (mL) of blood. If levels rise above 50 ng/mL, a person may experience adverse side effects.  However, most research indicates that the toxicity threshold for vitamin D is fairly high, around 200–240 ng/mL.  A person with levels of vitamin D in this range usually consumes between 10,000 and 40,000 international units (IUs) of the vitamin per day.  Below are some of the most serious side effects associated with overexposure to vitamin D.  Most of the significant side effects associated with vitamin D toxicity are related to hypercalcemia.  Hypercalcemia is an excess of calcium in the blood. This occurs when there are more than 10,4000 ng/mL of calcium in the blood.  Researchers often cite this threshold as  10.4 milligrams (mg)  of calcium per deciliter of blood or as 0.104 mg/mL.  There is a strong relationship between vitamin D and calcium. When there are high levels of vitamin D metabolites in the blood, this increases the amount of calcium that the intestines absorb.  High levels of vitamin D metabolites can also promote the release of calcium from the bones into the bloodstream.  Having too much calcium in the blood can lead to a wide range of complications and symptoms. Some of the most serious include:  Excess calcium in the bloodstream can bind with phosphate and form crystals that deposit in soft body tissues.  These crystals can cause tissue damage and eventually organ damage, depending on their location, number, and size.  The kidney is especially vulnerable to calcium deposits because of its role as a filter and its many small passageways.  When calcium deposits get stuck in kidney tissues, nephrocalcinosis can occur. If this condition is severe, it can cause permanent kidney damage and, eventually, kidney failure.  Symptoms of nephrocalcinosis include:  Authors of a  2015 review  considered the effects of vitamin D3 toxicity.  On average, the people affected had taken a total of 3,600,000 IU of the vitamin in fewer than 3 months. They experienced several side effects, including acute kidney damage.  Extreme hypercalcemia can reduce or change the ability of the heart's cells to function, and people with severe hypercalcemia often experience irregularities in the heartbeat.  A person with severely high levels of calcium or phosphate in the blood may also develop calcium deposits, or plaques, in the arteries or valves of the heart.  In 2012, doctors  reported  the case of a 70-year-old woman who received calcium injections in the equivalent of 80,000 IU/day over 30 days.  She experienced hypercalcemia and complete heart blockage, which required a permanent pacemaker.  Some signs of heart complications associated with vitamin D toxicity include:  When there is too much calcium circulating freely in the bloodstream, the body may not have enough hormones to bind the mineral to the bones effectively.  Vitamin D toxicity can cause hypercalcemia and subsequent problems with the bones. Some symptoms include:  Elevated levels of calcium in the blood can harm the kidney's ability to concentrate urine.  This can result in a person producing and passing unusually large quantities of urine, which is called  polyuria .  Researchers are not entirely sure why this occurs. One theory is that high calcium levels reduce the effects of antidiuretic hormones.  These hormones encourage the kidneys to retain water, and fewer hormones may result in larger quantities of diluted urine.  When a person passes a lot of diluted urine, they lose large quantities of water and electrolytes. For this reason, a person with vitamin D toxicity may be prone to  dehydration .  Symptoms of moderate dehydration include:  Severe dehydration can result in life-threatening conditions. Other signs and symptoms of this condition include:  Hypercalcemia can cause  acute pancreatitis , which is the term for  inflammation  of the pancreas.  In 2017, researchers published a  review  of the features and treatment of vitamin D toxicity-induced acute kidney injury.  They studied the experiences of 19 people with the toxicity. Each had taken an average of 6,000,000 IU of the vitamin over 1–3 months.  Two of the 19 people experienced acute pancreatitis as a complication.  Signs of  pancreatitis  include:  When high levels of calcium and phosphate in the blood bind to form crystals, these deposit in soft tissues.  The crystals are especially likely to deposit in soft-tissue organs that act as filters, such as the lungs.  If many of these calcium salt deposits, or ectopic calcifications, are present in the lungs, they can impair the organ's function.  Some signs of the resulting lung damage include:  Many people take high doses of vitamin D supplements, and the rate of adverse side effects is relatively low.  However, long-term or excessive consumption of vitamin D in supplements or foods can cause adverse side effects.  The body stores vitamin D in fat tissues, and it can take  weeks or months  for the effects of vitamin D toxicity to fully wear off.  However, some prescription formulas contain a combination of vitamin D and calcitriol. A person with vitamin D toxicity who has taken this combination will usually recover within  a few days  because calcitriol breaks down quickly in the body.  Vitamin D supplements are not right for everyone.  The supplements can interact with some medications. People on any of the following medicines should consult a doctor before taking vitamin D supplements:  Also, some medical conditions can increase sensitivity to vitamin D. A person with any of the following conditions should consult a doctor before using vitamin D supplements:  Most people who have taken too much vitamin D will experience at least two of the following symptoms within a few days of overdosing:  People with severe or chronic vitamin D toxicity may develop life-threatening symptoms, including:  Vitamin D toxicity can cause a wide range of symptoms, and each individual may respond differently.  A person has a higher risk of experiencing toxicity if they have taken supplements over an extended period or taken excessive amounts. This can cause vitamin D to build up in the blood.  The risk of experiencing adverse side effects after absorbing vitamin D from the diet or exposure to the sun is very low.    
 Alshahrani, F., &amp; Aljohani, N. (2013, September 13). Vitamin D: Deficiency, sufficiency and toxicity.  Nutrients ,  5 (9), 3,605–3,616.  Alshahrani, F., &amp; Aljohani, N. (2013, September 13). Vitamin D: Deficiency, sufficiency and toxicity.  Nutrients ,  5 (9), 3,605–3,616.  Chowdry, A. M., Azad, H., Najar, M. S., &amp; Mir, I. (2017). Acute kidney injury due to overcorrection of hypovitaminosis D: A tertiary center experience in the Kashmir Valley of India.  Saudi Journal of Kidney Diseases and Transplantation ,  28 (6), 1,321–1,329.  Dudenkov, D. V., Yawn, B. P., Oberhelman, S. S., Fischer, P. R., Singh, R. J., Cha, S. S., … Thacher, T. D. (2016, May 1). Changing incidence of serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D values above 50 ng/mL: A 10-year population-based study.  Mayo Clinic Proceedings ,  90 (5), 577–586.  Garg, G., Khadgwat, R., Khandelwal, D., &amp; Gupta, N. (2012, December). Vitamin D toxicity presenting as hypercalcemia and complete heart block: An interesting case report.  Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism ,  16 (2), S423–S425.  Genzen, J. R. (2014, May 1). Hypercalcemic crisis due to vitamin D toxicity.  Laboratory Medicine ,  45 (2), 147–150.  Gupta, A. K., Jamwal, V., Sakul, &amp; Malhotra, P. (2014, October–December). Hypervitaminosis D and systemic manifestations: A comprehensive review.  Journal of the International Medical Sciences Academy ,  27 (4), 236–237.  Hypercalcemia. (2017, January).  Kaur, P., Mishra, S. K., &amp; Mithal, A. (2015, June 3). Vitamin D toxicity resulting from overzealous correction of vitamin D deficiency.  Clinical Endocrinology ,  83 (3), 327–331.  Koul, P. A., Ahmad, S. H., Ahmad, F., Jan, R. A., Shah, S. U., &amp; Khan, U. H. (2011, May). Vitamin D toxicity in adults: A case series from an area with endemic hypovitaminosis D.  Clinical Endocrinology ,  26 (3), 201–204.  Lewis, J. L. (2018, March). Hypercalcemia.  Nephrocalcinosis. (2017, April 17).  Osteoporosis overview. (2017, February).  Pancreatitis. (n.d.).  Rehydration therapy. (2018, May 15).  Vitamin D [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Vogiatzi, M. G., Jacobson-Dickman, E., &amp; DeBoer, M. D. (2014, April 1). Vitamin D supplementation and risk of toxicity in pediatrics: A review of current literature.  The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism ,  99 (4), 1,132–1,141.  Wang, J., Zhou, J. J., Robertson, G. R., &amp; Lee, V. W. (2018, May). Vitamin D in vascular calcification: A double-edged sword?  Nutrients ,  10 (5), 652.  Wells, J. (2017, March 15). Shining the light on vitamin D supplementing.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Can too much vitamin D hurt you?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322602.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, July 27). "Can too much vitamin D hurt you?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  