 Doctors call it a chemical pregnancy because levels of the hormone human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) are initially elevated enough to produce a positive result on a pregnancy test but dip again before a doctor can see the gestational sac on an  ultrasound .  Many women may not even know that they have experienced a chemical pregnancy if they are not regularly taking pregnancy tests.  In this article, learn more about chemical pregnancies, including the signs and symptoms, causes, and outlook.  The clearest indication of a chemical pregnancy is a positive pregnancy test result that is followed by a negative one.  These tests can take place either at the doctor's office or at home.  A chemical pregnancy does not always cause symptoms.  If it does, they may include:  Advances in pregnancy tests mean that women can now identify pregnancies as early as the first day of embryo implantation.  However, research shows that up to  25 percent  of pregnancies result in miscarriage before a woman has any pregnancy symptoms or misses a period.  The symptoms listed above can also occur with a healthy, ongoing pregnancy. If a woman believes that there are any issues with her early pregnancy, she should talk to a doctor.  A chemical pregnancy does not usually require medical intervention or treatment.  It is not always possible to determine the exact cause of a chemical pregnancy. However, potential causes or contributing factors may include:  Most women can attempt to get pregnant again almost immediately after an early pregnancy loss unless a doctor advises otherwise.  According to the  American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists , it is possible to ovulate and become pregnant again as soon as 2 weeks after an early pregnancy loss.  If a woman has experienced a chemical pregnancy in the past, this does not mean that she will have difficulty conceiving in the future.  In fact, a chemical pregnancy means that an embryo reached the preimplantation phase of development. This is a positive sign that a woman could get pregnant in the future.  According to  older research , women who had a chemical pregnancy in their first IVF cycle were more likely to have a successful pregnancy in a subsequent IVF cycle than women who did not become pregnant during the first cycle.  Pregnancy loss at any stage can cause grief,  anxiety , and  stress . A woman should not hesitate to seek care from a doctor, counselor, or support group. They can also consider  online support groups .  It is crucial to remember that nobody is to blame for a chemical pregnancy. A person with a history of pregnancy loss can still go on to have a healthy pregnancy and birth.  Chemical pregnancies are those that typically end in the first few weeks after an initially positive pregnancy test. A woman's hCG levels rise enough to produce a positive test initially, but the pregnancy does not continue, and the levels fall soon after.  While a chemical pregnancy can be disappointing, it does indicate that a woman is likely to be able to conceive in subsequent pregnancy attempts.  If a woman has several chemical pregnancies, she should talk to a doctor about potential underlying causes.    
 Allison, J. L., Sherwood, R. S., &amp; Schust, D. J. (2011). Management of first trimester pregnancy loss can be safely moved into the office.  Reviews in Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  4 (1), 5–14.  Allison, J. L., Sherwood, R. S., &amp; Schust, D. J. (2011). Management of first trimester pregnancy loss can be safely moved into the office.  Reviews in Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  4 (1), 5–14.  Annan, J. J. W., Gudi, A., Bhide, P., Shah, A., &amp; Homburg, R. (2013, August).  Journal of Clinical Medicine Research ,  5 (4), 269–274.  Early pregnancy loss. (2015, August).  Huan, Z., Yongping, L, Lu, L., Min, Z., Xingzhi, C., &amp; Yulong, Q. (2016, July 26). Maternal pre-pregnancy risk factors for miscarriage from a prevention perspective: A cohort study in China.  European Journal of Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology and Reproductive Biology ,  206 (2016), 57–63.  Pearson, K. R., Hauser, R., Cramer, D. W., &amp; Missmer, S A. (2009, April). Point of failure as a predictor of  in vitro  Fertilization treatment discontinuation. Fertility and Sterility,   91  (Supp. 4), 1483–1485.  Prine, L. W., &amp; MacNaughton, H. (2011, July 1). Office management of early pregnancy loss.  American Family Physician ,  84 (1), 75–82.  Vitzthum, V. J., Spielvogel, H., Thornburg, J., &amp; West, B. (2006, August). A prospective study of early pregnancy loss in humans [Abstract].  Fertility and Sterility ,  86 (2), 373–379.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What to know about a chemical pregnancy."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322678.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, August 3). "What to know about a chemical pregnancy."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  