 The  tailbone  is triangular and consists of between three and five semi-fused bones. In humans, it is a non-functioning tail.  Many pelvic floor muscles insert into the tailbone, so injuries to this area may affect them too. These muscles assist in defecation, running, walking, and moving the legs. The pelvic floor also supports the vagina.  Performing specific stretches may help to relieve tension in the tailbone. In this article, we explain the tailbone stretches that people can use to relieve pain.  People will typically have  coccydynia , or persistent tailbone pain, when they are sitting or when something is putting pressure on the lower spine.   Sitting  in the wrong position, falling backward, childbirth, and hypermobility can all injure the bone itself or the surrounding tissue and muscles. Tailbone pain is more common in females than in males.  In addition to relieving the pain of coccydynia, treatment should reduce  inflammation  and ease muscle tension.  A recent  study  found that people with coccydynia benefited from performing exercises to increase thoracic spine mobility and to stretch the piriformis and iliopsoas muscles in the buttocks and hips.  These exercises reduced the participants' pain when sitting and increased the amount of pressure that they could withstand on the lower back before feeling pain.  The exercises below may help to relieve tailbone pain:  This stretches the piriformis and the iliopsoas muscles, both of which can become tight and limit mobility in the pelvis. The piriformis originates from the tailbone and can irritate the sciatic nerve if it becomes inflamed.  Gently increasing the stretch over time will allow the range of movement to expand.  This stretches the  piriformis  as well as the glutes. The glutes are attached to the tailbone and walking or running can cause them to pull on it.  The iliopsoas refers to the joined iliacus and psoas muscles. These hip muscles help the hip to flex.  Stretching them can help to relieve tailbone pain as they often become stiff with prolonged sitting.  The kneel and twist exercise stretches the iliopsoas while also improving mobility through the lower back.  A tight, immobile lower back can lead to lower  back pain . This can result in other muscles, such as the pelvic floor and hip-opening muscles, becoming tight to compensate.  If the tailbone is sore and inflamed, overactive pelvic floor and hip-opening muscles will worsen these symptoms.  This stretch is a  yoga  pose that helps to open the hips. It stretches the iliopsoas, as well as the glute muscles on the bent leg.  This pose is not suitable for people with knee problems.  The exercises above address some of the causes of tailbone pain.  As with all stretches and exercises, it is crucial to remain within a range of motion that does not cause pain or injury.  In addition to these exercises, other treatment methods may help to prevent and manage tailbone pain. These include:  If tailbone pain is persistent, it is best to visit a doctor or  physical therapist .  To prevent tailbone pain, people should avoid prolonged sitting and high impact exercises, such as running and jumping. High impact exercises may aggravate any inflammation and cause the pelvic and hip muscles to tighten further.  Tailbone injuries will heal over time. Until this occurs, treatments such as  physical therapy , stretching, and seat cushioning should help to relieve pain and discomfort.    
 Falótico, G. G., Torquato, D. F., Roim, T. C., Takata, E. T., de Castro Pochini, A., &amp; Ejnisman, B. (2015, July–August). Gluteal pain in athletes: How should it be investigated and treated?  Revista Brasileira de Ortopedia ,  50 (4), 462–468.  Falótico, G. G., Torquato, D. F., Roim, T. C., Takata, E. T., de Castro Pochini, A., &amp; Ejnisman, B. (2015, July–August). Gluteal pain in athletes: How should it be investigated and treated?  Revista Brasileira de Ortopedia ,  50 (4), 462–468.  Mohanty, P. P., &amp; Pattnaik, M. (2017, July). Effect of stretching of piriformis and iliopsoas in coccydynia [Abstract].  Journal of Bodywork and Movement Therapies ,  21 (3), 743–746.  Revord, J. P. (2012, September 14). Piriformis muscle stretch and physical therapy.  Smallwood Lirette, L., Chaiban, G., Tolba, R., &amp; Eissa, H. (2014, Spring). Coccydynia: An overview of the anatomy, etiology, and treatment of coccyx pain.  The Ochsner Journal ,  14 (1), 84–87.  Staehler, R. A. (2017, January 13). Anatomy of the coccyx (tailbone).  Staehler, R. A. (2017, January 13). Coccydynia (tailbone pain).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "How do you stretch out your tailbone?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322610.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, July 27). "How do you stretch out your tailbone?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  