 Some conditions and situations that affect the holes in the tonsils can cause  inflammation , a  sore throat , and other bothersome symptoms. Learn more about them and what to do in this article.  Tonsils are gland-like structures at the back of the throat. They contain cells called lymphocytes that help fight off and protect the body from infections.  Tonsils help trap bacteria and viruses that enter via the throat, stopping them before they reach other parts of the body.  Holes in the tonsils can inform the immune system about what a person is ingesting through their mouth.  But, because of their role in tackling bacteria and viruses, tonsils are also susceptible to infections.  If the tonsils become swollen, then inflammation, debris, or the formation of scar tissue due to another condition may block the holes.  Several conditions can affect the holes in the tonsils and put a person at risk of infection, including:   Tonsillitis    Tonsillitis  occurs when the tonsils become inflamed, usually due to a viral or bacterial infection. Both children and adults can get tonsillitis, though it is  more likely  to occur in children.  A person with tonsillitis may be able to feel the swollen glands in their neck. Other symptoms of tonsillitis include:   Strep throat    Strep throat  is a form of tonsillitis. This infection of the throat and tonsils  more commonly  occurs in children. A person gets strep throat by coming into contact with group A  Streptococcus  bacteria.  Strep throat is infectious and passed on through the germs in coughs and sneezes. It is also possible for people to develop strep throat by coming into contact with open sores on an infected person's skin.  Symptoms of strep throat include:  Less common symptoms include:   Mononucleosis   Mononucleosis, or "mono," is another condition that can cause the holes in the tonsils to become inflamed.  Symptoms of mono include:  Mono is infectious and is  most common  in young adults, including teenagers, and particularly college students.  The most common cause of  infectious mononucleosis  is the transmission of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) from person to person. However, some other virus types may also cause it.  Symptoms can take around 4 to 6 weeks to develop after a person is infected with EBV.   Poor oral hygiene   If a person does not practice good oral hygiene, a buildup of bacteria could cause an infection in the tonsils.  Symptoms of poor oral hygiene include:   Tonsil stones   Tonsil stones can occur when debris, such as food, dead cells, or bacteria, become trapped in the holes in the tonsils and calcify, forming hard stones.  People with chronic inflammation in their tonsils or those who experience reoccurring bouts of tonsillitis may be more likely to develop tonsil stones.  Sometimes, tonsil stones can grow, making holes in the tonsils larger and possibly prolonging an infection.  Symptoms of tonsil stones include:  For many people, tonsil stones cause no symptoms and they do not need to treat them.   Oral and tonsil cancer   In rare cases, people link holes in the tonsils to  oral cancer  that impacts a person's tonsils.  Signs and symptoms of oral cancer include:  While a doctor will not treat the holes in the tonsils, they may need to address the underlying cause of any symptoms.  Treatment will depend on the underlying problem, such as:   Tonsillitis   A person with tonsillitis does not necessarily need treatment, as the body can sometimes fight off the infection by itself.  A doctor may recommend drinking plenty of fluids, resting, and taking over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers to minimize discomfort.  If symptoms persist beyond 3 to 4 days or get increasingly severe, a person should see a doctor. The doctor may also test for a strep infection and prescribe  antibiotics  or other medications, as needed.   Strep throat   If a person thinks they have strep throat, they should also make an appointment to see a doctor.  A doctor will examine the throat and do a throat swab to check for group A strep bacteria.  Strep throat may need antibiotics to treat the infection, so it does not cause problems later.  Antibiotics also help reduce symptoms and prevent the spread of infection to other people.   Mononucleosis   Treatment for mono may vary depending on its severity. If a person's organs have become inflamed, a doctor may suggest treatment to target those symptoms.  A person with mono should also:  Doctors do not recommend treating mono with  penicillin  antibiotics, such as ampicillin or amoxicillin.  If a person's spleen becomes enlarged due to mono, they should avoid contact sports or other intense physical activity. Taking part in strenuous exercise could cause the spleen to rupture.   Poor oral hygiene   People can improve their oral hygiene practices by:   Tonsil stones   Treatment for tonsil stones will depend on how large the stones are, and whether or not they are causing any symptoms.  Smaller stones can often be dislodged by gargling salt water. If this does not work, a person may want to talk to their doctor who may use lasers or sound waves to dislodge the stones.  A doctor may also suggest a simple surgical procedure if the stones are large and difficult to remove.  Occasionally, people may find it is helpful to use antibiotics to treat tonsil stones and their side effects, particularly if they cause an infection.   Oral and tonsil cancer   Treatment for oral and tonsil  cancer  will depend on the type of cancer, its stage at diagnosis, and whether it has spread. Treatment could include surgery,  chemotherapy , or  radiotherapy , or sometimes more than one of these.  While holes in the tonsils are normal, a buildup of debris or bacterial or viral infection in the tonsils can cause health problems.  The best way to reduce the risk of complications from holes in the tonsils is by maintaining good oral hygiene, not smoking, and frequently washing the hands.    
 Chan, J., Rashid, M., &amp; Karagama, Y. (2012, April 17). An unusual case of a tonsillolith.  Case Reports in Medicine ,  2012 , 587503.  Chan, J., Rashid, M., &amp; Karagama, Y. (2012, April 17). An unusual case of a tonsillolith.  Case Reports in Medicine ,  2012 , 587503.  Epstein-Barr virus and infectious mononucleosis. (2018, May 8).  Oral cancer. (2018, June 19).  Stoodley, P., deBeer, D., Longwell, M., Nistico, L., Hall-Stoodley, L., Wenig, B., &amp; Krespi, Y. P. (2009, September 1). Tonsillolith: Not just a stone but a living biofilm [Abstract].  Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery ,  141 (3), 316–321.  Tonsil cancer. (n.d.).  Tonsillectomy 101. (2017, October 17).  Tonsillitis. (2018, January 11).  Tonsils and adenoids. (n.d.).  Worried your sore throat may be strep? (2018, January 31).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Are holes in tonsils normal?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322664.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, August 2). "Are holes in tonsils normal?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  