 Your menstrual cycle is counted from the first day of your last period to the start of your next period. Your period is considered irregular if it's longer than 38 days or if the duration varies.   Irregular periods  can have several causes, from hormonal imbalances to other underlying conditions, and should be evaluated by your doctor. Here's a look at the possible causes and their symptoms.  Pregnancy can cause you to miss your period or experience  spotting . Other  symptoms of early pregnancy  may include:  If you miss a period or notice changes in your period and you've had sex, you can take a pregnancy test at home or see your doctor to find out if you're pregnant.  If you may be pregnant and experience sharp, stabbing pain in the pelvis or abdomen that lasts more than a few minutes, see your doctor right away to rule out  ectopic pregnancy  or  miscarriage .   Hormonal birth control pills  and hormone-containing  intrauterine devices (IUDs)  can cause irregular bleeding.   Birth control  pills may cause spotting between periods and result in much lighter periods.  An IUD may cause heavy bleeding.  Prolactin is a hormone that's responsible for breast milk production. Prolactin suppresses your reproductive hormones resulting in very light periods or no period at all while you're breastfeeding.  Your periods should return shortly after you stop breastfeeding.  Read on to learn more the effects of breastfeeding on your period .   Perimenopause  is the transition phase before you enter  menopause . It usually begins in your 40s, but can occur earlier.  You may experience signs and symptoms lasting from  4 to 8 years , beginning with changes to your menstrual cycle. Fluctuating  estrogen  levels during this time can cause your menstrual cycles to get longer or shorter.  Other signs and symptoms of perimenopause include:  Irregular periods are the most common sign of  PCOS . If you have PCOS, you may miss periods and have heavy bleeding when you do get your period.  PCOS can also cause:  A 2015  study  found that 44 percent of participants with menstrual irregularities also had thyroid disorders.   Hypothyroidism , or underactive thyroid, can cause longer, heavier periods and increased cramping. You may also experience fatigue, sensitivity to cold, and weight gain.  High levels of thyroid hormones, which is seen in  hyperthyroidism , can cause shorter, lighter periods. You may also experience:  Swelling at the base of your neck is another common sign of a thyroid disorder.   Fibroids  are muscular tumors that develop in the wall of the uterus.  Most fibroids  are noncancerous and can range in size from as small as an apple seed to the size of a grapefruit.   Fibroids  can cause your periods to be very painful and heavy enough to cause  anemia . You may also experience:  Most fibroids don't require treatment and symptoms can be managed with over-the-counter (OTC) pain medications and an iron supplement if you develop  anemia .   Endometriosis  affects  1 in 10  women of reproductive age. This is a condition in which the tissue that normally lines your uterus grows outside the uterus.   Endometriosis  causes very painful, even debilitating menstrual cramps. Endometriosis also causes heavy bleeding, prolonged periods, and bleeding between periods.  Other symptoms may include:  Exploratory surgery is the only way to diagnose endometriosis. There's currently no cure for the condition, but symptoms can be managed with medication or hormone therapy.   Obesity  is known to cause menstrual irregularity.  Research  shows that being overweight impacts hormone and  insulin  levels, which can interfere with your menstrual cycle.  Rapid weight gain can also cause menstrual irregularities. Weight gain and irregular periods are common signs of PCOS and  hypothyroidism , and should be evaluated by your doctor.  Excessive or rapid weight loss can cause your  period to stop . Not consuming enough  calories  can interfere with the production of the hormones needed for  ovulation .  You're considered underweight if you have a  body mass index  lower than 18.5. Along with stopped periods, you may also experience fatigue,  headaches , and  hair loss .  See your doctor if:  Intense or excessive exercise  has been shown  to interfere with the hormones responsible for menstruation.  Female athletes and women who participate in intensive training and physical activities, such as ballet dancers, often develop  amenorrhea , which is missed or stopped periods.  Cutting back on your training and increasing your calorie count can help restore your periods.   Research  shows that  stress  can interfere with your menstrual cycle by temporarily interfering with the part of the brain that controls the hormones that regulate your cycle. Your periods should return to normal after your stress decreases.  Try these 16 techniques to relieve your stress .  Certain medications can interfere with your menstrual cycle, including:  Speak to your doctor about changing your medication.   Cervical  and  endometrial cancers  can cause changes to your menstrual cycle, along with bleeding between periods or heavy periods. Bleeding during or after intercourse and unusual discharge are other signs and symptoms of these  cancers .  Remember that these symptoms are more commonly caused by other issues. Speak to your doctor if you're concerned.  There are several possible causes of irregular periods, many of which require medical treatment. Make an appointment to see your doctor if:  Your doctor will ask about your medical history and want to know about:  Medical tests may also be used to help diagnose the cause of your irregular bleeding, including:  Treatment depends on what's causing your irregular periods and may require treating an underlying medical condition. Your doctor may recommend one or more of the following treatments:  Stress reduction techniques may also help, including:  Tracking your period is a good idea even when your period is regular. You can track your period on a calendar or in a notebook, or use one of the many  period tracking apps  available.  Begin tracking your period by marking the first day of your period on a calendar. Within a few months you'll begin to see if your periods are regular or different each month.  Keep track of the following:  Irregular periods can be caused by a number of things, some of them serious. Your doctor can help you determine the cause and help you get your cycle back on track. Eating a balanced diet, getting regular exercise, and avoiding stress can also help.    
 Ajmani, N. S., Sarbhai, V., Yadav, N., Paul, M., Ahmed, A., &amp; Ajmani, A. K. (2016, April). Role of thyroid dysfunction in patients with menstrual disorders in tertiary care center of walled city of Delhi.  The Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology of India, 66 (2), 115-119.  Ajmani, N. S., Sarbhai, V., Yadav, N., Paul, M., Ahmed, A., &amp; Ajmani, A. K. (2016, April). Role of thyroid dysfunction in patients with menstrual disorders in tertiary care center of walled city of Delhi.  The Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology of India, 66 (2), 115-119.  Cho, G. J., Han, S. W., Shin, J. W., &amp; Kim, T. (2017, May). Effects of intensive training on menstrual function and certain serum hormones and peptides related to the female reproductive system.  Medicine (United States), 96 (21), e6876.  Endometriosis. (2017, January 31).  Endometriosis fact sheet. (2014, March 13).  Harris, H. R., Titus, L. J., Cramer, D. W., &amp; Terry, K. L. (2016, October 6). Long and irregular menstrual cycles, polycystic ovary syndrome, and ovarian cancer risk in a population‐based case‐control study.  International Journal of Cancer, 140 (2), 285-291.  Irregular periods. (2018, April 9).  Jukic, A. Z. M., Steiner, A. Z. S., &amp; Baird, D. D. (2015, March 11). Lower plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D is associated with irregular menstrual cycles in a cross-sectional study.  Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology, 13 (20).  Lashen, H. (2010, August 11). Review: Role of metformin in the management of polycystic ovary syndrome.  Therapeutic Advances in Endocrinology and Metabolism, 1 (3), 117-128.  Menstrual cycle: What’s normal, what’s not. (2016, May 11).  Menopause 101: A primer for the perimenopausal. (n.d.).  Nagma, S., Kapoor, G., Bharti, R., Batra, A., Batra, A., Aggarwal, A., &amp; Sablock, A. (2015, March). To evaluate the effect of perceived stress on menstrual function.  Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research, 9 (3).  Nicholson, F., Rolland, C., Broom, J., &amp; Love, J. (2010, November 10). Effectiveness of long-term (twelve months) nonsurgical weight loss interventions for obese women with polycystic ovary syndrome: A systematic review.  International Journal of Women's Health, 2,  393-399.  Signs and symptoms of cervical cancer. (2016, December 5).  Signs and symptoms of endometrial cancer. (2016, February 29).  Tehrani, H. G., Mostajeran, F., &amp; Shahsavari, S. (2014, September). The effect of calcium and vitamin D supplementation on menstrual cycle, body mass index and hyperandrogenism state of women with poly cystic ovarian syndrome.  Journal of Research in Medical Sciences, 19 (9), 875–880.  Uterine fibroids. (2018, March 16).  Wei, S., Schmidt, M. D., Dwyer, T., Norman, R. J., &amp; Venn, A. J. (2012, September 6). Obesity and menstrual irregularity: Associations with SHBG, testosterone, and insulin. Obseity: A Research Journal, 17(5), 1070-1076.  What are the common treatments for menstrual irregularities? (2017, January 31).  What causes menstrual irregularities? (2017, January 31).  What happens during the typical 28-day menstrual cycle? (2018, March 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Santos-Longhurst, Adrienne. "14 possible causes for irregular periods."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322643.php&gt;    APA  Santos-Longhurst, A. (2018, August 1). "14 possible causes for irregular periods."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  