 Growing pains are a common cause of  leg pain  in children. These pains are muscle aches that can occur in the thighs, behind the knees, or the calves.  Other possible causes of leg pain that may be more serious can include juvenile idiopathic  arthritis  (JIA),  lupus ,  Lyme disease , and  leukemia .  In this article, we look at what we commonly refer to as 'growing pains,' what they are, and how people can treat them at home. We also cover other possible causes of joint pains in children and when to see a doctor.  Research suggests that more than  30 percent  of school children experience chronic musculoskeletal pain. In around half of these children, the pain is due to growing pains.  Growing pains most often occur during a child's preschool and preteen years, and they usually disappear by their teenage years. These pains are harmless and are not a sign of a serious condition.  Growing pains typically occur in the thigh and calf muscles or behind the knees, but sometimes can also happen in the arms. Children with these types of youthful pains may experience cramps or aches that can range from mild to severe.  Characteristics of growing pains may include:  People used to think that growing pains were the result of the bones growing during growth spurts. However, doctors no longer believe this to be the case, as there is no evidence that growth causes pain.  Growing pains may simply be aches that result from children running, jumping, and climbing while playing, during the day.  Growing pains may also be related to other factors, such as  fatigue ,  restless leg syndrome , low pain tolerance, or even  vitamin D deficiency .  There is no specific treatment for growing pains. However, the following home remedies can help ease a child's discomfort:  People should not give  aspirin  to children. Doctors do not recommend aspirin for children, as they have linked it with a rare but serious condition called Reye's syndrome.  Joint pains in children can sometimes be a sign of a more serious underlying condition, including:  If a child frequently complains of joint pain, then juvenile idiopathic arthritis or JIA may be the cause.  JIA can cause pain and swelling in one or more joints. Unlike growing pains, it can also affect a child's movement or strength.  There are several different types of JIA and symptoms can vary, so it can be difficult for a doctor to diagnose. However, early diagnosis and treatment are vital because JIA can affect bone growth and lead to permanent complications.  Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), or lupus, is an autoimmune disorder that can affect nearly every organ in the body. Lupus is  very uncommon  in younger children, but becomes more common in the teenage years, especially in females.  Lupus causes many different symptoms including:  Lupus is a long-term condition, and symptoms can range in their severity. However, early diagnosis and treatment can improve the outlook.  Insects called ticks can spread a bacterial infection known as Lyme disease. The ticks carry a bacterium called  Borrelia burgdorferi  that they pass onto people when they bite them. These ticks tend to live in grassy areas and woodlands in particular regions and feed on animals, such as mice and deer.  Symptoms of Lyme disease include:  Anyone who lives or spends time in an area where Lyme disease occurs can become infected, but children who spend a lot of time playing outside are at greater risk.  To prevent Lyme disease, children should wear long pants and long-sleeved shirts. Parents or caregivers should also check the child's whole body for tick bites after they have played outdoors.  Following a tick bite, it can take up to 3 weeks for the rash to appear. Joint pain can sometimes be the first and only symptom in children.  Early diagnosis and treatment of Lyme disease are critical to prevent severe complications. Anyone who suspects an infected tick has bitten their child should see a doctor, as soon as possible.  Leukemia is a  cancer  of the blood that starts inside the  bone marrow . It is the most common type of cancer in children. Leukemia can cause joint and bone pain, usually along with other symptoms.  The symptoms and their severity vary, according to the type of leukemia and can include:  The treatment options and outlook also depend on the type of leukemia that a doctor diagnoses in a child.  Growing pains are a common cause of leg pains in children and usually disappear, as the individual gets older. However, if the pain is persistent, severe, or unusual, the child should see a doctor.  They should also consult a doctor if the joint pains occur alongside any of the following symptoms:  The doctor will conduct a physical exam and may need to run tests to find the underlying cause.  Parents and caregivers frequently worry when children have pains in their legs and joints. Close to a third of school-aged children may have these types of pains, which usually get better on their own, and may be due solely to exercise and healthy playing.  If the pains are accompanied by any other symptoms or an adult is particularly concerned, they should consult a doctor for further investigation, as some pains may indicate a condition that needs medical intervention.    
 Growing pains. (2015, June).  Growing pains. (2015, June).  Harris, S. H. (2013, August). Parents &amp; teachers: Growing pains.  Juvenile-onset lupus. (n.d.).  Leukemia. (n.d.).  Levy, D. M., &amp; Kamphuis, S. (2013, April 1). Systemic lupus erythematosus in children and adolescents.  Pediatric Clinics of North America ,  59 (2), 345–64.  Sperotto, F., Balzarin, M., Parolin, M., Monteforte, N., Vittadello, F., &amp; Zulian, F. (2014, January–February). Joint hypermobility, growing pains and obesity are mutually exclusive as causes of musculoskeletal pain in schoolchildren [Abstract].  Clinical and Experimental Rheumatology ,  32 (1), 131–136.  Ticks and Lyme disease. (n.d.).  Uziel, Y., &amp; Hashkes, P. J. (2007, April 19). Growing pains in children.  Pediatric Rheumatology ,  5 , 5.  Vehapoglu, A., Turel, O., Turkmen, S., Inal, B. B., Aksoy, T., Ozgurhan, G., &amp; Ersoy, M. (2015, May 27). Are growing pains related to vitamin D deficiency? Efficacy of vitamin D therapy for resolution of symptoms.  Medical Principles and Practice ,  24 (4), 332–338.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Brosek, Shannon. "What can cause joint pains in children?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322617.php&gt;    APA  Brosek, S. (2018, July 30). "What can cause joint pains in children?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  