 People may perform the maneuver regularly without knowing it. For example, they may use it when they push to initiate a bowel movement.  However, this technique can also be beneficial when people use it intentionally as it can regulate heart rhythms and help the ears to pop.  The physician Antonio Maria Valsalva first described the technique in the 1700s as a way to clear  pus  out of the ears.  To do the Valsalva maneuver, follow these steps:  An alternative method involves lying down and blowing into an empty syringe for 15 seconds.  The Valsalva maneuver creates numerous effects in the body because it builds up the pressure in the pleural cavity, known as the intrapleural pressure.  This increased pressure can lead to the compression of the chambers of the heart and key blood vessels in the body, including:  The compression of the aorta initially causes the  blood pressure  to rise. A sensor in the carotid artery, called the baroreceptor, detects the increased blood pressure.  This activates parasympathetic fibers, which quickly reduce the heart rate and blood pressure. Doctors sometimes refer to this effect as vagaling.  The Valsalva maneuver reduces cardiac output, which is the amount of blood that the heart puts out with every beat. The individual may feel lightheaded or dizzy as a result.  Once the baroreceptor senses the decrease in heart rate and blood pressure, it will stimulate the sympathetic nervous system. This can cause a person's heart rate and blood pressure to increase, offsetting the parasympathetic effects.  However, when a person breathes out, this releases the compression on the heart, allowing it to fill back up with blood. Breathing out increases the pressure inside the aorta, stimulating the parasympathetic nervous system and decreasing the heart rate again.  Doctors can use the Valsalva maneuver to treat people with supraventricular  tachycardia  (SVT).  SVT is a rapid heart rate that is typically  over 100 beats per minute at rest . It can cause symptoms including heart palpitations, chest pain, and shortness of breath.  A heart rate of this speed can be dangerous because the heart cannot pump enough blood when it beats so quickly.  SVT often requires emergency treatment. Once emergency responders have identified a person's heart rhythm and determined that their blood pressure is stable, they may demonstrate how to perform the Valsalva maneuver.  According to a report in the   Journal of the American College of Cardiology  , the Valsalva maneuver was more effective in slowing down the heart rate than other similar procedures, such as carotid sinus massage or applying an ice-cold towel to the face.  A meta-analysis found that the Valsalva maneuver can restore regular heart rate  between 19.4 and 54.3 percent  of the time.  If the Valsalva maneuver does not normalize the heart rhythm, a person will need to receive electric shocks, called cardioversion, or medications.  These approaches can cause unpleasant side effects, such as chest pain, pressure, and flushing.  The Valsalva maneuver has other uses too. These include:  Weightlifters also tend to perform the Valsalva maneuver when they lift heavy weights. Some may try this technique deliberately while others will not realize that they are using it.  It is a common belief that using the Valsalva maneuver when lifting heavy weights can provide momentum and trunk stabilization.  The primary side effect of the Valsalva maneuver is  hypotension , which is a sudden, persistent decrease in blood pressure.  People performing the maneuver may also feel lightheaded or experience syncope, which is a brief loss of consciousness.  The Valsalva maneuver can help reduce rapid heart rhythms for some people. It can also help people to pop their ears, lift weights, or have a bowel movement.  While the Valsalva maneuver does have some potential side effects, it is a non-invasive alternative to other treatments, such as medication or electric shocks.    
 Ekinci, S., Akgül, G., Arş, E., Aydin, A., Musalar, E., &amp; Aktaş, C. (2017, November 10). Valsalva maneuver techniques for supraventricular tachycardias: Which and how?  Hong Kong Journal of Emergency Medicine ,  24 (6), 298–302.  Ekinci, S., Akgül, G., Arş, E., Aydin, A., Musalar, E., &amp; Aktaş, C. (2017, November 10). Valsalva maneuver techniques for supraventricular tachycardias: Which and how?  Hong Kong Journal of Emergency Medicine ,  24 (6), 298–302.  Hackett, D. A., &amp; Chow, C.-M. (2013, August). The Valsalva maneuver: Its effect on intra-abdominal pressure and safety issues during resistance exercise.  Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research ,  27 (8), 2338–2345.  Klabunde, R. E. (2014, April 28). Hemodynamics of a Valsalva maneuver.  Page, R. L., Joglar, J. A., Caldwell, M. A., Calkins, H., Conti, J. B., Deal, B. J., … Al-Khatib, S. M. (2016, April). 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the management of adult patients with supraventricular tachycardia.  Journal of the American College of Cardiology ,  67 (13).  Smith, G. D., Fry, M. M., Taylor, D., Morgans, A., &amp; Cantwell, K. (2015, February 18). The effectiveness of the Valsalva manoeuvre for stopping an abnormal heart rhythm.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  2015 (2).  Valsalva maneuver. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What is the Valsalva maneuver?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322661.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, August 2). "What is the Valsalva maneuver?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  