 There are two types of IUD available. One type secretes hormones while the other contains  copper . Hormone-secreting IUDs release the synthetic hormone progestin while the copper option prevents sperm from fertilizing the egg.  In addition to preventing pregnancy, hormonal IUDs may help to reduce the incidence of painful or heavy periods.  While the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have approved IUDs as a safe contraceptive, some people may experience bothersome side effects. In this article, learn about the side effects of each type of IUD, as well as when to see a doctor.  Before inserting an IUD, a doctor should make sure that the individual is aware of the potential side effects and risks, including the known side effects of particular brands.  Common IUD side effects include:  Rarer side effects of IUDs include:  The FDA have approved five IUD brands to date. One is a copper IUD called Paragard. The others are hormonal IUDs known as Kyleena, Liletta, Mirena, and Skyla. The side effects of each IUD type are listed below.  Kyleena is a hormonal IUD. In addition to the common IUD side effects, Kyleena can cause:  According to the  manufacturer , an estimated 22 percent of people who use Kyleena experience  ovarian cysts . While these  cysts  typically go away in 2–3 months, they can cause pain and discomfort.  Kyleena may increase the risk of an ectopic pregnancy, which is a pregnancy that implants outside of the womb, usually in the fallopian tube.  An ectopic pregnancy is a medical emergency. Prompt treatment is vital to prevent severe bleeding and preserve fertility.  A Liletta IUD can also increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy. People should call a doctor if they experience severe bleeding or abdominal pain with a Liletta IUD, as these signs could indicate an ectopic pregnancy.  Other potential side effects of a Liletta IUD include:  Mirena is a hormonal IUD that releases the synthetic hormone progestin to prevent pregnancy.  Some of the symptoms that people often experience after Mirena placement include:  According to the  manufacturer , an estimated 12 percent of women who use Mirena develop an ovarian cyst.  Side effects specific to Skyla may include:  According to the  manufacturer , one in every 16 people will stop having menstrual periods after 1 year of using Skyla, while about 14 percent of people will develop an ovarian cyst.  Paragard IUDs do not secrete hormones. Instead, they have a copper coating that acts as a deterrent for sperm. However, they can still cause side effects, including:  If a woman with this IUD thinks she is pregnant, she should call her doctor. If she is pregnant, the doctor will need to remove the IUD.  According to the  manufacturer , pregnancy with a Paragard IUD in place can result in life-threatening complications.  A person should see a doctor if they experience any of the following after an IUD insertion:  A person should also speak to a doctor if they can no longer detect the IUD strings in the vagina.  The doctor may check to ensure that the IUD is still in the right place.  Most IUD side effects occur within the first few months after IUD insertion. Some ways to manage the side effects include:  If a person experiences side effects that are unusual for an IUD or are not in the safety information that the doctor provides, they should report them to the FDA. They can do this by calling 1-800-FDA-1088 or visiting the website at  www.FDA.gov/medwatch .  It is essential to remember that IUDs do not protect against  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs).  Adverse IUD side effects should resolve within a few months as the body gets used to the device and any new hormones.  If the IUD causes intolerable symptoms, it is best to speak to a doctor about removing the device.    
 About birth control: The IUD. (2018, May).  About birth control: The IUD. (2018, May).  Hubacher, D., Chen, P.-L., &amp; Park, S. (2009, May). Side effects from the copper IUD: Do they decrease over time?  Contraception ,  79 (5), 356–362.  Kyleena: Frequently asked questions. (2018, June).  Liletta: Important risk information about Liletta. (2018, February).  Paragard: Safety and side effects. (2018, February).  Questions and answers about Mirena®. (2018, May).  Skyla: Safety considerations. (2018, April).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What are the side effects of an IUD?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322655.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, August 1). "What are the side effects of an IUD?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  