 In this article, we examine the possible link between  coffee  and  cancer  and look at whether drinking coffee can provide any health benefits.  Cancer is a complex disease, and it is not always easy to determine its cause. Researchers have investigated many different substances to find out if they increase a person's risk of cancer. Substances that can cause cancer are known as carcinogens.  The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)  reviewed  more than 1,000 studies in humans and animals and did not find adequate evidence to indicate that coffee is a carcinogen.  However, more research into the link between coffee and cancer is necessary. A  2017 study  suggests that drinking coffee may, in fact, lower the risk of developing specific forms of cancer.  Although older studies did sometimes find a link between drinking coffee and developing cancer, the cause was often smoking rather than coffee. People who smoke also tend to drink coffee.  Roasted coffee beans contain a substance called acrylamide, which is a byproduct of the roasting process.  The IARC  classify  acrylamide as a Group 2A probable carcinogen. This means that there is substantial evidence suggesting that acrylamide can cause cancer in animals. However, more research is necessary to determine if it also increases the risk of cancer in people.  Coffee does not contain acrylamide unless it has come from roasted coffee beans. People who are concerned about acrylamide can choose an alternative type of coffee.  Acrylamide also occurs in:  People can limit their exposure to acrylamide by being aware of cooking methods and not smoking. They can roast or bake potatoes instead of frying them and toast bread until it is light rather than dark brown.  There is also a link between drinking very hot liquids and cancer of the esophagus, or food pipe. Drinking coffee that is hotter than 149ºF may increase a person's risk of developing esophageal cancer. Therefore, it is best to allow coffee to cool slightly before drinking it, particularly if it does not contain milk.  Most cancers occur due to a combination of factors, including people's genes, environment, and lifestyle.  Some key risk factors for cancer include:  These risk factors can combine to increase the likelihood of a person developing cancer. For example, someone may have an unhealthful diet and not do enough exercise.  Drinking coffee as part of a healthful lifestyle is unlikely to be a health risk, but excessive coffee consumption can cause health problems. Coffee contains caffeine, which is a stimulant that makes the brain more alert and temporarily increases  blood pressure .  People who have heart problems may choose to avoid coffee if they experience heart palpitations after drinking it. Coffee can also cause  acid reflux  in some people and may irritate the stomach.  Drinking coffee in the evening can disrupt sleep, and a good night's sleep is essential for health. It might be beneficial to replace coffee with a decaffeinated version or a herbal tea later in the day.  Roasted coffee beans contain some acrylamide. Coffee drinkers can avoid this chemical by choosing unroasted coffee beans, although these do taste very different. A variety of unroasted coffees are available to  purchase online .  The United States  Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  recommend that adults consume no more than 4–5 cups of coffee a day. The American Academy of Pediatrics  advise  that children or adolescents do not consume products that contain caffeine.  Doctors generally also suggest that women who are pregnant or breast-feeding limit their caffeine consumption. However, the guidelines on this vary and can be difficult to follow because coffee strength differs too. People trying to limit their coffee intake may wish to seek medical advice or cut out coffee and other caffeinated products completely.  If a person wants to reduce the amount of coffee that they drink, they should do so slowly. Cutting down on caffeine can cause  headaches . Replacing coffee with tea, decaffeinated coffee, water, or herbal teas can reduce a person's caffeine intake. Black teas and some herbal teas, such as  green tea , do contain caffeine but usually less than a cup of coffee.  A  2017 study  reviewed a wide range of evidence and concluded that drinking moderate amounts of coffee is generally safe. According to this study, drinking coffee may also have health benefits.  The study compared people who drank no coffee with people who drank the following amounts of coffee each day:  The researchers found that all the groups drinking coffee had a lower rate of cancer than those who did not drink any coffee. People who drank more coffee had a reduced risk of developing the following cancers:  The study did not find a strong link between coffee consumption and the following cancers:  Other benefits of drinking coffee included a lower risk of death from all causes and a lower risk of  heart disease , liver disease, and  Parkinson's disease . The researchers found that drinking 3–4 cups of coffee per day gave the most benefit.  Coffee also contains  antioxidants . These are substances that may stop or slow down cell damage. There is a need for more research on the potential health benefits of antioxidants.  Current research suggests that coffee is unlikely to cause cancer. It may reduce the risk of developing certain types of cancer, but there is not yet enough scientific evidence to confirm this.  As part of a healthful diet, coffee is likely to be beneficial. Drinking up to 4 cups of coffee a day should not pose any risks to health and may reduce the risk of certain diseases.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Acrylamide and cancer risk. (2016, March 10).  Acrylamide and cancer risk. (2016, March 10).  Agents classified by the  IARC monographs , volumes 1–121. (2018, April 18).  Alicandro, G., Tavani, A., &amp; La Vecchia, C. (2017, September). Coffee and cancer risk: A summary overview [Abstract].  European Journal of Cancer Prevention ,  26 (5), 424–432.  Antioxidants:  In depth . (2016, May 4).  Caffeine and kids: FDA takes a closer look. (2018, January 4).  Caffeine intake during pregnancy. (2017, December 12).  Can cancer be prevented? (2016, December 29).  Coffee and cancer: What the research really shows. (2018, April 3).  Gapstur, S. M., Anderson, R. L., Campbell, P. T., Jacobs, E. J., Hartman, T. J., Hildebrand, J. S., ... McCullough, M. L. (2017, October). Associations of coffee drinking and cancer mortality in the cancer prevention study-II.  Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers &amp; Prevention ,  26 (10), 1477–1486.  Hashibe, M., Galeone, C., Buys, S. S., Gren, L., Boffetta, P., Zhang, Z.-F., &amp; La Vecchia, C. (2015, August 20). Coffee, tea, caffeine intake, and the risk of cancer in the PLCO cohort.  British Journal of Cancer ,  113 , 809–816.  IARC monographs evaluate drinking coffee, maté, and very hot beverages [Fact sheet]. (2016, June 15).  Known and probable human carcinogens. (2016, November 3).  Poole, R., Kennedy, O. J., Roderick, P., Fallowfield, J. A., Hayes, P. C., &amp; Parkes, J. (2017, November 22). Coffee consumption and health: Umbrella review of meta-analyses of multiple health outcomes.  BMJ ,  359 , j5024.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "Can coffee cause cancer?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322649.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2018, August 1). "Can coffee cause cancer?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  