 People describe a soapy taste as being:  Eating soap is a surefire way to get this unpleasant sensation, but it is not the only reason for a soapy taste in the mouth.  On its own, a soapy taste in the mouth does not reveal much about a person's overall health.  It is important to look at a variety of factors, such as what a person recently ate, any medications they take, and their health history, to disagnose the cause of the soapy taste.  Here, we describe some common reasons why a person might have a soapy taste in their mouth:  The taste of soap is so strong that even a trace of it can change the taste of food and water.  A soapy taste in the mouth may happen if a person:  The taste of soap in a person's mouth usually goes away over a short time in these instances.  Some medications leave a taste in the mouth. This flavor can resemble soap or can interact with food or water to create a soapy or metallic taste. If the soapy taste occurs with a new medication, the drug is probably the culprit.   Telavancin , an  antibiotic  used to treat bacterial  pneumonia , some skin infections, and infections by the  Staphylococcus  bacteria, can cause a soapy or metallic taste in the mouth.  This symptom is harmless but can be annoying. It typically lasts as long as a person takes the drug.  Every taste and flavor requires the taste buds to send signals to the brain. If the brain cannot correctly process or understand these signals,  it can change the way food tastes .  Some people experience changes in the way food tastes during or after a  stroke  or other brain injury. Others are not able to detect flavors at all. A  soapy or metallic taste  after a stroke may be temporary or long-term.  If a person experiences changes in their sense of taste, they should consult a doctor who can diagnose the cause. Occupational, speech, or swallowing therapy may be helpful.   Anxiety  affects the brain and body in a variety of ways. People experiencing anxiety about their food, the way it tastes, or the potential for contamination may find their perceptions of specific tastes change.  People who taste soap on their food and who become anxious about its potential health effects may create a self-fulfilling prophecy. In other words, by anticipating more soapy tastes, the brain may perceive a soapy flavor even in the absence of one.  A  variant in the gene OR6A2  can make some foods, especially cilantro or coriander, taste unpleasant and sometimes like soap. The variant is relatively rare.  The gene does not mean a person has an underlying health problem. Instead, it only causes certain foods to taste bad.  Problems with gum and tooth health can cause a soapy or metallic taste in the mouth. If a person does not maintain good oral hygiene, old food may be left behind in the teeth and gums, changing the way food tastes.   Gum disease  can cause a soapy taste in the mouth. Some people also notice a strong metallic taste. Various mouth and tooth infections also cause unusual tastes in the mouth.  If a soapy taste occurs with jaw or tooth pain, swollen or red gums, or  bad breath , people should consult a dentist.   A number of poisons  can change the way food tastes or cause a soapy or metallic taste in the mouth. An example of this is arsenic, which may affect the way food tastes.  Poisoning is more likely in children and babies and people who have:  A soapy taste may be the first symptom of poisoning, but most people quickly experience other symptoms, such as:  A soapy taste alone does not necessarily require treatment.  If a person has no reason to believe they are facing a medical emergency, such as possible poisoning, they can usually wait to see if the symptoms disappear.  Some strategies that may help include:  A soapy taste in the mouth is not typically a serious condition. However, people should see a doctor within 1 to 2 days if:  People should go to the emergency room if:  The taste buds do not always accurately reflect the taste of food. A soapy taste in the mouth is unpleasant but does not often mean that something serious is wrong.  If someone is in doubt about the reason for the soapy taste, or it does not go away quickly, they should consult a doctor.    
 Appendix 2: Characteristic signs and symptoms for several pesticide active ingredients and classes of pesticides [Fact Sheet]. (2000, January 31).  Appendix 2: Characteristic signs and symptoms for several pesticide active ingredients and classes of pesticides [Fact Sheet]. (2000, January 31).  Dutta, T. M., Josiah, A. F., Cronin, C. A., Wittenberg, G. F., &amp; Cole, J. W. (2013, September 19). Altered taste and stroke: A case report and literature review.  Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation ,  20 (1), 78–86.  Eriksson, N., Wu, S., Do, C. B., Kiefer, A. K., Tung, J. Y., Mountain, J. L., ... Francke, U. (2012, November 29). A genetic variant near olfactory receptor genes influences cilantro preference.  Flavour ,  1 , 22.  Plotkin, P., Patel, K., Uminski, A., &amp; Marzella, N. (2011, March). Telavancin (Vibativ), a new option for the treatment of gram-positive infections.  Pharmacy and Therapeutics ,  36 (3), 127–138.  Sensory problems. (n.d.).  Ubertalli, J. T. (2017, June). Periodontitis.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What causes a soapy taste in the mouth?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322645.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, August 1). "What causes a soapy taste in the mouth?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  