 Affecting as many as 50 million people in the United States each year,  acne  is the  most common  skin condition in the country. It often begins during  puberty , and it is especially prevalent between the ages of 12 and 24.  Acne can cause oily skin and several types of lesions, including  pimples . Symptoms vary from mild to severe, and they can impact a person's quality of life.  While there is currently no cure for acne, the range of effective treatments includes prescription medications and over-the-counter gels and creams. Lifestyle changes can also help to reduce symptoms and prevent breakouts.  Some people believe that the diet plays an important role. Results of a  2016 survey  showed that 71 percent of participants thought that fried or greasy foods caused acne. Others thought that chocolate, dairy, and soda drinks were responsible.  In the medical community, there is extensive debate about the impact of the diet. While many experts once thought that the diet had no role in the development of acne, results of some recent studies suggest otherwise.  In this article, we examine the effects of the diet on the skin and explore which foods might provoke or reduce acne breakouts. We also describe general tips for treating acne.  Acne develops when pores in the skin become clogged with dead skin cells, bacteria, or both. This clogging also occurs when the body produces too much sebum, an oil that keeps the skin from drying out.  Clogged pores can lead to  inflammation  and cause pimples and other types of lesion to form.  During puberty, the body produces more of a hormone called insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1). Some  studies  suggest that IGF-1 may increase the production of sebum and worsen symptoms of acne.  Certain foods can also raise IGF-1 levels. Avoiding these foods may help improve symptoms of acne and help prevent breakouts.  According to the results of a  2016 study , the following foods are most likely to increase a person's IGF-1 levels:  Measuring GI determines how fast and how high a type of food can raise levels of blood sugar.  Measuring GL allows a person to compare types of food with different GIs and portion sizes.  A person can calculate GL using this formula:   GL = GI x the amount of carbohydrates per portion (in grams) / 100   Several online  lists  provide the GIs of various foods. As a very general rule, more processed foods tend to have higher GIs and GLs.  According to the  American Diabetes Association , the following are examples of foods with high GIs:  Examples of dairy products include milk, cheese, ice cream, and yogurt. Some people with acne may benefit from avoiding these foods.  However, the  American Academy of Dermatology (AAD)  suggests that avoiding foods with high GIs may be more helpful than avoiding dairy products.  Eating chocolate may also worsen symptoms of acne. This effect is likely the result of chocolate's high sugar contents. However, results of a small  study  suggested that unsweetened chocolate containing 100 percent cocoa may also worsen symptoms in young men with a history of acne.  Currently, there appears to be little evidence that greasy foods cause acne. Overactive sebaceous glands cause oily skin, not the fat and oil in food.  The research is even less clear when it comes to identifying foods that may combat or prevent acne.  However, while more research is needed, a diet rich in  omega-3  fatty acids  may reduce inflammation  and improve symptoms of acne.  Foods rich in omega-3 fatty acids include:  Though further studies are required,  limited evidence  suggests that foods rich in  antioxidants  and dietary fiber may also fight acne.  With so much uncertainty surrounding the effects of the diet on acne, it can be hard to know which foods to try and which to avoid.  Also, certain strategies may work for some people but not for others.  Keeping a food diary can help a person to identify foods that trigger or worsen acne breakouts. Log every meal and snack and record the type and severity of acne symptoms that develop each day.  A person should do this for a few weeks or longer and bring the diary to an appointment with a doctor or dermatologist.  The doctor can help to find links between the timing of breakouts and entries in the food diary. They can also advise about dietary changes.  When changing the diet, it is important to be patient. According to the AAD, it can take  up to 12 weeks  for a dietary change to have a noticeable effect on the skin.  A variety of over-the-counter and prescription medications are available.  A doctor can advise on an appropriate course of treatment, which will depend on the severity of symptoms. For severe acne, the doctor may refer an individual to a dermatologist.  General tips for managing acne include:  According to the AAD, a person should also consider the  relationship between stress and acne .  Stress  causes the body to produce more of a hormone called androgen, which stimulates the sebaceous glands in the skin. They then produce more oil, and this can cause acne.  Acne can also affect a person's self-esteem and lead to  depression , especially in teenagers and young adults. The AAD recommend  taking the acne seriously  and emphasize the importance of managing stress and watching for signs of depression.  Some evidence suggests that dietary factors can affect acne, though conclusive research is needed.  Some people with acne may benefit from making the following changes to the diet:  Following the  Mediterranean diet  is an excellent way to incorporate these changes. Also, a food diary can help a person identify any foods that trigger or worsen their acne.  Dietary changes alone will not clear up acne breakouts, and it is important to follow a regular treatment routine.    
 5 ways to help your teenager survive acne. (n.d.).  5 ways to help your teenager survive acne. (n.d.).  Acne: Tips for managing. (n.d.).  Adult acne. (n.d.).  Atkinson, F. S., Foster-Powell, K., &amp; Brand-Miller, J. C. (2008, December). International tables of glycemic index and glycemic load values: 2008.  Diabetes Care ,  31 (12), 2,281–2,283.  Caperton, C., Block, S., Viera, M., Keri, J., &amp; Berman, B. (2014, May). Double-blind, placebo-controlled study assessing the effect of chocolate consumption in subjects with a history of acne vulgaris.  Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology ,  7 (5), 19–23.  Glycemic index and diabetes. (2014, May 14).  Growing evidence suggests possible link between diet and acne. (2013, February 8).  Katta, R., &amp; Desai, S. P. (2014, July). Diet and dermatology: The role of dietary intervention in skin disease.  Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology ,  7 (7), 46–51.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4106357/   Kucharska, A., Szmurło, A., &amp; Sińska, B. (2016). Significance of diet in treated and untreated acne vulgaris.  Advances in Dermatology and Allergology ,  33 (2), 81–86.  Nguyen, Q.-G., Markus, R., &amp; Katta, R. (2016, April 30). Diet and acne: An exploratory survey of patient beliefs.  Dermatology Practical &amp; Conceptual ,  6 (2), 5.  Skin conditions by the numbers. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Harris, Scott. "Can dietary changes help acne?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322639.php&gt;    APA  Harris, S. (2018, July 31). "Can dietary changes help acne?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  