 In this article, we explore several components of a healthful post-workout snack and describe how they benefit the body.  During exercise, the muscles use up stored glucose, called glycogen, and levels become depleted.  Endurance sports, such as running, use up more glycogen than resistance activities, such as weightlifting. Another effect of exercise is that the muscles develop small tears.  Getting the right nutritional balance after exercise restores energy levels and reduces  fatigue , helping the body to repair muscles and build strength for future workouts.  Proteins,  carbohydrates , and healthful fats are all essential for the body's recovery.  Exercise supports muscle growth, but the body can only build upon existing muscles if they recover after each workout.  Consuming protein after exercise helps the muscles to  heal  and prevents the loss of lean mass. Lean mass contributes to a muscular and toned appearance.  Carbohydrates are macronutrients that help the body to recharge and restore its fuel supply.  Anyone who exercises more than seven times a week should consume plenty of carbohydrates, as they  quickly replenish glycogen  levels.  Many people believe that consuming fat after exercising slows digestion and the absorption of nutrients. For some types of fat, this may be true.  However, there is little information about the post-workout effects of fat  calories . It may be a good idea to limit fat intake after exercise, but low levels of fat are unlikely to inhibit recovery.  The following are examples of foods and compounds that help the body to absorb nutrients quickly and speed recovery.  According to  research  published in 2017, as few as 9 grams (g) of milk protein may be enough to stimulate protein synthesis in the muscles, aiding in recovery after exercise.  Other than milk, dairy products rich in protein include:  In fact, a 1 cup serving of low-fat kefir contains  9.2 g  of high-quality protein. These proteins can repair new cells, especially those in the muscles. These proteins also contain all of the essential amino acids, which are only available through the diet.  In 2007, some researchers found that milk-based proteins are  more effective  than soy-based proteins at promoting the growth of muscle proteins after resistance exercise.  The researchers concluded that while both milk and soy proteins help a person to maintain and build muscle mass, milk proteins were more effective at supporting the quick growth of lean muscle mass.  Results of a study from  2017  suggested that consuming whole eggs after resistance exercise resulted in more protein synthesis than consuming egg whites with the same protein content.  The researchers concluded that the nutrients in the yolk helped to stimulate the muscles more effectively.   Research  from the Washington University School of Medicine suggests that supplementation with  omega-3  fatty acids helps to boost the synthesis of muscle proteins and increase the size of muscle cells in healthy young and middle-aged adults.  Fatty fish, including salmon, are rich in omega-3 fatty acids. Tuna also contains high levels of the fatty acids, and about 6 ounces (oz) of tuna packed in water contains  41.6 g  of protein and  5.4 g  of fat.  Other evidence shows that oil drawn from fatty fish may help to reduce muscle soreness after resistance training. A  study  from 2016 found that consuming 6 g of fish oil every day for 1 week before beginning resistance exercise resulted in reduced muscle soreness.  Consuming carbohydrate-rich foods may be the  best way  to reduce the decreases in immunity that can occur after exercise.  Consuming carbohydrates as part of a post-workout snack also helps to promote glycogen storage.  Sweet potatoes, grains, and fruits can contain high levels of healthful carbohydrates, as can  quinoa .  Quinoa is gluten-free, classified as a pseudocereal, and usually consumed as a grain. It is high in fiber and rich in protein, with 1 cup providing  8.14 g .  Also, quinoa has a low glycemic index, making it an excellent choice for people who regulate their blood sugar.  The nutrients and chemical compounds in herbal teas, especially yerba mate, may help the body process carbohydrates and protein effectively.  Authors of a  study  from 2016 compared the effects of yerba mate to water after exercise. The participants who drank yerba mate recovered strength faster in the 24 hours that followed a workout.  In 2012, researchers  found  that mice administered yerba mate extract were able to metabolize more quickly and expend more energy than those who did not.  It is essential to drink plenty of water before, during, and after a workout. Staying hydrated ensures that the body gets the most benefit from exercise.  The body  loses water and electrolytes  while sweating, so drinking water during and after a workout promotes performance and recovery.  Everybody varies in the amount of water they need, depending on the type of exercise, how much they sweat, how thirsty they are, as well as other factors.  Consuming carbohydrates, proteins, and some fats after exercising helps to encourage muscle protein production, and promote recovery with the best results.  Arrange to eat a snack as soon as possible after a workout. Also, remember to replace fluids and electrolytes by drinking water before, during, and after exercise.    
 Atherton, P. J., &amp; Smith, K. (2012, March 1). Muscle protein synthesis in response to nutrition and exercise.  The Journal of Physiology ,  590 (5), 1049–1057.  Atherton, P. J., &amp; Smith, K. (2012, March 1). Muscle protein synthesis in response to nutrition and exercise.  The Journal of Physiology ,  590 (5), 1049–1057.  Basic report: 01289, Kefir, lowfat, plain, LIFEWAY. (2018, April).  Basic report: 15126, Fish, tuna, white, canned in water, drained solids. (2018, April).  Basic report: 20137, Quinoa, cooked. (2018, April).  Burke, L. M., van Loon, L. J. C., &amp; Hawley, J. A. (2017, May 1). Postexercise muscle glycogen resynthesis in humans.  Journal of Applied Physiology ,  122 (5). 1055–1067.  Caspero, A. (2017, July 17). Protein and the athlete – How much do you need?  Harrar, S. (2017, December 30). What to eat before and after a workout.  Kang, Y.-R., Lee, H.-Y., Kim, J.-H., Moon, D.-I., Seo, M.-Y., Park, S.-H. … Oh, H.-G. (2012, March 21). Anti-obesity and anti-diabetic effects of Yerba Mate ( Ilex paraguariensis ) in C57BL/6J mice fed a high-fat diet.  Laboratory Animal Research ,  28 (1), 23–29.  Kraut, J. A., &amp; Madias, N. E. (2014, December 11). Lactic acidosis.  The New England Journal of Medicine ,  371 (24), 2309–2319.  McNeely, B. D., Meade, R. D., Fujii, N., Seely, A. J. E., Sigal, R. J., &amp; Kenny, G. P. (2017, December 1). Fluid replacement modulates oxidative stress — but not nitric oxide-mediated cutaneous vasodilation and sweating during prolonged exercise in the heat.  American Journal of Physiology, Regulatory, Intergrative and Comparative Physiology ,  313 (6), R730–R739.  Mitchell, C. J., Zeng, N., D'Souza, R. F., Mitchell, S. M., Aasen, K., Fanning, A. C. … &amp; Cameron-Smith, D. (2017, June 8). Minimal dose of milk protein concentrate to enhance the anabolic signalling response to a single bout of resistance exercise; a randomised controlled trial.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition  ,  14 (17).  Panza, V. P., Diefenthaeler, F., Tamborindeguy, A. C., Camargo, C. de Q., de Moura, B. M., Brunetta, H. S. … da Silva, E. L. (2016, April). Effects of mate tea consumption on muscle strength and oxidative stress markers after eccentric exercise.  British Journal of Nutrition ,  115 (8), 1370–1378.  Peake, J. M., Neubauer, O. Walsh, N. P., &amp; Simpson, R. J. (2017, May 1). Recovery of the immune system after exercise.  Journal of Applied Physiology ,  122 (5), 1077–1087.  Smith, G. I., Atherton, P., Reeds, D. N., Mohammed, B. S., Rankin, D., Rennie. M. J., &amp; Mittendorfer, B. (2011, September). Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids augment the muscle protein anabolic response to hyperinsulinaemia-hyperaminoacidaemia in healthy young and middle-aged men and women.  Clinical Science ,  121 (6), 267–278.  Spano. M. (2013, November). Postexercise recovery — Proper nutrition is key to refuel, rehydrate, and rebuild after strenuous workouts.  Today's Dietitian ,  15 (11), 18.  Tinsley, G. M., Gann, J. J., Huber, S. R., Andre, T. L., La Bounty, P. M., Bowden, R. G. … &amp; Grandjean, P. W. (2016, July 21). Effects of fish oil supplementation on postresistance exercise muscle soreness [Abstract].  Journal of Dietary Supplements ,  14  (1), 89–100.  van Vliet, S., Shy, E. L., Abou Sawan, S., Beals, J. W., West, D. W. D., Skinner, S. K. … &amp; Burd, N. A. (2017, December 1). Consumption of whole eggs promotes greater stimulation of postexercise muscle protein synthesis than consumption of isonitrogenous amounts of egg whites in young men.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  106 (6), 1401–1412.  Wilkinson, S. B., Tarnopolsky, M. A., Macdonald, M. J., Macdonald, J. R., Armstrong, D., &amp; Phillips, S. M. (2007, April). Consumption of fluid skim milk promotes greater muscle protein accretion after resistance exercise than does consumption of an isonitrogenous and isoenergetic soy-protein beverage [Abstract].  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  85 (4), 1031–1040.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barhum, Lana. "What should you eat after working out?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322692.php&gt;    APA  Barhum, L. (2018, August 7). "What should you eat after working out?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  