 In this article, we look at  ovarian cysts  and explain how they can sometimes develop into  cancer . We also look at the symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of ovarian cysts.  Ovaries are part of the female reproductive system. As part of the menstrual cycle, the ovaries release an egg, or ovum, around every 28 days. This process is known as  ovulation . The ovaries also produce the female sex hormones  estrogen  and  progesterone .  Ovarian cysts are fluid-filled sacs that can develop in or on a person's ovaries. The  cysts  are usually benign, which means they are not cancerous and often clear up without treatment.  Ovarian cysts are relatively common in people who have regular periods because small cysts can develop naturally as part of the menstrual cycle.  The ovarian cysts that develop due to regular ovulation during the menstrual cycle are known as functional ovarian cysts.  Ovarian cysts are typically not cancerous and cause no symptoms. Someone may only discover they have ovarian cysts by chance during a routine pelvic examination.  Ovarian cysts are less likely to form after a person goes through  menopause . Menopause marks the phase of a person's life when they stop having periods. However, if cysts do form post menopause, they have a higher chance of becoming cancerous.   Pathological ovarian cysts   Sometimes, ovarian cysts can develop as a result of abnormal and excessive cell growth. These are known as pathological ovarian cysts.  Pathological ovarian cysts can sometimes be malignant, which means they have the potential to cause  ovarian cancer . People who have gone through menopause have a higher chance of developing pathological cysts.  Certain underlying conditions, such as  endometriosis , can also cause pathological ovarian cysts to develop. Endometriosis is a condition where the cells that line the womb start to appear outside the womb, such as in the ovaries and fallopian tubes.   Ovarian cancer   Ovarian cancer occurs when cells in the ovaries grow and multiply in an uncontrolled way to form a  tumor . If not treated, these tumor cells can spread to nearby tissues and other places in the body.   Epithelial ovarian tumor   Different types of ovarian cancer can develop depending on which part of the ovaries the cancer started in. An epithelial ovarian tumor is the  most common  type of ovarian cancer and starts in the cells on the outer surface of the ovaries.  People with ovarian cysts usually experience few or no symptoms. The early stages of ovarian cancer may also cause no or only minor symptoms.  However, if an ovarian cyst is very large, ruptures, or is blocking blood supply to the ovaries, it may cause symptoms similar to later-stage ovarian cancer, such as:  Anyone who has these symptoms should see a doctor. If a person with ovarian cysts starts to experience severe, unusual, or recurring symptoms, they should see a doctor as soon as possible.  To diagnose ovarian cysts, a doctor may perform a type of  ultrasound scan , such as:  If the doctor discovers an ovarian cyst during the ultrasound, they may request additional ultrasound scans to continue monitoring the cyst.  If a doctor suspects that the cyst is cancerous, they may also recommend a cancer antigen 125 (CA 125) blood test. High levels of CA 125 in the blood can be a sign of ovarian cancer.  However, not everyone with high CA 125 levels has ovarian cancer. Other conditions can also produce high levels of CA 125, including:  Most ovarian cysts go away on their own without medical treatment. However, a person may need treatment depending on:  Doctors may suggest one of the following treatment approaches:   Watchful waiting   The doctor may recommend simply keeping an eye on the cyst and waiting to see how it progresses without treatment. This may include regular pelvic ultrasounds to see if the cyst changes in size or appearance.   Medication   A doctor may sometimes recommend the  birth control  pill for a person with ovarian cysts. Taking the birth control pill may not reduce the size of the cyst, but may help prevent it from getting worse.   Surgery   A doctor may recommend operating and removing a cyst that:  Depending on the type of cyst, surgical options include:  Ovarian cysts are relatively common and can form naturally during a person's menstrual cycle. Most ovarian cysts are harmless, noncancerous, and usually, do not require treatment.  Ovarian cysts that form after a person has been through menopause have a slightly higher chance of becoming ovarian cancer. Anyone who has ovarian cysts and starts to experience severe, persistent, or unusual symptoms should see a doctor as soon as possible.  The usual treatment approach for ovarian cysts is watchful waiting. If a cyst is causing bothersome symptoms, becomes cancerous, or is getting in the way of becoming pregnant or carrying a child, a doctor may recommend surgical removal.    
 Farghaly, S. A. (2014). Current diagnosis and management of ovarian cysts [Abstract].  Clinical and Experimental Obstetrics and Gynecology ,  41 (6), 609−612.  Farghaly, S. A. (2014). Current diagnosis and management of ovarian cysts [Abstract].  Clinical and Experimental Obstetrics and Gynecology ,  41 (6), 609−612.  Greenlee, R. T., Kessel, B., Williams, C. R., Riley, T. L., Ragard, L. R., Hartge, P., … Reding, D. J. (2011, April 1). Prevalence, incidence and natural history of simple ovarian cysts among women over age 55 in a large cancer screening trial.  American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology ,  202 (4), 373.e1−9.  Ovarian cancer. (2016, April 27).  Ovarian cysts. (2018, May 22).  Ross, E., &amp; Fortin, C. (2016, August). Ovarian Cysts.  Sayasneh, A., Ekechi, C., Ferrara, L., Kaijser, J., Stalder, C., Sur, S., … Bourne, T. (2015, February). The characteristic ultrasound features of specific types of ovarian pathology (review).  International Journal of Oncology ,  46 (2), 445−458.  Ţarcă, E., Ciomaga, I.-M., Savu, B., Mihăilă, D., Plămădeală, P., &amp; Aprodu, S. G. (2015). Borderline ovarian cyst treated by laparoscopic surgery: Clinical case report and literature review.  Romanian Journal of Morphology and Embryology ,  56 (4), 1529−1534.  What is ovarian cancer? (2018, April 11).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "Can ovarian cysts become cancerous?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322651.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, August 1). "Can ovarian cysts become cancerous?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  