 Gastric  inflammation  caused by  H. pylori  can lead to superficial gastritis, ulcers, and even  gastric cancer .  H. pylori  infections typically require triple therapy with two  antibiotics  and a proton pump inhibitor.  Antibiotics can cause side effects. Using natural treatments might be helpful in preventing these side effects, protecting the stomach, helping the body to better fight infection, and promoting overall good health.  As natural treatments are unlikely to eradicate  H. pylori  entirely, people might choose to use them alongside conventional therapy.  Researchers have conducted a range of studies on natural approaches to treating  H. pylori  infections. Eight potential natural treatments include:  Honey is known for its antibacterial properties, and people have used it as a medicine since ancient times.  One study showed that  Manuka honey  suppressed the growth of  H. pylori  in gastric epithelial cells.  Other studies have demonstrated that honey has other anti- H. pylori  properties, but more animal studies and clinical trials are needed to assess honey's efficiency as a complementary or alternative treatment.  Aloe vera is an herbal remedy used to treat a variety of illnesses, including:  In one study, the gel from inside the leaves of an  aloe vera  plant was effective in both inhibiting growth of and killing  H. pylori  strains, even those that were drug-resistant in a laboratory environment.  This suggests that aloe vera could be effective against  H. pylori  infection when used in combination with antibiotics.  Sulforaphane, a compound found abundantly in broccoli sprout, has been shown to kill  H. pylori .  Studies performed both in test tubes and on animal and human subjects have demonstrated the favorable effects of  sulforaphane  against  H. pylori  bacteria. Broccoli sprout also decreased gastric inflammation in  H. pylori -infected mice.  Lactoferrin, a glycoprotein found in both human and cow's milk, has shown inhibitory activity against  H. pylori . One study used a combination of antibiotics and lactoferrin from cow's milk, which resulted in a  100 percent  eradication rate of  H. pylori  in 150 affected people.  Also, a compound called melanoidin appears to inhibit the growth of  H. pylori  bacteria. Melanoidin is a compound formed by a chemical reaction between the sugar lactose and a protein called casein in milk and dairy products. Research has shown that melanoidin  suppresses   H. pylori  colonization in both mice and humans.  People must not ingest essential oils. Instead, they can inhale them and use them as part of an aromatherapy approach. According to studies carried out on humans and animals, lemongrass essential oil inhibits the growth of  H. pylori .  In a  study on mice , the density of  H. pylori  colonization in the stomach was significantly reduced compared to mice not treated with lemongrass oil.   Green tea  is one of the healthiest and most widely consumed beverages in the world. It contains many  antioxidants  and nutrients.  In an animal study, green tea decreased both the  number of bacteria  and the inflammation score of  H. pylori -infected mice. However, researchers found that mice that received green tea before infection achieved better results.  According to the  Food and Agriculture Organization , probiotics are live microorganisms that offer health benefits to people. Interest in probiotics as a treatment for  H. pylori  is increasing.  There are numerous types of probiotics. Many people use  Bifidobacterium , which is found in dairy and fermented products, to prevent gastrointestinal infection.  Research has shown that  Bifidobacterium  exerts its effect against  H. pylori  by  competing with the bacteria  to stick to the mucous lining of the stomach.  Research suggests that  H. pylori  bacteria are sensitive to ultraviolet light. During phototherapy, an ultraviolet light source illuminates the whole stomach.  Phototherapy has been shown to  reduce  the number of bacteria in the stomach significantly. However, the bacteria will repopulate a few days after illumination.  While phototherapy is not a complete fix, it may have the potential to become an effective treatment against  H. pylori , particularly for people who cannot take antibiotics.  Many people have  H. pylori  in their body for their entire lives and never have symptoms. Doctors do not routinely test for  H. pylori . It is essential to get a correct diagnosis to receive proper treatment.  Symptoms of  H. pylori  infection may include:  Anyone who is worried about symptoms should contact their doctor. Do not replace antibiotic treatments for  H. pylori  with natural treatments without discussing with a doctor.   H. pylori  is a widespread gastric infection that can lead to problems, such as gastric and duodenal ulcers.  It is becoming increasingly challenging to treat  pylori  as the bacteria have become resistant to conventional antibiotics.  There are some natural remedies which have been shown to be effective against  H. pylori  bacteria.  A person should speak with their doctor regarding starting natural treatments of  H. pylori  infection.  Herbs and supplements can interfere with some medications. The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not monitor supplements for quality and purity, so people should choose a reputable brand and speak to a doctor before trying them.    
 Abdel-Latif, M. M., &amp; Abouzied, M. M. (2016, July). Molecular mechanisms of natural honey against H. pylori infection via suppression of NF-κB and AP-1 activation in gastric epithelial cells [Abstract].  Archives of Medical Research ,  47 (5), 340–348.  Abdel-Latif, M. M., &amp; Abouzied, M. M. (2016, July). Molecular mechanisms of natural honey against H. pylori infection via suppression of NF-κB and AP-1 activation in gastric epithelial cells [Abstract].  Archives of Medical Research ,  47 (5), 340–348.  Ayala, G., Escobedo-Hinojosa, W. I., de la Cruz-Herrera, C. F., &amp; Romero, I. (2014, February 14). Exploring alternative treatments for  Helicobacter pylori  infection.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  20 (6), 1450–1469.  Cellini, L., Di Bartolomeo, S., Di Campli, E., Genovese, S., Locatelli, M., &amp; Di Giulio, M. (2014, July). In vitro activity of Aloe vera inner gel against Helicobacter pylori strains. [Abstract].  Letters in Applied Microbiology ,  59 (1), 43–48.  Takeuchi, H., Trang, V. T., Morimoto, N., Nishida, Y., Matsumura, Y., &amp; Sugiura, T. (2014, July 21). Natural products and food components with anti- Helicobacter pylori  activities.  World Journal of Gastroenterology ,  20 (27), 8971–8978.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Brosek, Shannon. "What are the best natural H. pylori treatments?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Jul. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322627.php&gt;    APA  Brosek, S. (2018, July 31). "What are the best natural H. pylori treatments?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  