 We describe eight exercises to help strengthen muscles in the forearm and prevent  tennis elbow  from coming back. We also cover causes and symptoms, home treatment, prevention, and when to see a doctor.  Before trying these exercises, wait for any swelling to go down. It is also a good idea to check with a doctor or a physical or occupational therapist first.  The following exercises can help rehabilitate tennis elbow:  To perform a wrist turn:  The wrist turn with weight is the same as the wrist turn above. But, in this version, the person also grips a light weight, such as a small dumbbell or a tin of food.  To perform a wrist lift, palm up:  To perform the elbow bend:  To perform the wrist extensor stretch:  To perform the wrist extensor flex:  To perform the fist squeeze:  To perform the towel twist:  People call this condition tennis elbow because it strains the muscles and tendons that a person uses to grip a tennis racket. However, most cases of tennis elbow are not due to playing tennis or any other sport. Any activity that involves a gripping and twisting motion can cause this strain.  Tennis elbow usually occurs because of repetitive activity. Carpenters, painters, and plumbers are particularly susceptible.  Symptoms of tennis elbow vary from person to person and range from mild to severe. Typical symptoms include pain in the arm and tenderness around the elbow.  A person may notice swelling and a burning sensation around the elbow. They may find that their grip becomes weaker and may also feel pain further down the arm.  Continuation of the repetitive activity causing the strain can make it worse.  People with tennis elbow do not typically need to see a doctor. By stopping the repetitive activity and resting the arm, the pain usually eases within  2 weeks .  A person can treat tennis elbow at home by:  Ceasing or reducing repetitive activities and resting the arm can aid recovery. When resting is not possible, adjusting arm movements can help to ease symptoms. For example, a person can try keeping their palms flat and elbows bent when lifting.  Doing exercises designed for tennis elbow helps strengthen forearm muscles and improve function. People whose jobs involve a repetitive movement of the forearm should do these exercises to prevent tennis elbow returning.  Always consult a doctor before attempting exercises for tennis elbow. A doctor can make sure that the exercises will not affect any underlying conditions or injuries.  If exercising the forearms seems to worsen symptoms of tennis elbow, a person can try:  Most people can treat the pain and inflammation caused by tennis elbow with rest and OTC medication. If the pain is severe or does not go away within 2 weeks, a person should see a doctor.  A doctor may prescribe a different NSAID or a steroid injection. Most people only need one injection, though they may need to rest their elbow for around 2–3 weeks afterward. Pain can worsen after a steroid injection, but this should improve within 48 hours.  Some people may find that tennis elbow is affecting their day-to-day activities. In these cases, a doctor may recommend physical or occupational therapy. A specialist can provide treatments and exercises to help improve motion and reduce pain.  A doctor or therapist may also recommend a supportive brace or clasp. This can help reduce strain on the elbow if repetitive movements are necessary for a person's work.    
 10 minute tennis elbow exercises. Stretch and strengthen [Fact sheet]. (2016, December).  10 minute tennis elbow exercises. Stretch and strengthen [Fact sheet]. (2016, December).  Exercise advice: Tennis elbow. (2017, May 18).  Tennis elbow. (2014, May 1).  Tennis elbow (lateral epicondylitis). (2015, July).  Tennis elbow — lateral epicondylitis. (2017).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "Eight exercises for tennis elbow."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322746.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, August 13). "Eight exercises for tennis elbow."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  