  Breast cancer  has four stages, and a doctor uses the TNM staging system to identify which of these four stages the breast cancer has reached.  The letters TNM mean the following:  The TNM staging system also  uses numbers . The numbers from 0-4 determine how advanced the cancer is.  The system is overseen by the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). This means all cancer doctors describe and classify the stages of cancer in the same way.  To determine which stage a person's breast cancer has reached, a doctor will perform tests. Tests include blood tests, CT and  PET scans ,  MRI's , X-rays, including a mammogram, and  ultrasounds .  A person with  stage 0 breast cancer  has a noninvasive cancer type.  This means that cancer has not spread anywhere else in the body and that the cancerous cells remain in the breast where they started growing.  Noninvasive breast cancer is also known as ductal  carcinoma  in situ (DCIS). It means cancer remains in the milk ducts.  Early diagnosis of stage 0 breast cancer means that a person can receive prompt treatment.  This might prevent cancer from turning into an invasive breast cancer type.  There is a variety of  treatment options  for stage 0 breast cancer, including:   Surgery    A lumpectomy involves removing cancerous cells from the breast. It is an option when the cells remain in one area. This is a relatively short and simple procedure, and a person should be able to go home after the surgery on the same day.  If cancerous cells appear throughout the breast, the doctor may recommend a  mastectomy , which involves removing the entire breast. Plastic surgeons can rebuild the breast at the same time or a later date.   Radiation therapy    Radiation therapy  can help kill cancer cells and inhibit them from spreading. A person will typically undergo radiation therapy once the breast surgery site has healed. This is usually 4-6 weeks after surgery.   Hormone treatment   The hormone  estrogen , found naturally in the body, can impact some types of breast cancer. If a person has estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) or  progesterone  receptor-positive (PR+) breast cancer, a doctor may suggest hormone treatment in addition to surgery.  The person may also require radiation therapy to manage the levels of these hormones in the body.   Stage 1 breast cancer  means the cancerous cells are invading the surrounding breast tissue. Stage 1 breast cancer has two subcategories –  1A and 1B .  People with stage 1A breast cancer have breast cancer with:  People with stage 1B breast cancer have invasive breast cancer that can present as:  If this is the case and the cancer is ER+ or PR+, a doctor is still likely to classify it as stage 1A cancer.  Microscopic invasion is where cancer cells have begun to spread outside the milk duct lining or lobule. If microscopic invasion is present, doctors may still classify cancer as stage 1 breast cancer, providing these cells do not measure more than 1mm.  Doctors can offer a variety of  treatment options  for stage 1 breast cancer, although surgery is the primary treatment.   Surgery   A lumpectomy or mastectomy are both viable surgical options for people with stage 1 breast cancer. A doctor will decide what surgery is most appropriate depending on the location of the primary tumor, how large it is, the size of the breast, family history, genetics, and the person's preference.   Radiation therapy   Radiation therapy is a standard treatment for stage 1 breast cancer. However, a doctor may not recommend radiation therapy for people over 70 years old, particularly if hormone therapy is suitable.   Hormone therapy   If the breast cancer is ER+ or PR+, hormone therapy may be effective. Hormone therapy works by preventing the growth of estrogen, which helps cancer grow. Hormone therapy can reach cancer cells in the breast as well as other areas of the body and reduces the risk of the cancer coming back.   Chemotherapy   Before recommending  chemotherapy , a doctor will test to see whether the cancer is hormone receptive.  If the test results show that the cancer is not receptive to estrogen and progesterone or to another protein called human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), it is known as triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC).  Hormone therapy is ineffective against this cancer type, and people who have TNBC will usually need chemotherapy.  However, some people who do have ER+ or PR+ breast cancer may still undergo chemotherapy. A doctor may need to run a test on the tumor to help decide whether chemotherapy is appropriate.  Sometimes, doctors will recommend that people who have HER2+ breast cancer use Herceptin, which is a targeted therapy, alongside chemotherapy.   Stage 2 breast cancer  also has subcategories known as  2A and 2B .  Stage 2A breast cancer is an invasive cancer where:  Stage 2B breast cancer is an invasive breast cancer where:  The most common  type of treatment  for stage 2 breast cancer is surgery.   Surgery   In most cases, treatment involves removing the cancer.  A person with stage 2A or 2B breast cancer may undergo a lumpectomy or mastectomy. The doctors and the individual can decide based on the size and location of the tumor.   Combination therapy   A doctor may recommend a combination of radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and hormone therapy (if the cancer is hormone receptive) to people with stage 2A or 2B breast cancer.  The subcategories for  stage 3 breast cancer  are 3A, 3B, and 3C.  3A breast cancer is an invasive breast cancer where:  Stage 3B breast cancer is invasive breast cancer where:  If cancer spreads to the skin of the breast, a person may have inflammatory cancer.  Symptoms of  inflammatory breast cancer  include:  Stage 3C breast cancer is an invasive breast cancer where:   Treatment  for people with stage 3 breast cancer includes chemotherapy, surgery, and radiation. Typically, doctors administer the chemotherapy before performing the surgery in an attempt to shrink a tumor.  People with stage 3 breast cancer will probably need radiation therapy to kill off any remaining cancer cells. Doctors may also recommend hormone therapy, as well as additional targeted therapies, if necessary.  A person with  stage 4 breast cancer  has cancer that has spread not only to the nearby lymph nodes but also to more distant lymph nodes and other organs in the body.  Stage 4 breast cancer is the most advanced stage. It is also known as secondary or metastatic breast cancer. Stage 4 breast cancer may be recurrent breast cancer that has now spread to other parts of a person's body.  Typically, treatment for  stage 4 breast cancer  includes a combination of chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and hormone therapy (if appropriate).  Targeted therapy is a treatment that targets the protein that allows cancer cells to grow and this type of therapy may also be an option for people with stage 4 breast cancer.  Sometimes, surgeons will operate to try and remove tumors though this is not usually the first option for treatment.  Doctors, however, may recommend surgery to help with pain relief by treating some of the issues that may develop as a result of having stage 4 breast cancer. These include spinal cord compression, removing single masses caused by metastasis, and fixing any broken bones.  A doctor may also prescribe medication to treat related symptoms such as:  New treatments and therapies are emerging all the time, and anyone who has breast cancer at any stage can volunteer to try out these new treatments. People considering this should talk to their doctor to see whether any trials are available in their area.  Trials for a new treatment called immunotherapy are  currently taking place . Immunotherapy works by raising the body's natural ability to fight off cancer and has fewer side effects than chemotherapy.  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have not yet approved immunotherapy, but anyone who wishes to put themselves forward for these trials should discuss their options and suitability with their doctor.  As well as numbers, a zero or an 'X' often follow the letters T, N, and M. According to  the AJCC , the meanings are as follows:  The stages of breast cancer give a doctor an indication of how developed the breast cancer is and the kind of treatment options that may be effective.  There are, however, other factors that doctor's take into consideration when determining how successful a specific type of breast cancer treatment might be.  These include:  A person's outlook depends on early diagnosis and the stage of their cancer. The earlier a person receives treatment, the better the prognosis.  People should routinely check for any signs of breast cancer by performing monthly breast exams and should talk to their doctor about having regular mammograms.  Some people may need to begin screening earlier than others depending on their risk factors. Discuss this with the doctor. Other people may be candidates to start screening later, but it is a good idea to share the decision making with a doctor who will be able to advise on the best way forward.  Treatment depends on many factors, including the stage of breast cancer, family history, genetics and a person's personal preferences. Doctors will tailor treatment to each individual and will adjust it depending on how well a person responds initially.    
 BRCA gene mutations. (2015, May 5).  BRCA gene mutations. (2015, May 5).  Breast cancer family history risk assessment. (2017, March).  Breast cancer stages. (2017, December 20).  Breast cancer stages. (2018, May 18).  Breast cancer treatment (PDQ) — Patient version. (2018, April 12).  Breast cancer: Treatment options. (2017, April).  Cancer staging manual. (n.d).  Facts for life: Ductal carcinoma in situ. (n.d.).  Hormone therapy. (2018, March).  Inflammatory breast cancer. (2017, October 13).  Inflammatory breast cancer. (2018, April 12).  Levitan, D. (2016, May 3). Pembrolizumab promising in metastatic triple-negative breast cancer.  Managing pain related to metastatic breast cancer. (2018 July 5).  New phase 2 clinical trial testing immunotherapy drug announced. (2018, February 7).  Partridge, A. H., Pagani, O., Abulkhair, O., Aebi, S., Amant, F., Azim Jr, H. A., ... Cardoso, F. (2014, June). First international consensus guidelines for breast cancer in young women (BCY1) [Abstract].   The Breast  ,  23 (3), 209–220.  Ribnikar, D., Ratosa, I., Perhavec, A., &amp; Amir, E. (2017). General overview and treatment recommendations for young women with breast cancer.  Revista de Investigación Clínica ,  69 , 77–93.  Stage 1. (2017, October 3).  Stage 1A and 1B. treatment options. (2015, November 5).  Stage 2. (2017, October 4).  Stage 3. (2017, October 4).  Stage 4. (2017, October 9).  Treating breast cancer during pregnancy. (2017, September 27).  Treatment for DCIS. (2018, May 2).  Treatment of breast cancer by stage. (2018, February 2).  http://cancer.org/cancer/breastcancer/detailedguide/breast-cancer-treating-by-stage   Treatment of breast cancer stages 1-111. (2018, June 5).  Treatment of breast cancer stage IV (metastatic) breast cancer. (2018, February 1).  Understanding a breast cancer diagnosis. (2017, December 20).  What is cancer staging? (n.d.)  What is the AJCC? (n.d).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What happens at each stage of breast cancer?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322760.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, August 15). "What happens at each stage of breast cancer?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  