 In uncomplicated pregnancies, membrane stripping at 38–40 weeks of gestation  will often :  The procedure aims to separate the amniotic sac and fine fetal membranes from the uterine wall. This separation triggers the release of natural chemicals called prostaglandins. Prostaglandins help soften the cervix and stimulate contractions and labor.  Women do not generally need to prepare for membrane stripping, which the doctor will carry out as part of a regular examination.  The procedure usually takes place in a doctor's office. The doctor may need to stimulate the cervix to dilate it, as membrane stripping will not be possible otherwise.  The procedure can be uncomfortable, and most women feel a bit of pain and tenderness afterward. Some women also experience minor bleeding.  It is essential to let the doctor know immediately if severe pain or bleeding occurs during or after the appointment.  Membrane stripping is usually safe in uncomplicated pregnancies.  However, there are minor risks associated with this technique. These include:  Membrane stripping carries minimal risk, but it still may not be suitable for everyone.  A doctor is likely to decide against membrane stripping in women who are showing signs of needing a cesarean delivery. The following factors might also make the procedure unsuitable:  In most cases, membrane stripping increases the likelihood of spontaneous labor, especially within the first 7 days following the procedure.  Doctors usually only need to carry out the procedure once to induce labor successfully. However, some women may require multiple stripping procedures.  A  2014 study  looking at the efficacy and safety of membrane stripping found that it reduced total gestation time.  The study, which included 80 women who had the procedure and 80 who did not, showed that:   Another study  of 800 women found that membrane stripping:  However, the researchers also used other methods of induction alongside the membrane stripping.  Membrane stripping takes place during the final few weeks of pregnancy, which are usually between 38 and 41 weeks of gestation.  Membrane stripping is a relatively safe procedure in uncomplicated pregnancies, and study results have shown that it can increase the likelihood of spontaneous labor.    
 Adams, R., Lichorad, A., &amp; Simmons, J. (2017, January 1). Membrane sweeping to decrease rates of postdate induction.  American Family Physician ,  95 (1), 35–36.  Adams, R., Lichorad, A., &amp; Simmons, J. (2017, January 1). Membrane sweeping to decrease rates of postdate induction.  American Family Physician ,  95 (1), 35–36.  Al-Harmi, J., Chibber, R., Fouda, M., Mohammed K, Z., El-Saleh, E., &amp; Tasneem, A. (2014, August 18). Is membrane sweeping beneficial at the initiation of labor induction? [Abstract].  The Journal of Maternal-Fetal &amp; Neonatal Medicine ,  28 (10), 1214–1218.  Dulay, A. T. (2017, October). Vasa previa.  Zamzami, T. Y., &amp; Al Senani, N. S. (2014). The efficacy of membrane sweeping at term and effect on the duration of pregnancy: A randomized controlled trial.  Journal of Clinical Gynecology and Obstetrics ,  3 (1), 30–34.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What to know about membrane stripping."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322701.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, August 7). "What to know about membrane stripping."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  