 Also, having a  heart attack  can cause someone to panic, which may make the situation more confusing. If someone thinks they may be having a heart attack, they should seek emergency medical attention.  Every year, about  2 to 3 percent  of people in the United States experience panic disorder. Symptoms of a  panic attack  can include:  Every year, about  735,000  people in the United States have a heart attack. Symptoms of a heart attack can include:  While the symptoms of these two conditions overlap, knowing how to tell the difference can be lifesaving.  Knowing the difference between a panic attack vs. heart attack can be difficult, especially if a person has never experienced the symptoms of either before.  Distinguishing between the two conditions can be made easier by several factors, including:  Although chest pain is common to both a panic attack and a heart attack, the characteristics of the pain often differ.  During a panic attack, chest pain is usually sharp or stabbing and localized to the middle of the chest.  Chest pain from a heart attack may resemble pressure or a squeezing sensation.  Chest pain that occurs due to a heart attack may also start in the center of the chest, but can then radiate from the chest to the arm, jaw, or shoulder blades.  The onset of symptoms may also help a person know if they are having a panic attack or heart attack.  Although both conditions can develop suddenly and without warning, there may still be some differences.  Sometimes heart attacks come on due to physical exertion, such as climbing the stairs.  The duration of symptoms might also help distinguish between a heart attack and panic attack.  Although it can vary, most panic attacks are over in  20 to 30 minutes .  During a heart attack, symptoms tend to last longer and get worse over time. For example, chest pain may be mild at the onset of a heart attack but become severe after several minutes.  A panic attack will not cause a heart attack. A blockage in one or more of the blood vessels to the heart, which leads to an interruption of vital blood flow, causes a heart attack.  Although a panic attack will not cause a heart attack,  stress  and  anxiety  might play a role in the development of  coronary artery disease .  Panic attacks can occur as isolated events or as part of an anxiety disorder.  Some  research indicates  that people with anxiety disorders may have an increased risk of developing  heart disease  due to low heart rate variability (HRV).  HRV is the time between each heartbeat. The autonomic nervous system controls the heart rate. The heart rate is meant to vary throughout the day, depending on a person's activities and emotions.  A high HRV indicates that a person's heart rate shifts efficiently throughout the day, based on what they are doing. It is also a sign that their autonomic nervous system is working well.  A low HRV means a person's heart does not switch gears as efficiently. Some studies associate a low HRV with an increased risk of heart disease.  In the researchers' analysis of  studies  looking at HRV in people who were diagnosed with various types of anxiety disorder, including panic disorder, the results indicated the participants had a lower HRV than those without an anxiety disorder.  It is crucial to understand that having a panic attack or panic disorder does not mean someone will have a heart attack. Additional research is needed to say if having panic disorder increases the risk of developing heart disease, definitively.  As the symptoms of panic attacks and heart attacks are similar, it is always best to seek immediate medical attention when in doubt.  It is vital to seek emergency medical treatment if any of the following symptoms develop:  According to the  Woman's Heart Foundation , doctors may mistake heart disease for panic attacks in women. Medical tests, such as an electrocardiogram and blood tests, can help a doctor make an accurate diagnosis.  A person's outlook and recovery can improve when they receive prompt treatment for a heart attack. Even if symptoms are not due to a heart attack, a person can also receive medical treatment for a panic attack.  The outlook will vary, depending on whether a person has experienced a heart attack or a panic attack.  Although a panic attack may feel very uncomfortable, it is not life-threatening. Panic attacks can interfere with a person's quality of life, so they should seek appropriate treatment.  A doctor can help treat anxiety and panic attacks with various techniques, including lifestyle modifications, medication, and counseling.  In some cases, a heart attack can be life-threatening. With prompt treatment, many people survive a heart attack. Following a heart attack, a person will also need to take steps to manage the underlying heart disease.  Is there a way to rule out a heart attack at home, or should a person always seek emergency medical attention?  People should always seek emergency medical attention when having chest pain or discomfort, chest pain that radiates to other parts of the body, or shortness of breath. Some other symptoms that might accompany a heart attack include nausea, sweating, and lightheadedness.    
 Am I having a panic attack or heart attack? (n.d.).  Am I having a panic attack or heart attack? (n.d.).  Chalmers, J. A., Quintana, D. S., Abbott, M. J.-A., &amp; Kemp, A. H. (2014, July 11). Anxiety disorders are associated with reduced heart rate variability: A meta-analysis.  Frontiers in Psychiatry ,  5 , 80.  Heart disease facts. (2017, November 28).  Panic attack or heart attack? Diagnosing heart disease in women. (2007).  Panic attacks and panic disorder. (2018, June).  Panic disorder. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  de Pietro, MaryAnn. "Panic attack vs. heart attack: How to tell the difference."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322797.php&gt;    APA  de Pietro, M. (2018, August 16). "Panic attack vs. heart attack: How to tell the difference."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  