 Providers often use  subcutaneous injections  for medications that must be  absorbed into the bloodstream slowly and steadily , such as  insulin .  Subcutaneous injections are usually safe and do not require as much force as intramuscular injections into the muscle tissues.  Subcutaneous injection can be used to give many types of medications for various medical conditions.   There are fewer blood vessels  in the fatty layer of connective tissue just beneath the skin than the muscle tissue.  Having fewer blood vessels means that medication injected subcutaneously is absorbed more slowly.  This makes it an ideal way to administer medications that the body must use slowly over time, such as insulin for the treatment of  diabetes .  Medications given this way include:  Many drugs that must be taken daily, or injected at home, are designed for subcutaneous injection.  To give a subcutaneous injection, people should follow  these steps :  The best location for a subcutaneous injection depends on a person's pain sensitivity and where they have some subcutaneous fat.  A few commonly  chosen locations include :  Some subcutaneous injections come in the form of an auto-injector. An auto-injector is a self-contained device that does not require drawing the medication up first. People can follow the instructions on the package if they are using an auto-injector.  The needle used for subcutaneous injection is usually small and short and causes minimal discomfort.  The amount of pain a person feels depends on factors such as where they or another person administer the injection, their pain tolerance, and skin sensitivity.  The pain also depends on the medication they are injecting, as it may cause stinging, burning, or aching during or following the injection.  Subcutaneous injections tend to be less painful than intramuscular injections because the needles are smaller and do not have to push through as much tissue.  Children and people who fear needles may still have issues with these injections that can cause  anxiety .   A few strategies can help  with the pain and anxiety:  The most common complication of a subcutaneous injection is pain near the injection site for 1 to 2 days afterward.  Pain near the injection site can happen when inserting the needle at the wrong angle, or when it moves slightly during the injection. Some medications can cause a bruise or irritation at the injection site.  Other complications are much less frequent and include:  Injecting a blood vessel can cause serious complications in rare cases. However, the likelihood of hitting a blood vessel in the subcutaneous fat is extremely rare. More than likely, if there is blood, it is from slight bleeding after the injection.  A subcutaneous injection is a minor and very safe medical procedure when done correctly.  Mastering the technique of injecting at home can take some practice. People should ask for help from a medical provider and not shy away from asking questions about the benefits of treatment or how best to minimize pain.    
 Dalrymple, L. (2016, July 12). Parents can help reduce pain and anxiety from vaccinations.  Dalrymple, L. (2016, July 12). Parents can help reduce pain and anxiety from vaccinations.  Giving a subcutaneous injection [Fact Sheet]. (2016, July).  Kim, H., Park, H., &amp; Lee, S. J. (2017, August 29). Effective method for drug injection into subcutaneous tissue.  Scientific Reports ,  7 (1).  Ogston-Tuck, S. (2014, July 4). Subcutaneous injection technique: An evidence-based approach.  Nursing Standard ,  29 (3), 53–58.  Ruffing, V. (2012, December 18). How to give a subcutaneous injection.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Is a subcutaneous injection painful?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 8 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322710.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, August 8). "Is a subcutaneous injection painful?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  