 They can appear on the internal part of the vagina or the external area, known as the vulva, which includes the labia.  The following are the most common causes of vaginal lumps:  Vaginal  cysts  are pocket or pouch-like projections on the vaginal wall. There are a variety of different types of vaginal cysts. Some cysts contain  pus  and others contain air or scar tissue.  The types of vaginal cyst include:  Some cysts may be large and painful, but most vaginal cysts are small and have no symptoms.  Vaginal polyps are outgrowths of skin that doctors may also refer to as skin tags.  They usually do not require treatment unless they are painful or cause significant bleeding.  Vaginal  warts  are caused by the  human papillomavirus (HPV) , which is a  sexually transmitted infection .  HPV  is also a risk factor for  cancer .  It is not usually possible to feel warts inside the vagina, but it is possible to notice growths just outside the vaginal opening. Vaginal warts typically feel like small, irregular growths. It may be possible to see the warts by holding a mirror under the vagina.  The sexually transmitted infection  herpes  can also cause genital blisters, according to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) . Sometimes, herpes lesions may resemble an ingrown hair or a  pimple . Other times, they may have a sore or blister-like appearance.  Rarely,  vaginal cancer  can cause lumps on the vagina. These lumps can grow due to the excess development of cancerous cells in the lining of the vagina's skin cells or the glandular cells located in the vagina.  Other symptoms of  vaginal cancer  include unusual vaginal bleeding or discharge. If cancer becomes advanced, symptoms may include  constipation , pelvic pain,  back pain , or leg swelling. However, these symptoms do not necessarily mean a person has cancer; they are much more likely to be caused by another condition, such as an infection.  Anyone that notices any changes in the vaginal area, such as lumps or bumps, should see a doctor.  It is especially important to see a doctor for lumps if they:  Most lumps on the vagina do not require invasive treatments. A doctor can evaluate vaginal bumps to determine if they need further treatment.  To diagnose vaginal lumps or bumps, a doctor will likley examine the outside of the vagina as well as perform a physical examination.  A doctor may also take a swab from the lump and send it to a laboratory to test for the presence of any harmful cells.  To help with diagnosis, a doctor may request some imaging tests to see how large the lump or lumps may be. Imaging tests may include transvaginal  ultrasound  imaging or abdominal imaging.  Treatments for vaginal lumps depend upon the underlying cause:  If a vaginal cyst becomes infected, a doctor may prescribe  antibiotics  to reduce the effects of the infection.  A doctor may also recommend at-home treatments and lifestyle changes, such as:  A doctor cannot cure the HPV infection, but they can remove the warts if they are causing symptoms. Treatment includes freezing or using laser surgery to remove the warts.  Doctors treat vaginal cancer in a variety of ways, depending on how far the cancer has progressed.  According to the  American Cancer Society , if a person has pre-cancerous cells on their vagina, a doctor may recommend topical treatments to destroy the pre-cancerous cells or laser surgery to remove the pre-cancerous cells.  Invasive or more advanced vaginal cancers may require surgical removal.  Treatment may also include:  Lumps on the vagina can be a normal occurrence.  Vaginal lumps are not usually painful. However, when lumps on the vagina grow too large, cause bleeding or pain, or result in infection, they might require treatment.  Anyone who develops vaginal lumps or experiences any other symptoms should see a doctor.    
 Genital herpes – CDC Fact Sheet. (2017, February 9).  Genital herpes – CDC Fact Sheet. (2017, February 9).  Genital warts. (2018, March 14).  Kondi-Pafiti, A., Grapsa, D., Papakonstantinou, K., Kairi-Vassilatou, E., &amp; Xasiiakos, D. (2008). Vaginal cysts: A common pathologic entity revisited [Abstract].  Clinical and Experimental Obstetrics and Gynecology .  35 (1), 41–44.  Signs and symptoms of vaginal cancer. (2018, March 19).  Treating vaginal cancer. (n.d.).  What is vaginal cancer? (2018, March 19).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What to do about vaginal cysts, sores, and bumps."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322782.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, August 15). "What to do about vaginal cysts, sores, and bumps."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  