 It can be easy to lose a pill in a handbag or down the drain. If this happens, the best course of action depends on the type of pill.  In this article, we discuss what a person should do if they lose a combination or progestin-only  birth control  pill. We also explore how missing a pill can affect pregnancy rates and medical conditions.  Combination pills contain both  estrogen  and progestin.  Combination pills come in 21- or 28-day packs, which have slightly different instructions:  If a person loses a pill, they should call their doctor and ask for a replacement pack as soon as possible. In the meantime, the doctor may offer the following advice:  If a person loses a pill and fewer than 48 hours have passed since they took their last pill, the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  recommend:  If a person has lost only one pill and returned to a regular dosage immediately, it is not usually necessary to use alternative methods of contraception, such as condoms. However, it is best to use these if there are any doubts.  Returning to a reliable dosage of birth control becomes more difficult if a person has missed two or more doses, or it has been longer than 48 hours since the last dose.  If this is the case, a person should:  Progestin-only pills are also called POPs or mini-pills. A person must take them within the same 3-hour period every day to prevent pregnancy.  Progestin-only pills take effect more quickly than combined pills, typically within about 2 days, but the effects also wear off more quickly. This means that there is less room for error.  If a person misses their 3-hour window, and it has been 27 hours or more since their last dose, the  CDC  recommend:  If a person takes birth control pills correctly, they are  99 percent  effective for preventing pregnancy. The pill is much less effective if a person does not follow the instructions. Typical use generally results in a  9 percent  failure rate.  A person can still become pregnant while taking the pill. This can occur on purpose or by accident.  Many wonder if the hormones in the pill can affect the fetus. A  study from 2016 , which looked at more than 880,000 live births in Denmark, reported no link between birth control pills and birth abnormalities.  Missing doses of birth control pills or taking them too far apart can also result in unscheduled bleeding, which can be bothersome.  It is important to note that some people take birth control pills for reasons other than contraception. Birth control pills can also help to treat medical conditions, including:  If a person taking birth control pills to manage PCOS or endometriosis loses a pill or misses a dose, they should follow the relevant advice from the CDC above.  PCOS is an endocrine disorder that is closely linked with hormonal imbalances. It affects about  10 percent  of women of childbearing age, and it is associated with a wide variety of health problems.  In people with PCOS, birth control pills can help to reduce:  For people with endometriosis, hormonal birth control pills can help to reduce pain and make periods lighter, shorter, and more regular.  Losing a pill or missing a dose may cause a slight increase in these symptoms. It will last until the dosage is back on track.  Like any medication, birth control pills work best if a person follows a doctor's instructions. In the case of these pills, this involves taking one a day.  The pill is  99 percent  effective at preventing pregnancy if a person takes it correctly, but after factoring in human error, it is only  91 percent  effective.  If a person has missed a pill and is wondering what to do, Planned Parenthood's  information quiz  can provide information about options and next steps.  The best guidance will depend on:  Healthcare providers can provide personalized advice.    
 About endometriosis. (2017, January 31).  About endometriosis. (2017, January 31).  Birth control pill. (n.d.).  Charlton, B. M., Mølgaard-Nielsen, D., Svanström, H., Wohlfahrt, J., Pasternak, B., &amp; Melbye, M. (2016, January 6). Maternal use of oral contraceptives and risk of birth defects in Denmark: Prospective, nationwide cohort study.  BMJ ,  352 .  How effective are birth control methods? (2017, February 9).  How effective is the birth control pill? (n.d.).  I missed my pill. (n.d.).  Jaget, N. (2018). A brief review on polycystic ovary syndrome.  European Journal of Pharmaceutical and Medical Research ,  5 (1), 126–130.  Key Statistics from the National Survey of Family Growth - P Listing. (2017, June 22).  Polycystic ovary syndrome. (2018, May 22).  Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). (2017, June).  QuickStats: Percentage of women who missed taking oral contraceptive pills among women aged 15–44 years who used oral contraceptive pills and had sexual intercourse, overall and by age and number of pills missed — National Survey of Family Growth, United States, 2013–2015. (2017, September 15).  U.S. selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2013. (2013, June 21).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "What to do if you've lost a birth control pill."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322749.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, August 13). "What to do if you've lost a birth control pill."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  