 Using a variety of methods of weight control is vital for maintaining a healthy  body weight . In this article, learn 14 techniques that people can use to lose weight without diet or exercise.  Understanding how to prepare meals and developing better skills in the kitchen can be a powerful way to lose weight without reducing food intake.  People who have more knowledge about how to cook different foods are more likely to eat a wide variety of highly nutritious ingredients, including fruit and vegetables, which are great for weight loss.  In fact,  researchers  are increasingly linking weight gain and  obesity  to poor cooking skills.  People who are not confident in the kitchen can try taking a cookery class or watching cooking videos online. A great place to start is Jamie Oliver's  Food Tube , which focuses on how to make simple, healthful meals.  Protein is an essential part of a healthful diet and is necessary for growth and efficient metabolism. Protein can  increase  feelings of fullness and delay hunger.  A  small study  in young women found that eating high-protein yogurt as an afternoon snack reduced hunger and calorie intake at later meals.  Simple ways to increase the amount of protein in the diet include adding a tablespoon of chia seeds or hemp seeds to breakfast cereals or including more eggs in meal plans.  Fiber is in fruit, vegetables, legumes, and whole grains.  Fiber is different than other foods because the body does not digest it in the small intestine. Instead, the food moves to the large intestine, where fermentation occurs.  This  benefits  people by:  People can add more fiber into a balanced diet by:  The fiber in the skin of many vegetables is also beneficial. As long as people thoroughly wash the skin, it is safe and easy to eat when cooked.  Probiotics are beneficial bacteria that are integral to digestion.  Recent research  links gut and brain function and suggests that probiotics can influence weight, fat mass, and mood.  Humans act as the host of these bacteria and provide them with food, including fiber. In turn, the bacteria benefit the intestine and a person's general health.  The benefits that they provide include:  A diet that is high in sugar and fat can alter the balance of bacteria in the gut, reducing the number of good bacteria.   Research suggests  that probiotics could help prevent or manage obesity. People can buy over-the-counter (OTC) probiotics in pharmacies or  online .  Probiotics also occur naturally in a variety of fermented foods, including:  A good night's rest is essential for general health and weight maintenance. Poor sleep disrupts important hormones, including those involved in metabolism.  Getting  less than 6 hours  of sleep a night can increase a person's risk of being overweight or obese.  Raised  stress  levels can also disrupt hormonal balance. When a person is stressed, their body produces hormones called glucocorticoids. Too many glucocorticoids  can increase  a person's appetite, leading to weight gain.  Stress can also trigger emotional eating.  Emotional eating  is when a person eats unhealthful foods to try to control and improve a negative mood.  Methods to reduce stress include:   Some research  indicates that those with low  vitamin D  blood levels are more likely to be obese and not get enough exercise.  Other health conditions associated with low  vitamin  D include:  People can get vitamin D from the sun and some foods. Foods that contain vitamin D include egg yolks, fatty fish, certain mushrooms, and fortified foods.  Vitamin D supplements are also available to purchase in pharmacies or  online .   This method is most useful in a buffet or snacking situation. One  study  divided single meals into smaller portions to test whether people expected to feel fuller after eating the same amount of food in separate units.  They found that by dividing foods into three or six separate portions, the participants' expected level of fullness was greater.  When eating at a buffet, a person can take multiple small plates to split the food across. When snacking, they can cut up the snacks and place them on different small plates.  A person can also try dividing mealtimes up into several small courses, instead of putting everything on one plate.  When people serve food onto a plate, they  tend to finish  all the food on that plate. They could lower their  calories  with minimal effort by reducing the size of their plate or how much food they put on it.  Two  2017 studies  found that university students consistently put less food on a special portion control plate.  A portion control plate has visual size indicators for essential food groups, allowing people to adjust their portions without the guesswork.  Portion control plates are available in some stores and  online .   British research  linked the regular consumption of sugary and artificially sweetened drinks with higher body fat in children.  There are many healthful alternatives to soft drinks. Plain water with fresh  mint ,  ginger , berries, or cucumber is refreshing and contains very few calories. People can also add lime or lemon to sparkling water.  Herbal, green, and black teas are also suitable. Many teas come with additional health benefits.  Fruit juices tend to be very high in sugar. When possible, it is best to eat whole fruits instead as they contain fiber.  According to  research from 2016 , almost one-third of people's daily energy intake comes from snacking.  Snacks have  increased in size  over time, resulting in people consuming too much between meals.  However, healthful and homemade snacks can increase fullness and reduce the number of calories that people eat during meals.  Healthful snacks include:  Chewing or mastication initiates the process of digestion. Some  preliminary research  found that chewing each mouthful thoroughly and prolonging meal duration reduced food intake.  Thoroughly chewing food can help a person savor what they are eating. Taking enough time to eat during meals also gives the body time to register when it is full.  Mindful eating, or eating with awareness, is an excellent tool for weight management.  Mindful eating may help reduce food cravings and improve portion control.  To practice mindful eating, a person should avoid distractions, including televisions, laptops, and reading materials. It is best to eat at a table, concentrate on how the food tastes, and be aware of signs that the body is full.  Sitting down and eating a healthful meal with family can also play a role in weight management.  Eating at home can  reduce fat and sugar intake . Parents or caregivers who cook balanced, nutritious meals for children also often pass these positive habits onto them.  There are plenty of ways to lose weight without going on a diet or exercising. The above tips are a great way to start making positive lifestyle changes.  Adding exercise to these healthful habits can also improve a person's weight loss results.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bliss, E. S., &amp; Whiteside, E. (2018, July 12). The gut-brain axis, the human gut microbiota and their integration in the development of obesity.  Frontiers in Physiology ,  9 , 900.  Bliss, E. S., &amp; Whiteside, E. (2018, July 12). The gut-brain axis, the human gut microbiota and their integration in the development of obesity.  Frontiers in Physiology ,  9 , 900.  Dunn, C., Haubenreiser, M., Johnson, M., Nordby, K., Aggarwal, S., Myer, S., &amp; Thomas, C. (2018, March). Mindfulness approaches and weight loss, weight maintenance, and weight regain [Abstract].  Current Obesity Reports ,  7 (1), 37–49.  Garcia, A. L., Reardon, R., McDonald, M., &amp; Vargas-Garcia, E. J. (2016, December). Community interventions to improve cooking skills and their effects on confidence and eating behaviour.  Current Nutrition Reports ,  5 (4), 315–322.  Hollis, J. H. (2018, September 1). The effect of mastication on food intake, satiety and body weight.  Physiology &amp; Behavior ,  193   (Part B), 242–245. Retrieved from  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0031938418302087?via%3Dihub   Hughes, J. W., Goldstein, C. M., Logan, C., Mulvany, J. L., Hawkins, M. A. W., Sato, A. F., &amp; Gurnstad, J. (2017, July 28). Controlled testing of novel portion control plate produces smaller self-selected portion sizes compared to regular dinner plate.  BMC Obesity ,  4 , 30.  Kang, Y., &amp; Cai, Y. (2018, June). The development of probiotics therapy to obesity: A therapy that has gained considerable momentum.  Hormones ,  17 (2), 141–151.  Kavader, G., Demircioğlu, D. T., Özgönenel, L., &amp; Emre, T. Y. (2015, May). The relationship between vitamin D status, physical activity and insulin resistance in overweight and obese subjects.  Bosnian Journal of Basic Medical Sciences ,  15 (2), 62–66.  Labbe, D., Rytz, A., Brunstrom, J. M., Forde, C. G., &amp; Martin, N. (2017, April 1). Influence of BMI and dietary restrain on self-selected portions of prepared meals in US women.  Appetite ,  111 , 203–207.  Lavelle, F., Spence, M., Hollywood, L., McGowan, L., Surgenor, D., McCloat, A., … Dean, M. (2016, August 3). Learning cooking skills at different ages: A cross-sectional study.  International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity ,  2016 (13), 119.  Laverty, A. A., Magee, L., Monterio, C. A., Saxena, S., &amp; Millett, C. (2015, October 26). Sugar and artificially sweetened beverage consumption and adiposity changes: National longitudinal study.  International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity ,  12 , 137.  Leger, D., Bayon, V., &amp; de Sanctis, A. (2015, December 15). The role of sleep in the regulation of body weight [Abstract].  Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology ,  418 (Part 2), 101–107.  Mantau, A., Hattula, S., &amp; Bornemann, T. (2018, November 1). Individual determinants of emotional eating: A simultaneous investigation [Abstract].  Appetite ,  130 , 93–103.  Nijike, V. Y., Smith, T. M., Shuval, O., Shuval, K., Edshteyn, I., Kalantari, V., &amp; Yaroch, A. L. (2016, September 7). Snack food, satiety, and weight.  Advances in Nutrition ,  7 (5), 866–878.  Oldham-Cooper, R. E., Wilkinson, L. L., Hardman, C. A., Rogers, P. J., &amp; Brunstrom, J. M. (2017, November 1). Presenting a food in multiple smaller units increases expected satiety.  Appetite ,  118 , 106–112.  Oliver, J. (2017, March 18). 10 Food tricks and tips.  Ortinau, L. C., Hoertel, H. A., Douglas, S. M., &amp; Leidy, H. J. (2014, September 29). Effects of high-protein vs. high-fat snacks on appetite control, satiety, and eating initiation in healthy women.  Nutrition Journal ,  2014 (13), 97.  Rebello, C. J., O'Neil, C. E., &amp; Greenway, F. L. (2016, February). Dietary fiber and satiety: The effects of oats on satiety.  Nutrition Reviews ,  74 (2), 131–147.  Smit, H. J., Kemsley, E. K., Tapp, H. S., &amp; Henry, C. J. (2011, August). Does prolonged chewing reduce food intake? Fletcherism revisited.  Appetite ,  57 (1), 295–298.  Ulrich-Lai, Y. M., Fulton, S., Wilson, M., Petrovich, G., &amp; Rinaman, L. (2015). Stress exposure, food intake, and emotional state.  Stress ,  18 (4), 381–399.  Vitamin D [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Ziauddeen, N., Page, P., Penney, T. L., Nicholson, S., Kirk, S. F. L., &amp; Almiron-Roig, E. (2018, June 1). Eating at food outlets and leisure places and "on the go" is associated with less-healthy food choices than eating at home and in school in children: Cross-sectional data from the UK National Diet and Nutrition Survey Rolling Program (2008–2014).  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  107 (6), 992–1003.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "14 ways to lose weight without diet or exercise."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322780.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, August 15). "14 ways to lose weight without diet or exercise."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  