 In this article, we describe what monk fruit and  stevia  are, the pros and cons of using each, and how to choose between them.  We also discuss whether these sweeteners are safe for people with  diabetes  and look at some alternatives.  Monk fruit is also called luo han guo or swingle. It looks like a small gourd, and it grows on a vine.  Monk fruit is native to regions of Southeast Asia, including some parts of Thailand and China. Buddhist monks in the 13th century were the first to cultivate the fruit, which is the reason for its name.  Fresh monk fruit spoils rather quickly. Traditionally, people used dried monk fruit in herbal medicines.  Today, monk fruit is most popular as a natural sweetener. The fruit's extract contains substances called mogrosides, which are intensely sweet.  According to the   International Food Information Council Foundation  , monk fruit is around 150–200 times sweeter than sugar. Some manufacturers mix the extract with different sugars to balance out the intensity.  A variety of monk fruit sweeteners are available to purchase  online .  A monk fruit sweetener has several benefits when compared with sugar:  Monk fruit sweeteners may also have some health benefits:  For the following reasons, a person may think twice before using monk fruit sweeteners to replace sugar:  Stevia is a sweetener extracted from the leaves of the  Stevia rebaudiana  plant, which is native to some parts of South America.  The leaves contain substances knowns as steviol glycosides, which are  200–400 times  sweeter than table sugar.  People have used whole leaves or crude extracts from the plant as a sweetener for many centuries. Despite this, the  FDA  have not approved the use of raw stevia, due to safety concerns.  However, the FDA do consider high-purity extracts of steviol glycosides to be generally regarded as safe.  This means that, in the U.S., stevia sweeteners usually consist of highly purified extracts of the steviol glycosides rebaudioside A or stevioside. They may contain a mixture of both.  A variety of stevia sweeteners are available to purchase  online .  When compared with table sugar, stevia has similar advantages to monk fruit, including:  Some potential disadvantages to using stevia sweeteners include:  Monk fruit and stevia are both low-glycemic sweeteners and should have little or no effect on a person's blood sugar levels.  However, it is important to check the labels of products that contain these sweeteners. Other ingredients may contain sugars or carbohydrates.  Monk fruit and stevia have very similar properties. For many, the choice between them simply comes down to personal preference. A person may want to try both and see which they prefer.  When choosing between monk fruit and stevia, considerations may include:  People with allergies to other plants in the  Asteraceae  family should avoid stevia.  Anyone who experiences gastrointestinal side effects from stevia may prefer monk fruit sweeteners.  Also, it is important to consider the use. One sweetener may work better in tea and  coffee , while the other may be better for cooking and baking.  There are a variety of alternative sweeteners.  The FDA have approved six high-intensity sweeteners for food:  However, these may negatively affect blood sugar management, gut health, and cardiovascular health. More research is needed.  For people interested in sweeteners that contain some sugar and calories, natural choices include:  Sugar alcohols are a type of carbohydrate. They are an alternative to sugar and contain fewer calories. Examples include:  However, sugar alcohols can cause gastrointestinal side effects, such as gas, bloating, and  diarrhea .  Monk fruit and stevia are non-nutritive sweeteners. This means that the products contain very few calories, if any. They both come from plants, and they have very similar properties.  Monk fruit and stevia sweeteners are generally safe for people with diabetes, but always check the labeling to ensure that the manufacturers have not added sugars or carbohydrates.  For many people, choosing between these two sweeteners will come down to cost, availability, and taste.  However, stevia can cause gastrointestinal side effects. Also, anyone with an allergy to plants from the  Asteraceae  family should avoid stevia.  Both  monk fruit  and  stevia  sweeteners are available to purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Additional information about high-intensity sweeteners permitted for use in food in the United States. (2018, February 8).  Additional information about high-intensity sweeteners permitted for use in food in the United States. (2018, February 8).  Everything you need to know about monk fruit sweeteners. (2018, August 7).  Gardner, C., Wylie-Rosett, J., Gidding, S. S., Steffen, L. M., Johnson, R. K., Reader, D., &amp; Lichtenstein, A. H. (2012, July 24). Nonnutritive sweeteners: Current use and health perspectives: A scientific statement from the American Heart Association and the American Diabetes Association.  Circulation ,  126 (4), 509–519.  Has stevia been approved by FDA to be used as a sweetener? (2018, March 28).  High-intensity sweeteners. (2017, December 19).  Liu, H., Wang, C., Qi, X., Zou, J., &amp; Sun, Z. (2018, May 1). Antiglycation and antioxidant activities of mogroside extract from  Siraitia grosvenorii  (swingle) fruits.  Journal of Food Science and Technology ,  55 (5), 1880–1888.  Strawbridge, H. (2018, January 8). Artificial sweeteners: Sugar-free, but at what cost?  Sugar alcohols [Fact sheet]. (n.d.).  Xu, Q., Chen, S. Y., Deng, L. D., Feng, L. P., Huang, L. Z., &amp; Yu, R. R. (2013, November 18). Antioxidant effect of mogrosides against oxidative stress induced by palmitic acid in mouse insulinoma NIT-1 cells.  Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research ,  46 (11), 949–955.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "What are monk fruit and stevia?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322769.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, August 15). "What are monk fruit and stevia?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  