 Many fast foods are  fried in unhealthful oils  or coated in salt to make them more appetizing. Also, additives, such as salt or oil make fast foods a less healthful option for people seeking to reduce  carbohydrate  consumption.  A low-carb diet is not necessarily a healthful diet, especially if someone mainly eats fried meat or high-calorie processed foods.  All healthful diets contain some carbohydrates.  A person's carbohydrate needs will vary based on their activity levels, their stature, and their health goals. For specific requirements, it is best to speak with a dietitian.  One study in   Nutrition and Metabolism   noted that to achieve a low-carb diet people should aim to consume less than 130 grams (g) of carbs each day.  Dietitians consider anyone consuming below 30 g of carbs per day to be on a very low-carbohydrate diet.  Some fast food restaurants do offer low-carb alternatives, but if not, the following tips can make it easier to eat low-carb fast food:  Low-carb options at fast food restaurants include:  According to the  American Heart Association , fast food is typically high in:  Even a healthful choice, such as a salad, may be full of unhealthful additives, such as high-sodium or high-calorie salad dressing.  The following strategies can help make fast food more healthful:  Healthful eating and making healthful choices can help a person support specific nutritional goals. Fast food can be a part of a healthful diet, and people can make choices to make fast food options more nutritious, balanced, and healthful.  It is nearly impossible, however, for fast food to form the bulk of a healthful diet.  Eating fast food in moderation, keeping healthful alternatives to fast food close by, and eating plenty of nutrient-dense, wholesome meals at home can all be part of a nutritious, balanced low-carb diet.    
 Accurso, A., Bernstein, R. K., Dahlqvist., Draznin, B, Feinman, R. D., Fine, E. J., … Vernon, M. C. (2008, April 8). Dietary carbohydrate restriction in type 2 diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome: Time for a critical appraisal.  Nutrition and Metabolism ,  5 (9).  Accurso, A., Bernstein, R. K., Dahlqvist., Draznin, B, Feinman, R. D., Fine, E. J., … Vernon, M. C. (2008, April 8). Dietary carbohydrate restriction in type 2 diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome: Time for a critical appraisal.  Nutrition and Metabolism ,  5 (9).  Eating fast food. (2015, May 15).  Low carb. (n.d.).  Zagorsky, J. L., &amp; Smith, P. K. (2017, November). The association between socioeconomic status and adult fast-food consumption in the U.S. [Abstract].  Economics &amp; Human Biology ,  27 , 12–25.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What fast foods can you eat on a low-carb diet?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322704.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, August 7). "What fast foods can you eat on a low-carb diet?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  