 The mean platelet count blood test is typically part of a complete blood count (CBC) test. A CBC reveals important information about the number of different blood cells in the body.  Platelets,  also called thrombocytes , are fragments of larger cells made in the  bone marrow  called megakaryocytes.  The test gives a platelet count per microliter (mcL) of blood.  The measurement is the number of platelets a person has, on average, per microliter.  The ideal platelet range is  150,000 to 400,000 per mcL  in most healthy people.  Low platelet count is known as thrombocytopenia. High platelet count is known as thrombocytosis.  The test can be done on its own or as part of a CBC test. A doctor will often perform a platelet count test if they suspect a person has a disorder that affects platelet count.   The test  involves drawing blood from a vein in the arm or hand.  Obtaining a sample of blood from a vein takes a few minutes and generally causes only minimal discomfort. Occasionally, some people may feel queasy or light-headed while the blood is drawn or shortly after. Taking slow deep breaths is usually enough to calm these feelings.  Some people may develop a small mark or bruise. Most people feel fine after the test, but some experience mild aching pain at the site of the needle stick for 1 to 2 days.  A technician puts the blood sample into a machine that counts the number of platelets and produces a report of the findings.  The test is very safe, and complications are rare. People with bleeding disorders should tell their doctor about any history of bleeding issues. Most people find that the test is only a brief inconvenience and a source of mild discomfort.  The amount of time it takes to get the results back varies.  Hospitals administering the test for emergencies or people about to undergo surgery often get the results back almost immediately. It can take a few days to get the results when a doctor's office orders the test at an outside lab.  A high platelet count can happen when something causes the bone marrow to make too many platelets. When the reason is unknown, it is called primary, or essential, thrombocytosis. When excess platelets are due to an infection or other condition, it is called secondary thrombocytosis.  A person's blood clots more easily when they have too many platelets.  Clotting is a natural protection against bleeding. The body produces more platelets during and following an injury.  However, because platelets cause blood clotting, they can also cause dangerous blood clots in the arms or legs. The blood clot may break off or travel to another area of the body.  The risk of a blood clot is higher in people who are confined to bed by illness or who cannot move their limbs.  Someone who has an elevated platelet count because of a recent injury but who must remain in bed may need monitoring to reduce the risk of blood clots as a result.   Some temporary conditions  can cause a higher than normal platelet count. A doctor may order a retest a few days or weeks later when this happens. Some common reasons that platelets are temporarily elevated include:  If a person's platelet count remains high,  the following medical conditions  may be responsible:  A low platelet count can make it difficult for the blood to clot, putting a person at risk of excessive bleeding. The cause may be due to an inherited tendency to not produce enough platelets, but the cause may also be unknown. In other cases, it is due to an underlying medical condition.  If the blood platelet count falls below 20,000 per mcL, a person can begin bleeding spontaneously. People who experience spontaneous bleeding may require a blood transfusion. Low platelet count increases the risk of death in people who have recently experienced a  traumatic injury .  Common causes of low platelet volume include:  Platelet count also tends to  decline with age . A platelet count that is lower than it once was, or that is on the lower end of normal, may not be a cause for concern in an older adult—especially if there are no other symptoms.  Changes in platelet count may mean that a person has a chronic illness or that there is an issue with the bone marrow.  It is generally not possible, however, to diagnose a medical condition based on platelet count alone. People should talk to a doctor about further testing if a blood test reveals low platelets.  It is advisable to inform the doctor about any other symptoms, which can help narrow down testing options.    
 Balduini, C. L., &amp; Noris, P. (2014, June). Platelet count and aging.  Haematologica ,  99 (6), 953–955.  Balduini, C. L., &amp; Noris, P. (2014, June). Platelet count and aging.  Haematologica ,  99 (6), 953–955.  Brown, L. M., Call, M. S., Knudson, M. M., &amp; Cohen, M. J. (2015, March 26). A normal platelet count may not be enough: The impact of admission platelet count on mortality and transfusion in severely injured trauma patients.  The Journal of Trauma: Injury, Infection, and Critical Care ,  71 (2 0 3), S337–S342.  Kuter, D. J. (2018, May). Overview of Thrombocytopenia.  Liu, S., Ren, J., Han, G., Wang, G., Gu, G., Xia, Q., &amp; Li, J. (2012). Mean platelet volume: A controversial marker of disease activity in Crohn's disease.  European Journal of Medical Research ,  17 (1), 27.  Low platelet count or thrombocytopenia. (June 2018).  NCI dictionary of cancer terms. (n.d.).  Platelet count. (2018, July 30).  Thrombocytopenia. (2016, June).  Thrombocytopenia. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What do high or low platelet count levels mean?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322726.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, August 9). "What do high or low platelet count levels mean?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  