 A person's nails can say a lot about the state of their health.  Nail abnormalities, in most cases, are not serious and can be easily treated. In other cases, a health condition that may need medical attention and treatment might be the cause.  In this article, we give a list of nail abnormalities along with their potential causes and pictures. We also discuss how to take care of the nails and when to see a doctor.  Vertical ridges and brittle patches can develop due to aging or minor injuries. Other abnormalities, such as discoloration, spots, and nail separation, may develop as a result of infections, injuries, or some medications.  In many cases, the skin condition known as  psoriasis  causes nail abnormalities. An estimated  50 percent  of people with psoriasis may have nail psoriasis.  Otherwise, trauma to the nail may lead to abnormalities that can result in discoloration, spots, or changes to the nail.  Changes in or around the fingernails and toenails can have many other causes, which we discuss below:  Cracked or split nails are dry and brittle with possible cracks or splits. If someone's nails are easily damaged, this can be a sign of  malnutrition  or a skin disorder.  Nails also naturally become more brittle as people grow older.  Lifestyle factors can also contribute, such as working with the hands or having the hands in water for long periods of time.  Cracked or split nails may also be a sign of:  Non-uniform white spots and lines on the nails are characteristics of leukonychia.  These spots are harmless and minor trauma to the nail is usually the cause. Sometimes, especially when ongoing, they can be the result of:  Beau's lines are depressions across the fingernail. They may be a sign of:  Transverse white lines on the nails are called Mees' lines.  They may be the sign of arsenic or  carbon monoxide poisoning  or may occur when someone is having  chemotherapy .  Koilonychia is characterized by fingernails that are spoon-shaped, with raised ridges and a scooped out  depression .  Koilonychia may be a sign of:  Small depressions and little pits in the nail is called pitting.  These changes in a person's nails are often the result of:  Clubbing is a thickening and curving around the fingertips. Clubbed nails can take years to develop.  Low blood oxygen levels can cause of nail clubbing. Reasons for this deficiency include:  Bluish nails have a blue or blue-like tint due to not enough oxygen in the body.  This can be the result of:  Onycholysis is a white discoloration of the nails that happens when the nail plate and the nail bed separate.  Causes of onycholysis may include:  A greenish-black color to the nail is the primary feature of paronychia. It is usually a sign of a bacterial nail infection.  Having a dark band on each nail is characteristic of Terry's nails.  Terry's nails can be the result of:  Ram's horn nails are thickening and overgrowth of the nails.  Ram's horn nails may be the sign of:  People with yellow nail syndrome have nails that are yellow, thicker than usual, and do not grow as fast as healthy nails.  Yellow nail syndrome can be the result of:  People can have gnawed nails when they bite their nails consistently for a long period of time. Compulsive nail biting or picking is sometimes linked to:  People's nails can turn pale or light in color if they have a nutritional deficiency or a circulation problem that stops the blood from reaching the fingertips.  Nails that look very pale may be a sign of:  Lindsay's nails are also known as half and half nails. One part of the nail is white while the other part is pink, red, or brown with a sharp line dividing the two halves.  People who have Lindsay's nails may have one of the following conditions:  Red and puffy skin around the nails is characteristic of puffy nail folds. The skin may appear inflamed.  People may notice puffy nail folds if they have:  Nail abnormalities can be a sign of different conditions that need medical attention and treatment.  Many nail abnormalities are harmless while some are signs of health conditions.  They are usually not the first signs but one of many symptoms, so people should pay attention to all of their body cues rather than just their nails.  Consult a doctor if you are worried about any of the following symptoms of nail abnormalities:  To prevent nail problems, people need to take care of their nails properly. Correct nail care practices include:  Pay attention to any changes or problems, and seek medical attention when needed.  Nail abnormalities can come in many forms, and the ones described here are just some signs and types of abnormalities a person may experience.  To determine the reason behind a nail abnormality, people should visit a doctor for diagnosis and treatment.    
 12 nail changes a dermatologist should examine. (n.d.)  https://www.aad.org/public/skin-hair-nails/nail-care/nail-changes-a-dermatologist-should-examine  
 Higuera, V., Amezcua-Guerra, L. M., Montoya, H., Massó, F., Patlán, M., Paez, A., ... Silveira, L. H. (2016, January). Association of nail dystrophy with accrued damage and capillaroscopic abnormalities in systemic lupus erythematosus [Abstract].  Journal of Clinical Rheumatology ,  22 (1), 13–18.  12 nail changes a dermatologist should examine. (n.d.)  https://www.aad.org/public/skin-hair-nails/nail-care/nail-changes-a-dermatologist-should-examine   Higuera, V., Amezcua-Guerra, L. M., Montoya, H., Massó, F., Patlán, M., Paez, A., ... Silveira, L. H. (2016, January). Association of nail dystrophy with accrued damage and capillaroscopic abnormalities in systemic lupus erythematosus [Abstract].  Journal of Clinical Rheumatology ,  22 (1), 13–18.  Nail diseases. (n.d.).  https://medlineplus.gov/naildiseases.html   Nail psoriasis. (n.d.).  Paramalingam, S., Taylor, A., &amp; Keen, H. (2017, June). FRI0672 Assessment of the nail bed in psoriatic arthritis (PSA) by ultrasound (US) and MRI.  Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases ,  76 , 744.  Singal, A., &amp; Arora, R. (2015, March–April). Nail as a window of systemic diseases.  Indian Dermatology Online Journal ,  6 (2), 67–74.  Pitukweerakul, S., &amp; Pilla, S. (2016, August). Terry's nails and Lindsay's nails: Two nail abnormalities in chronic systemic diseases.  Journal of General Internal Medicine ,  31 (8), 970.  Yang, C. S., &amp; Robinson-Bostom, L. (2015, April 30). Lindsay's nails in chronic kidney disease.  New England Journal of Medicine ,  372 (18), 1748  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gal, Kat. "What do your nails say about your health?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322735.php&gt;    APA  Gal, K. (2018, August 10). "What do your nails say about your health?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  