 Rice is more problematic than some other leftover foods as it may contain bacteria called  Bacillus cereus , which  survive some cooking processes .  This bacterium is often the cause of  food poisoning  from reheated or cooked rice. Food poisoning usually causes  diarrhea  and vomiting and can cause severe complications in people with other health issues.  If people do not follow food safety guidelines correctly, the bacteria may grow on leftover rice and make people sick. However, handling food correctly can prevent illness.  The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) outline the safest ways to cook, store, and reheat food, including rice, properly.  Each of the following steps will ensure that reheated rice has a low risk of making people sick:   1. Wash hands well   Always wash hands thoroughly before preparing and cooking food. Keep utensils that have touched raw animal products separate.   2. Cook the rice properly   When cooking rice, make sure that it reaches a  high temperature . Keep it out of the  danger zone  — between 40°F and 140°F — where bacteria grow rapidly.  Serve rice immediately after cooking.   3. Cool the leftovers quickly   To further reduce bacteria growth,  cool food quickly  by:   4. Store leftovers properly   The  USDA  recommend only storing leftovers for set periods:  Store foods at a safe temperature. According to the  USDA , room temperature is 90°F, which is the ideal temperature for bacteria to grow. Bacteria grow rapidly between 40°F and 140°F.   5. Reheating   When reheating rice, make sure it is piping hot throughout.  To microwave leftover rice:  To stir-fry leftover rice:  To steam leftover rice:  It is safe to eat the rice cold as long as it has been cooled and stored correctly. Do not leave reheated rice sitting on the counter.  Following these steps will reduce the risk of food poisoning. Do not reheat the rice more than once as this further increase the risk of food poisoning.  Food poisoning symptoms typically  include :  The symptoms will come on quickly and should only last a short time. According to one report, there may be up to  84,000 cases  of food poisoning caused by  Bacillus cereus  each year in the U.S.  Most people will recover quickly with no complications. Speak to a doctor if:  Reheating rice is safe when done correctly. It is essential to practice food safety and hygiene whenever cooking.  Following specific steps will reduce bacteria growth and limit the risk of food poisoning from eating reheated rice.    
 Food poisoning (foodborne illness). (n.d.).  Food poisoning (foodborne illness). (n.d.).  Keep foods safe! Food safety basics. (2016, December 20).  Leftovers and food safety. (2013, June 15).  Rasooly, R., Hernlem, B., He, X., &amp; Friedman, M. (2015, March 11). Plant compounds enhance the assay sensitivity for detection of active  Bacillus cereus  toxin.  Toxins ,  7 (3), 835–845.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "Is it safe to reheat rice?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322775.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, August 15). "Is it safe to reheat rice?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  