 Scientists have linked a variety of foods with better sex. In this article, learn about which foods to eat to boost libido, improve stamina, and enhance your sex life.  Keeping the circulatory system in good working order is essential for sexual health. Better circulation can lead to an improved sexual response in men and women. This is especially true for the erectile response. Cardiac health is also vital for stamina.  In other words, if it is good for the heart, it is good for a person's sex life.  The  American Heart Association  recommend a diet that includes:  Research suggests that following this heart-healthy diet can improve certain aspects of sexual health.   Researchers studying the Mediterranean Diet , which follows similar lines to the American Heart Association's, found that people with metabolic syndrome who followed the diet had fewer problems with  erectile dysfunction , otherwise known as ED.  Also, many of the foods featured in a heart-healthy diet, such as avocados, asparagus, nuts, seafood, and fruit, have associations with better sex in both traditional medicine and scientific research.  For example, in Nahuatl — the language once used by the Aztecs — the term for avocados was the same as the  term for testicles .  Also,  researchers  found that people who ate avocados had a reduced risk of metabolic syndrome, which is a risk factor for ED.  Men with metabolic syndrome are almost  twice as likely  as men without it to experience ED, so adding healthful fats, such as those in avocados, to a varied diet may help.  Foods that can help people improve their libido are commonly called aphrodisiacs, after Aphrodite, the ancient Greek goddess of love.  Oysters are among the most famous aphrodisiacs in history. Their effects may be due to their zinc content.  Zinc is a mineral the body needs every day for many vital functions, such as cell metabolism, stamina, and  regulating levels of testosterone .  Testosterone  is the most important male sex hormone.  One older  study  found that zinc might be helpful for treating ED in people with  chronic kidney disease .  Oysters have more zinc than any other food per serving. Some examples of other foods that are high in zinc are:  However, sexual desire is complex and has to do with many more factors than just  nutrition , including an individual's relationships,  stress  levels, and personal preference.  It is natural for people to experience ups and downs in their interest in sex. Many alternative healthcare practitioners claim diet can help.  While more scientific research is needed, the following foods are possible libido-boosters:  When a person has difficulty getting and maintaining an erection, doctors refer to it as ED. According to the Urology Care Foundation, ED affects up to  30 million men  in the United States.  Understanding the physical, mental, and emotional factors that contribute to ED can help people choose a diet that promotes better sex.  Factors that contribute to ED include:  Tackling the underlying cause is the best way to treat ED. But another thing people can do is eat more fruit.  In one study, researchers linked a higher fruit intake to a  14 percent  reduction in the risk of ED. The flavonoid content of many fruits may be responsible for this improvement.  Foods rich in flavonoids  include :   Research  in an animal model has also shown that watermelon may be effective against ED. The melon's content of the amino acid  l-citrulline  may explain this positive action.  Also, nitric oxide may be beneficial to prevent ED by increasing blood flow and vasodilation.  Beets also contain nitrates, which convert to nitric oxide and may be beneficial for blood flow.  Many people look to their diet to increase their sexual desire, improve their ability to have sex, and increase the pleasure they get from sex.  While research indicates possible links between particular foods and better sex, those seeking the best food for sex should ensure they are eating a balanced, heart-healthy diet.    
 Barassi, A., Corsi Romanelli, M. M., Pezzilli, R., Damele, C. A. L., Vaccalluzzo, L., Goi, G., . . . Melzi d'Eril, G. V. (2017, February 8). Levels of L-arginine and L-citrulline in patients with erectile dysfunction of different etiology.  Andrology ,  5 (2), 256–261.  Barassi, A., Corsi Romanelli, M. M., Pezzilli, R., Damele, C. A. L., Vaccalluzzo, L., Goi, G., . . . Melzi d'Eril, G. V. (2017, February 8). Levels of L-arginine and L-citrulline in patients with erectile dysfunction of different etiology.  Andrology ,  5 (2), 256–261.  Cassidy, A., Franz, M., &amp; Rimm, E. B. (2016, February 1). Dietary flavonoid intake and incidence of erectile dysfunction.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  103 (2), 534–541.  Davis, S. R., Worsley, R., Miller, K. K., Parish, S. J., &amp; Santoro, N. (2016, February). Androgens and female sexual function and dysfunction – Findings from the Fourth International Consultation of Sexual Medicine [Abstract].   Journal of Sexual Medicine ,  13 (2), 168–178.  English, J. (2013, April 19). A natural approach to enhancing sexual libido and performance.  Fallah, A., Mohammad-Hasani, A., &amp; Colagar, A. H. (2018, April–June). Zinc is an essential element for male fertility: A review of Zn roles in men's health, germination, sperm quality, and fertilization.  Journal of Reproduction &amp; Infertility ,  19 (2), 69–81.  Fulgoni III, V. L., Dreher, M., &amp; Davenport, A. J. (2013, January 2). Avocado consumption is associated with better diet quality and nutrient intake, and lower metabolic syndrome risk in US adults: Results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2001–2008.  Nutrition Journal ,  12 (1).  Higdon, J. (2016, February). Flavonoids.  Kaya, E., Sikka, S. C., &amp; Gur, S. (2015, April). A comprehensive review of metabolic syndrome affecting erectile dysfunction [Abstract].  Journal of Sexual Medicine ,  12 (4), 856–875.  Kotta, S., Ansari, S. H., &amp; Ali, J. (2013, January–June). Exploring scientifically proven herbal aphrodisiacs.  Pharmacognosy Review ,  7 (13), 1–10.  Leung, K. W., &amp; Wong, A. S. T. (2013, September 13). Ginseng and male reproductive function.  Spermatogenesis ,  3 (3).  Maca. (2016, March 14).  Munglue, P., Kupittayanant, S., &amp; Kupittayanant, P. (2014, January). Effects of watermelon ( Citrullus lanatus ) flesh extract on sexual behavior in male rats.  Chiang Mai University Journal of Natural Sciences,  13  (1), 12982.  Steels, E., Rao, A., &amp; Vitetta, L. (2011, September). Physiological aspects of male libido enhanced by standardized Trigonella foenum-graecum extract and mineral formulation [Abstract].  Phytotherapy Research ,  25 (9), 1294–1300.  The American Heart Association's diet and lifestyle recommendations. (2018, April 17).  Vecchio, M., Navaneethan, S. D., Johnson, D. W., Lucisano, G., Graziano, G., Querques, M., Saglimbene, V., … Strippoli, G. F. M. (2010, June). Treatment options for sexual dysfunction in patients with chronic kidney disease: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials.  Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology ,  5 (6), 985–995.  What is erectile dysfunction? (2018, June).  Zinc [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Dresden, Danielle. "Foods to eat for better sex."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322779.php&gt;    APA  Dresden, D. (2018, August 15). "Foods to eat for better sex."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  