 According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),  1 in 3 adults  will develop  shingles  at some point during their lives. Shingles, or  herpes  zoster, is caused by the varicella-zoster virus, which is the same virus that causes  chickenpox  — so anyone who has previously had chickenpox can develop shingles.  Once someone has had chicken pox, the  virus stays in their body , hidden in the nerve cells but does not usually cause further symptoms. Sometimes, however, the virus becomes re-activated, and the infection returns as shingles, not chickenpox.  The location of the shingles rash depends on which nerves the virus has infected.  Shingles symptoms appear on the face when the chickenpox virus infects the facial nerves.  When shingles affects the eyes, the condition is medically referred to as  herpes zoster ophthalmicus .   Doctors do not know why  some people who have had chickenpox get shingles and others do not.  People with weak immune systems — including older people, people with  HIV , people with  AIDS , and people taking drugs that weaken the immune system — are more vulnerable to shingles.  Anyone of any age can, however, develop shingles on the face.  Shingles is different from other conditions in several ways:  The most common complication of shingles is called  postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) .  PHN is damage to the nerves that can cause tingling, burning, pain, and other symptoms for months or years after the infection. Some people experience constant pain, while the pain comes and goes for others.  Complications from shingles are more common in people who have a weak immune system or a chronic medical condition, such as  diabetes , HIV, and AIDS.  Shingles can, rarely,  cause severe complications  including:  Untreated or poorly managed shingles complications can be fatal. However, the death rate for shingles is low. A  2012 study  estimates that shingles is an underlying cause of 78 deaths each year in the United States.   A doctor can usually diagnose shingles  with a clinical exam. A doctor may take a sample of the skin for testing if it is unclear what is causing the rash. The test that assesses skin for shingles will, however, also give a positive result if a person has another herpes virus.  People who have shingles in or around the eyes should see an ophthalmologist because shingles around the eyes  can cause eye problems , including  glaucoma .  Treatment is the same no matter where shingles develop. Treatment will involve taking  an antiviral drug  to reduce the severity of the outbreak and help it disappear more quickly.  People will see the best results if they take antiviral medication within 72 hours of the rash appearing.  In most cases, a doctor will prescribe the drugs famciclovir and valacyclovir. People with weak immune systems may need to take a different drug, such as acyclovir, instead.  Most research suggests anti-shingles drugs are safe for people who are breast-feeding, but those who are pregnant or breast-feeding should discuss medications with their doctors.  People who develop PHN may also require pain medication. PHN medication may include oral drugs, such as opioids or creams that people can apply directly to the skin.  People who have shingles on the face may want to conceal the rash.  However, makeup and lotions may irritate the blisters. This is most likely if the blisters are open or oozing. Putting anything on the blisters can make the rash last longer. It can, in rare cases, also cause an infection.  People should keep the rash clean and avoid using makeup, lotion, and anything else that could irritate the skin.  Shingles is not contagious. However, people who have never had chickenpox or are unvaccinated can contract the virus and develop chickenpox if exposed to an open sore.  Some ways to prevent developing shingles  include :  Shingles can be intensely painful and may cause embarrassment when the rash is visible on someone's face.  For most people, however, shingles is temporary and goes away on its own. People who think they might have shingles should see a doctor immediately.  Proper treatment can prevent the symptoms from getting worse and prevent against scarring and damage to the face.    
 Kaye, K. M. (2018, February). Herpes zoster.  Kaye, K. M. (2018, February). Herpes zoster.  Mahamud, A., Marin, M., Nickell, S. P., Shoemaker, T., Zhang, J. X., &amp; Bialek, S. R. (2012, October). Herpes zoster-related deaths in the United States: Validity of death certificates and mortality rates, 1979–2007 [Abstract].  Clinical Infectious Diseases ,  55 (7), 960–966.  Roat, M. I. (2016, December). Herpes zoster ophthalmicus.  Shingles. (2018, March 14).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "How to treat shingles on the face."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 8 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322711.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, August 8). "How to treat shingles on the face."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  