 Skin can stretch to accommodate size changes, including those due to weight fluctuations,  puberty , muscle gain, and pregnancy. If the skin stretches too quickly, the  collagen  and elastic tissues in the skin may break, resulting in stretch marks.  Stretch marks typically first appear as red, pink, or purple lines. Over time, the blood vessels heal, and the lines often fade and become less noticeable. However, they may not disappear entirely.  According to some estimates, up to  80 percent  of the population get stretch marks. They are particularly common during and after pregnancy due to the rapid changes in the body.  Teenagers who experience fast growth and body changes during puberty may also develop stretch marks. Some people who gain muscle quickly, such as weightlifters, may get stretch marks on their arms, shoulders, and legs.  While there is no way to guarantee that a person will not develop stretch marks, the following tips may help reduce the likelihood:   Omega-3  fatty acids help the skin stay supple. Many cold-water fish contain omega-3, including:  Vegetarian sources of omega-3 include:  The 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans  recommend 8 ounces (oz) of seafood per week . Pregnant women should talk with a doctor to confirm how much fish it is safe for them to eat. They should also  avoid fish that is high in mercury .   Vitamin D  is essential for healthy skin. A person can often get  vitamin  D from sun exposure.  However, too much sun exposure also raises the risk of skin aging and  cancer .  The Skin Cancer Foundation  state that eating fortified foods and taking supplements when necessary is a safe way to get vitamin D without exposing skin to the sun.  The  American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists  recommend 25–35 pounds (lb) of total weight gain for pregnant women who are already at a healthy weight.  Women who are overweight before pregnancy should gain 15–25 lb, while underweight women should gain up to 40 lb.  Pregnant women should talk to their doctor about how much weight to gain during pregnancy because underlying health conditions can also affect the range.  There are no creams or oils proven to prevent stretch marks. However, keeping the skin supple may be helpful for reducing the risk in some people.  Moisturizers can often help reduce itching that happens as the skin stretches.  One review  found that creams and oils may also help prevent stretch marks, but more recent research is necessary to confirm this.  Anabolic steroids weaken the skin's structure, so people who use them, such as some athletes, may be more prone to stretch marks.  Anabolic steroids are not the same as corticosteroids, which are medications that people use to treat  asthma , allergies,  lupus ,  arthritis , and many other conditions.  Steroid creams or corticosteroids, which usually contain cortisone, may weaken skin's collagen and result in stretch marks. However, people concerned about this should speak to a doctor before discontinuing them.  People can try anti-itch creams that do not contain cortisone for minor bug bites and rashes. They can also ask a doctor about nonsteroidal creams for conditions such as  eczema .  If a person must use creams containing cortisone, it is best to use them only for as long as necessary before switching to a milder cream.  Researchers have not been able to prove that any specific vitamins prevent stretch marks, but evidence shows that  skin needs a variety of nutrients , including vitamins A, C, E, and zinc, to stay healthy. Fruits and vegetables are rich in these and other vitamins and minerals.  Exercising regularly can help a person lose weight and avoid weight gain in the future. Remaining at a healthy weight can reduce the risk of excessive skin stretching.  Exercise also increases blood flow to the skin, which can help the skin rebuild itself.  The sun's ultraviolet (UV) rays damage the skin's collagen and elastin, which can make stretch marks more likely to form.  People should seek shade, wear UV-protective clothing, and apply sunscreen daily. It is essential to allow the sunscreen to absorb for  30 minutes  before sun exposure and to reapply it at least every 2 hours while spending time in the sun.  Smoking reduces blood flow to the skin, which deprives it of the oxygen it needs to repair itself. In addition, smoking depletes nutrients in the body that the skin needs to stay healthy.  Smoking also releases damaging free radicals, which can break down the collagen and elastin fibers in the skin.  Rapid growth and weight gain are the most common causes of stretch marks. However, not everyone who gains weight quickly or has a growth spurt as a teenager will develop them.  Experts believe that genetics may play a role in whether or not a person gets stretch marks. The  American Society for Dermatologic Surgery  say that if a woman's mother had stretch marks after pregnancy, she is more likely to get them as well.   Researchers  also recently identified specific genes that may predispose people to stretch marks.   Other research  indicates that women who are younger and have a higher  body weight  during pregnancy are more likely to get stretch marks than older pregnant women who weigh less.  There is no proven way to get rid of stretch marks once they appear. However, some new treatments look promising, including:  A healthful lifestyle can help keep the skin looking supple and smooth and may help prevent stretch marks.  However, genetics also contributes to a person's likelihood of developing stretch marks, so it may not be possible for everyone to prevent them.  People who are bothered by their stretch marks may wish to talk to a doctor about clinical treatment options.    
 Brennan, M., Young, G., &amp; Devane, D. (2012, November 14). Topical preparations for preventing stretch marks in pregnancy.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  2012 (11).  Brennan, M., Young, G., &amp; Devane, D. (2012, November 14). Topical preparations for preventing stretch marks in pregnancy.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  2012 (11).  Dietary guidelines for Americans 2010. (2010, December).  Eating fish: What pregnant women and parents should know. (2017, November 29).  Ersoy, E., Ersoy, A. O., Celik, E. Y., Tokmak, A., Ozler, S., &amp; Tasci, Y. (2016, May). Is it possible to prevent striae gravidarum?  Journal of the Chinese Medical Association ,  79 (5), 272–275.  Gamil, H. D., Ibrahim, S. A., Ebrahim, H. M., &amp; Albalat, W. (2018, May). Platelet-rich plasma versus tretinoin in treatment of striae distensae: A comparative study.  Dermatologic Surgery ,  44 (5), 697–704.  Hexsel, D., Soirefmann, M., Porto, M. D., Schilling-Souza, J., Siega, C., &amp; Dal'Forno, T. (2014, May). Superficial dermabrasion versus topical tretinoin on early striae distensae: A randomized, pilot study.  Dermatologic Surgery ,  40 (5), 537–544.  How much vitamin D do you need? (2015, August 6).  Laser/light therapy for stretch marks. (n.d.).  Picard, D., Sellier, S., Houivet, E., Marpeau, L., Fournet, P., Thobois, B., … Joly, P. (2015, October). Incidence and risk factors for striae gravidarum.  Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology ,  73 (4), 699–700.  Schagen, S. K., Zampeli, V. A., Makrantonaki, E., &amp; Zouboulis, C. C. (2012, July 1). Discovering the link between nutrition and skin aging.  Dermato-Endocrinology ,  4 (3), 298–307.  Stretch marks. (n.d.).  Sunscreens explained. (2012, May 22).  The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (2013, January). Weight gain during pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 548.  Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology ,  548 (121), 210–212.  Tung, J. Y., Kiefer, A. K., Mullins, M., Francke, U., &amp; Eriksson, N. (2013, November). Genome-wide association analysis implicates elastic microfibrils in the development of nonsyndromic striae distensae.  Journal of Investigative Dermatology ,  133 (11), 2628–2631.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "Ten tips to prevent stretch marks."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322776.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2018, August 15). "Ten tips to prevent stretch marks."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  