  Candida albicans  is part of our natural microflora — or the microorganisms that commonly live in or on our bodies. It can be found in the GI tract, the mouth, and the vagina.  Most of the time it causes no issues, but it's possible for overgrowths and infections to happen.   Candida albicans  is the  most prevalent  cause of fungal infections in people. Its species name,  albicans , comes from the Latin word for "white." The yeast appears white when cultured on a plate. And in the case of certain infections, like  thrush , it can create white patches.  We look more closely at types of  Candida albicans  infections and how they're treated.  Below, we'll explore the causes, symptoms, and treatment of four of the most common types of  Candida  infection. In the next section we'll go over the less common infections that  Candida albicans  can also cause.   Candida  species are the  most common  cause of fungal  urinary tract infections (UTIs) .  Candida  UTIs can occur in the lower portion of the urinary tract or in some cases can ascend up to the kidneys.  The following can put you at risk of developing a  Candida  UTI:   Symptoms   Many people with a  Candida  UTI don't have symptoms. If symptoms are present, they can include:   Treatment   Treatment is only recommended for symptomatic individuals. The antifungal drug  fluconazole  can be used in many cases.  If a catheter is in place, it should be removed.   Candida albicans  is the  most common  cause of genital yeast infections.  Normally, a type of bacteria called  Lactobacillus  keeps the amount of  Candida  in the genital area under control. However, when  Lactobacillus  levels are disrupted in some way,   Candida  can overgrow  and cause an infection.  You can also develop a  Candida  genital infection after participating in certain sexual activities, particularly those that involve oral-genital contact.  Although otherwise healthy individuals can get genital  Candida  infections, the following groups are at an increased risk:   Symptoms   Symptoms of a genital  Candida  infection can include:   Candida  species can also  infect the male genitals , often if their partner has a  vaginal  Candida  infection . The infection may be asymptomatic, but can cause an itchy or burning rash around the head of the penis.   Treatment   Mild or moderate genital  Candida  infections can be treated with a short course of an over-the-counter (OTC) or prescription antifungal cream, pill, or suppository. You could also be prescribed a single dose of an oral antifungal medication, such as fluconazole.  For more complicated infections, you may be prescribed a longer course of medication, either in the form of a cream, a pill, or an ointment.  Despite being a normal part of the microflora of your mouth,  Candida albicans  can cause  infections  if it overgrows. The infection may not be limited to just your mouth. It can spread to your tonsils and the back of your throat as well.  Severe infections  may spread to the esophagus .  People that are at an increased risk for developing  oral thrush  include:   Symptoms   Some of the common symptoms of oral thrush include:  If an  oral thrush  infection is left untreated, it can lead to a systemic  Candida  infection, particularly in people with a weakened immune system.   Treatment   Oral thrush is treated with an antifungal medication that can come in the form of a pill, liquid, or lozenge. Examples of drugs that are used include nystatin or clotrimazole.  An oral course of fluconazole can be given for more severe cases.   Candida  species can also infect your skin and mucus membranes.   Candida albicans  is most often the cause of a fungal skin infection, although other  Candida  strains can also cause it.  Areas that are warm, moist, or sweaty provide good environments for yeast to thrive. Examples of such areas include the armpits, groin, the skin between your fingers and toes, the corners of your mouth, and the area under your breasts.  Other risk factors for developing a  Candida  skin infection include:   Symptoms   The most common symptom of a   Candida  skin infection  is a red rash that forms in the affected area.  In some cases, blister-like lesions can form. The skin may also become thickened or produce a white substance that has a curd-like appearance.   Treatment   Antifungal creams are typically given to clear the skin infection. They can contain antifungal drugs such as clotrimazole, miconazole, and econazole.  A steroid cream may also be given to help ease any itching or swelling. The skin should also be kept dry while recovering.  In cases where the infection is widespread, oral fluconazole pills may be prescribed.  In order to diagnose  candidiasis , your doctor will first take your medical history and ask you about your symptoms. They may also ask if you have any conditions or medications that could lead to a weakened immune system, or if you've taken a course of antibiotics recently.  Many common cases of  candidiasis  can often be diagnosed through a physical examination.  If your doctor is uncertain if your symptoms are due to a  Candida  infection, they may take a sample from the affected area. This sample can then be used to culture the organism and to identify what species it is. For example, if candidemia is suspected, your doctor will collect a blood sample for testing.  Identifying the species of  Candida  that's causing your infection is also helpful because your doctor will be able to prescribe an antifungal medication that will be effective in treating that particular species.  If  Candida albicans  enter your bloodstream, they can cause serious infections not only in your blood but in other organs as well.  An important risk factor for developing more invasive  Candida  conditions is  neutropenia . This is when there are abnormally low levels of cells called neutrophils in your blood. It can make you more prone to infections.  People that are commonly affected by neutropenia include people undergoing  chemotherapy  or  radiation therapy  for  cancer , and people with  leukemia  or other  bone marrow  diseases.  Individuals that have neutropenia and an invasive  Candida  infection have different treatment recommendations.  Candidemia is a blood infection with  Candida  species. It can lead to long hospital stays and an increase in mortality due to concurrent conditions.  Risk factors for candidemia include:   Symptoms   Symptoms can resemble those of bacterial  sepsis  and can include:   Diagnosis and treatment   Candidemia can be diagnosed when the yeast is isolated from a blood sample.  Treatment may depend on the species of  Candida  causing the infection, but can include IV doses of fluconazole, caspofungin, micafungin, or amphotericin B. Catheters should also be removed.   Endocarditis  is an infection of the inner lining of your heart, which includes the heart chambers and valves.  Fungal  endocarditis  is a very serious condition with a high mortality rate.  Candida albicans  is responsible for  24 to 46 percent  of all cases of fungal endocarditis.  Risk factors for developing this condition include:   Symptoms   Symptoms of fungal endocarditis can include:   Diagnosis and treatment   Diagnosis can be difficult because symptoms are often similar to endocarditis caused by bacteria.  Treatment may include intravenous (IV) fluconazole or amphotericin B, removal of any infected medical device, and possible surgical removal of fungus from the tissue.   Endophthalmitis  is an  inflammation  of the eye that can be caused by fungus. It can lead to loss of vision.   Candida albicans  is the most common  Candida  species involved, although  Candida tropicalis  can also cause the infection.  Risk factors for endophthalmitis are:   Symptoms   The condition can affect one or both eyes. The main symptom is inflammation in the eye, although in some cases  pus  can be present in the tissues of the eye.   Diagnosis and treatment   Endophthalmitis can be diagnosed through a retinal examination as well as by analyzing a sample of fluid from your eye.  Treatment can include amphotericin B with flucytosine. Fluconazole can also be used.   Meningitis  is the inflammation of the tissues that surround your brain and spinal cord. Fungal  meningitis  can occur when fungus travels through the blood to your spinal cord. Fungal meningitis caused by  Candida  is often acquired within a hospital.  Factors that can put you at risk for meningitis caused by  Candida  can include:   Symptoms   Symptoms of fungal meningitis include:   Diagnosis and treatment   If a fungus is suspected for causing your meningitis, a sample of cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) will be taken and cultured.  The recommended treatment of meningitis caused by  Candida  species is amphotericin B with flucytosine.  Intra-abdominal candidiasis can also be referred to as  Candida  peritonitis. It's an inflammation of the lining of your inner abdomen caused by a yeast infection.  The condition is most commonly caused by  Candida albicans  although other  Candida  species can cause it as well.  Some risk factors for developing intra-abdominal candidiasis include:   Symptoms   The symptoms of intra-abdominal candidiasis can be very similar, if not indistinguishable, from bacterial  peritonitis . Symptoms can include:  In order to diagnose the condition, your doctor will take a sample of abdominal fluid (peritoneal fluid). If  Candida  is causing the infection, yeast will be observed in the sample.   Treatment   Treatment can include antifungal drugs such as:  Catheters should be removed as well.   Osteomyelitis  is a  bone infection  while fungal  arthritis  (also called  septic arthritis ) is a fungal infection of a joint. Both conditions can be caused by  Candida  species, although this is rare. Bacterial infections are more common.  Risk factors for developing these conditions can include:   Symptoms   Symptoms of these conditions include pain or swelling in the affected area that can be accompanied by fever or chills. People with fungal arthritis can also have great difficulty using the affected joint.  In order to determine if a fungal infection is causing osteomyelitis, a bone biopsy may be needed. Analysis of joint fluid can determine if arthritis is due to a fungal infection.  If a blood infection caused either condition,  Candida  may also be detected in the blood.   Treatment   Treatment can include courses of antifungal medication such as amphotericin B and fluconazole.  Normally,  Candida  species are a part of the natural microflora of the GI tract, skin, and vagina, and don't cause disease. Some circumstances, such as taking a long course of antibiotics or having a weakened immune system can increase your risk of developing a  Candida  infection.  The most common  Candida  infections, such as vaginal and skin infections, are localized and can be treated with antifungal drugs. An untreated  Candida  infection carries the risk of leading to a systemic infection in which other organs can become involved.  If you notice symptoms that are consistent with those of a  Candida  infection, see your doctor in order to receive the proper diagnosis and treatment.    
 Berman, J., (2012, August 21).  Candida albicans. Current Biology, 22 (16), 620-622.  Berman, J., (2012, August 21).  Candida albicans. Current Biology, 22 (16), 620-622.  Candida peritonitis. (2016).  Candidiasis. (n.d.).  Sykes, J. E., (2014). Canine and Feline Infectious Diseases 2014, 653-659.  Candidiasis. (2013, February).  Candidiasis. (2017, August 7).  Candidiasis. (2018, March).  Candidiasis (Mucocutaneous). (2017, April).  Definition of invasive candidiasis. (2016, March 2).  Fungal meningitis. (2016, April 15).  Fungal Urinary Tract Infections (UTIs). (2018, June).  Kuhbacher, A., Burger-Kentischer, A, &amp; Rupp, S. (2017, June 7). Interaction of  Candida  species with the skin.  Microorganisms, 5 (2), 32.  Mayo Clinic Staff. (2015, September 25). Osteomyelitis.  Mayo Clinic Staff. (2015, September 18). Yeast infection (vaginal).  Mayo Clinic Staff. (2018, March 8). Oral thrush. retrieved from  https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/oral-thrush/symptoms-causes/syc-20353533   Mayo Clinic Staff. (2018, June 6). Peritonitis.  Mayo Clinic Staff. (2018, July 4). Septic arthritis.  Pappas, P. G., Rex, J. H., Sobel, J. D., Filler, S. G., Dismukes, W. E., Walsh, T. J., &amp; Edwards, E. J. (2004). Guidelines for Treatment of Candidiasis.  Clinical infectious Diseases, 38 (2), 2004.  Rolston, K. VI., &amp; Bodey, G. P. (2003). Cancer Medicine. 6th Edition: Fungal Infections.  Sridhar, J., Flynn Jr, H. W., Kuriyan, A. E., Miller, D., &amp; Albini, T. (2013, September 20). Endogenous fungal endophthalmitis: Risk factors, clinical features, and treatment outcomes in mold and yeast infections.  Journal of Ophthalmic Inflammation and Infection, 3 (60).  Walsh, T. J., &amp; Gamaletsou, M. N. (2013, December6). Treatment of fungal disease in the setting of neutropenia.  American Society of Hematology Education Book (1) , 423-427.  Yeast infection. (n.d.).  Yuan, S-M. (2016, May - June). Fungal endocarditis.  Brazilian Journal of Cardiovascular Surgery, 31 (3).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Seladi-Schulman, Jill. "About Candida albicans: Natural yeast and problematic infections."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322722.php&gt;    APA  Seladi-Schulman, J. (2018, August 9). "About Candida albicans: Natural yeast and problematic infections."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  