 In this article, we explore the health conditions beyond  diabetes  that can cause  hypoglycemia . We also look at treatment options and the dietary changes that can help prevent low blood sugar.  Hypoglycemia occurs when blood sugar levels drop below  70 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dl) . Severe hypoglycemia can be life-threatening if a person does not receive treatment. Treatments focus on returning blood sugar to safe levels.  Blood sugar, or glucose, is the body's primary source of energy. When levels fall too low, the body does not have enough energy to function fully. This is called hypoglycemia.   Insulin  helps the body's cells to absorb sugar from the bloodstream. A person with diabetes may take insulin shots because their body is resistant to insulin or because it does not produce enough.  In people with diabetes, taking too much insulin can cause blood sugar levels to drop too low. Not eating enough or exercising too much after taking insulin can have the same effect.  However, people who do not have diabetes can also experience hypoglycemia.  In people without diabetes, hypoglycemia can result from the body producing too much insulin after a meal, causing blood sugar levels to drop. This is called reactive hypoglycemia.  Reactive hypoglycemia can be an early sign of diabetes.  Other health issues can also cause hypoglycemia, including:   Drinking too much alcohol   When a person's blood sugar levels are low, the pancreas releases a hormone called glucagon.  Glucagon tells the liver to break down stored energy. The liver then releases glucose back into the bloodstream to normalize blood sugar levels.  Drinking too much alcohol can make it difficult for the liver to function. It may no longer be able to release glucose back into the bloodstream, which can cause temporary hypoglycemia.   Medication   Taking another person's diabetes medication can cause hypoglycemia.  Hypoglycemia can also be a side effect of:  Some groups have an increased risk of medication-induced hypoglycemia, including children and people with kidney failure.   Anorexia   A person with the eating disorder  anorexia  may not be consuming enough food for their body to produce sufficient glucose.   Hepatitis    Hepatitis  is an inflammatory condition that affects the liver. Having hepatitis can prevent the liver from working properly.  If the liver cannot produce or release enough glucose, this can cause problems with blood sugar levels and lead to hypoglycemia.   Adrenal or pituitary gland disorders   Problems with the pituitary gland or adrenal glands can cause hypoglycemia because these parts of the body affect the hormones that control glucose production.   Kidney problems   The kidneys help the body process medication and excrete waste.  If a person has a problem with their kidneys, medication can build up in their bloodstream. This type of buildup can change blood sugar levels and lead to hypoglycemia.   Pancreatic tumor   Pancreatic tumors are rare, but having one can lead to hypoglycemia.  Tumors in the pancreas can cause the organ to produce too much insulin. If insulin levels are too high, blood sugar levels will drop.  When a person has hypoglycemia, they may feel:  A person with hypoglycemia may develop a  headache  or pass out (lose consciousness).  If a person has hypoglycemia often, they may stop experiencing symptoms. This is called hypoglycemia unawareness.  To diagnose hypoglycemia, a doctor first asks a person about their symptoms. If the doctor suspects hypoglycemia, they may perform a blood test.  Blood sugar levels below  70 mg/dl  can indicate hypoglycemia.  However, everyone has a different base blood sugar level, and the measurement that determines hypoglycemia can vary.  The doctor may use other tests to determine the underlying cause of low blood sugar.  Treating the underlying cause is the best way to prevent hypoglycemia in the long term.  In the short term, receiving glucose helps blood sugar levels return to normal.  According to  research from 2014 , the best way to treat mild hypoglycemia is to:  There are many ways to receive glucose, including:  Eating slow-release carbohydrates may help sustain blood sugar levels.  A non-diabetic hypoglycemia diet can help keep blood sugar levels balanced. The following tips can help to prevent hypoglycemia:  Carrying a snack to eat at the first sign of hypoglycemia can prevent blood sugar levels from dipping too low.  Ultimately, the best way to prevent hypoglycemia is to identify and treat the underlying cause.    
 Desimone, M. E., &amp; Weinstock, R. S. (2017, September 23). Non-diabetic hypoglycemia.  Endotext .  Desimone, M. E., &amp; Weinstock, R. S. (2017, September 23). Non-diabetic hypoglycemia.  Endotext .  Eckert-Norton, M., &amp; Kirk, S. (2013, October 1). Non-diabetic hypoglycemia.  The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism ,  98 (10), 39–40.  Evert, A. B. (2014, February 12). Treatment of mild hypoglycemia.  Diabetes Spectrum ,  27 (1), 58–62.  Low blood glucose (hypoglycemia). (2016, August).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "Can you have hypoglycemia without diabetes?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322744.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, August 10). "Can you have hypoglycemia without diabetes?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  