 Cranberry juice can temporarily make conditions, such as  acid reflux , worse because it is mildly acidic. Some people find that cranberry juice leaves an unusual taste in their mouth, or that it temporarily irritates gums and lips.  Research into the benefits of cranberry juice is mostly preliminary, but the  antioxidant  and antibacterial benefits look promising.  Most people can safely include cranberry juice in their diets, and they are adding a serving of fruit to their diet when they do so.  Potential benefits of cranberry juice include:  Chemicals called free radicals accumulate in the body as people age. Free radicals cause oxidative damage. There is a link between oxidative damage and health issues, including:  Some of the chemicals in cranberry juice are antioxidants or compounds that fight harmful free radicals. The presence of antioxidants means that cranberries and cranberry juice might help fight age-related damage to the body's tissues.  A  2011 study  found that chemicals in cranberries promoted better antioxidant activity the lower their pH was. That study also found that the berries were significantly more potent antioxidants than cranberry juice, although cranberry juice still offered some benefits.  Studies show that various ingredients in cranberry juice may improve heart health.  Cranberries are high in chemicals called polyphenols that may support heart health. A  2011 study  of females with metabolic syndrome found that cranberry juice increased the antioxidants in the blood plasma. People who drank cranberry juice also had lower low-density lipoprotein (LDL). LDL is known as the "bad" type of  cholesterol .   Another 2011 study  found that cranberry juice could improve health in people with  coronary artery disease . Mean carotid-femoral artery  pulse  wave velocity, which is a way to measure the stiffness of arteries, was reduced among the people in the study who drank a laboratory preparation of double-strength cranberry juice.  The antibacterial effects of cranberry juice were reported to reduce the incidence of UTIs in mice, according to a 2017 study in   Frontiers in Microbiology  .  The reduction of UTI incidence is thought to be due to the ability of antibacterial properties to reduce the colonization of  Escherichia coli  in the bladder. The bacteria, which is known better as  E. coli , is the cause of most UTIs.  A 2016 study, reported in   Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine  , showed less bacterial infections in urine cultures from uncircumcised boys who drank cranberry juice and had previously had repeated UTIs compared to those who drank a  placebo  and those who had been circumcised who also drank the placebo.  The authors concluded that cranberry juice might be beneficial against the growth of bacterial pathogens.  There is growing evidence that the phytochemicals contained in cranberries play an important role in digestive health.  Evidence for the digestive health benefits of cranberry juice, in addition to other benefits, was reported in a study from 2018 in the   Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture  .  The paper noted that inhibiting the production of another bacterium called  H. pylori  in the stomach is thought to promote digestive health. The researchers also suggested further research is needed on cranberry juice.  Some chemicals in cranberries may help fight viruses and bacteria.   A 2011 study  found that cranberries inhibited the growth of seven bacterial microbes. The study did not assess whether cranberries or cranberry juice could prevent infection with these microbes in humans.  Similarly,  a 2010 study  found that cranberries could fight some viruses, including  norovirus , which s a common cause of food-borne illness.  The authors of the study caution that more research is needed, but argue that cranberries might be a useful method of treating or preventing food-borne illness.  The risk of heart problems increases after  menopause  compared to the risk in all other groups of people of the same age.   A 2013 study  investigated this phenomenon in rats that had their ovaries removed. Researchers found that daily cranberry consumption reduced total cholesterol, suggesting cranberry products might be useful dietary supplements after the menopause.   Some research has found  that cranberry juice may interact with certain medications. One concern is that cranberries may intensify the effects of a blood thinner called warfarin.   Research on other drugs  is less consistent. Preliminary research, however, suggests the possibility of interactions between cranberries and:  People taking these drugs or any other medications should talk to a doctor before using cranberry juice. It may be necessary to monitor the doses and effects on medications rather than avoiding cranberry juice entirely.  Cranberry juice is safe for most people and has several potential benefits.   The American Academy of Pediatrics  recommends limiting fruit juice intake in toddlers and children and advises against giving babies juice. Parents who want to add cranberry juice to their children's diet should, therefore, only do so in small quantities and should not give them other juices.  People should choose varieties that are not from concentrate, with no sugar added, to get the most out of cranberry juice. Alternatively, a person can consider making fresh cranberry smoothies at home by putting cranberries in a blender with other ingredients. Adding a sweet fruit, such as an orange, can help it taste sweeter.  As with any diet change or supplement, people should talk to a doctor or dietitian first.  Cranberry juice is available for purchase online.    
 American Academy of Pediatrics recommends no fruit juice for children under 1 year. (2017, May 22).  American Academy of Pediatrics recommends no fruit juice for children under 1 year. (2017, May 22).  Basu, A., Betts, N. M., Ortiz, J., Simmons, B., Wu, M., &amp; Lyons, T. J. (2011, March). Low-energy cranberry juice decreases lipid oxidation and increases plasma antioxidant capacity in women with metabolic syndrome [Abstract].  Nutrition Research ,  31 (3), 190–196.  Caillet, S., Côté, J., Doyon, G., Sylvain, J., &amp; Lacroix, M. (2011, June). Antioxidant and antiradical properties of cranberry juice and extracts [Abstract].  Food Research International ,  44 (5), 1408–1413.  Côté, J., Caillet, S., Doyon, G., Dussault, D., Sylvain, J., &amp; Lacroix, M. (2011, August). Antimicrobial effect of cranberry juice and extracts [Abstract].  Food Control ,  22 (8), 1413–1418.  Dohadwala, M. M., Holbrook, M., Hamburg, N. M., Shenouda, S. M., Chung, W. B., Titas, M., … Vita, J. A. (2011, May 1). Effects of cranberry juice consumption on vascular function in patients with coronary artery disease.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  93 (5), 934–940.  Jensen, H. D., Struve, C., Christensen, S. B., &amp; Krogfelt, K. A. (2017, April 4). Cranberry juice and combinations of its organic acids are effective against experimental urinary tract infection.  Frontiers in Microbiology ,  8 , 542.  Marko, M. G., &amp; DerMarderosian, A. (2016, January). Cranberry.  Srinivas, N. R. (2013, June 20). Cranberry juice ingestion and clinical drug-drug interaction potentials; Review of case studies and perspectives.  Journal of Pharmacy &amp; Pharmaceutical Sciences ,  16 (2), 289–303.  Su, X., Howell, A. B., &amp; D'Souza, D. H. (2010, June). The effect of cranberry juice and cranberry proanthocyanidins on the infectivity of human enteric viral surrogates [Abstract].  Food Microbiology ,  27 (4), 535–540.  Wan, K. S., Liu, C. K., Lee, W. K., Ko, M. C., &amp; Huang, C. S. (2016, November). Cranberries for preventing recurrent urinary tract infections in uncircumcised boys [Abstract].  Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine ,  22 (6), 20–23.  Yung, L.-M, Tian, X. Y., Wong, W. T., Leung, F. P., Yung, L. H., Chen, Z. Y., … Huang, Y. (2013, April). Chronic cranberry juice consumption restores cholesterol profiles and improves endothelial function in ovariectomized rats [Abstract].  European Journal of Nutrition ,  52 (3), 1145–1155.  Zhao, S., Liu, H., &amp; Gu, L. (2018, January 9). American cranberries and health benefits — an evolving story of 25 years [Abstract].  Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What are the health benefits of cranberry juice?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322731.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, August 9). "What are the health benefits of cranberry juice?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  