 In this article, we look at the possible causes of cramps after  menopause , as well as their diagnosis and treatment.  Menopause refers to the time in a person's life when their monthly periods stop. In the United States, most people go through the menopause between the ages of  45 and 55 years old , with the average being 51 years of age.  A person has reached menopause when their monthly periods have stopped for 12 months in a row. Other symptoms vary from person-to-person and can include:  The months leading up to menopause is known as perimenopause. A person may notice their periods begin to get lighter and less frequent during this time. While this happens, it is perfectly normal to experience period-like cramping before bleeding occurs.  Many different conditions can cause pelvic cramps postmenopause.  If a person has been through menopause and has pelvic cramps, they may also experience the following symptoms:  A person should see a doctor if they have any vaginal bleeding after the menopause or have gone 12 months without a period. They should get diagnosed right away.  While pelvic cramping that occurs after menopause may not be of concern, it can sometimes be a symptom of a more severe condition that may need medical treatment, such as:  Uterine  fibroids  are small growths that can occur in the wall of the womb, or uterus.  These growths are usually benign, which means they are not cancerous. Although uterine fibroids are more likely to develop before a person goes through menopause, it is still possible for older people to have them.  Fibroids usually stop growing or shrink after a person goes through menopause. However, someone may still experience symptoms of uterine fibroids, such as pelvic pressure or cramps, after their periods have ceased.   Endometriosis  is a condition where the tissue that lines the womb starts to grow in other parts of the body, such as around the ovaries, fallopian tubes, or bowel.  Endometriosis is most common in those aged between  30 and 40 years old , but  rarely , symptoms can still occur postmenopause.  Symptoms of endometriosis may include:  For some people, endometriosis can have a significant impact on their lives and can lead to feelings of  depression .  Also, undergoing hormone therapy for menopausal symptoms may make the pain of endometriosis worse.  Chronic constipation is also a common cause of lower pelvic pressure and pain and gastrointestinal upset.  Doctors define constipation as having fewer than three bowel movements per week. A person's stools may also be hard, dry, or lumpy and painful or difficult to pass.  Causes of constipation include:  Anyone who has severe or persistent constipation should see a doctor.   Gastroenteritis  is an infection of the digestive tract that can cause abdominal and pelvic cramps alongside nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.  Causes of gastroenteritis include:  While many cases of gastroenteritis resolve alone, severe cases may need medication and even hospitalization.  People who experience persistent vomiting and diarrhea can quickly become very dehydrated, which can lead to severe complications, including death.  Ovarian and uterine  cancers  can cause abdominal or pelvic cramping. Older people are at  higher risk  of developing these cancers than younger people.  Other symptoms of these cancers can include:  Conditions that cause cramps after menopause may be more likely to occur in people who:  If abdominal or pelvic cramps are accompanied by other concerning symptoms, especially vaginal bleeding, a person should see a doctor, as soon as possible.  Anyone who is concerned about abdominal or pelvic cramping should also see a doctor.  A doctor will ask a person about their symptoms and medical history and do a physical examination. They may recommend referral to a specialist for further testing.  To discover if an underlying condition is causing abdominal cramps, a doctor may perform one or more of the following tests:  Treatment for postmenopausal cramps will vary depending on the underlying cause. Some possible treatment options may include:  Other cancer treatments include  radiation therapy ,  chemotherapy , and hormone therapy. A doctor may prescribe one or all of these treatments, depending on the type and stage of a person's cancer, and whether it has spread.  People with abdominal cramps may find benefit from the following home remedies:  Cramps that occur postmenopause may be nothing serious. However, anyone who experiences abdominal pain or cramping with no apparent cause should arrange to see a doctor.    
 Abnormal uterine bleeding [Fact sheet]. (2017, March).  Abnormal uterine bleeding [Fact sheet]. (2017, March).  Endometrial cancer risk factors. (2016, February 29).  Endometrial hyperplasia. [Fact sheet]. (2011, May).  Endometriosis. (2018, March 16).  Haas, D., Chvatal, R., Reichert, B., Renner, S., Shebl, O., Binder, H., … Oppelt, P. (2012, September). Endometriosis: A premenopausal disease? Age pattern in 42,079 patients with endometriosis [Abstract].  Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics ,  286 (3), 667–670.  Hysterectomy [Fact sheet]. (2015, March).  Menopause basics. (2018, May 22).  Menopause FAQs: Understanding the symptoms. (n.d.).  Perimenopausal bleeding and bleeding after menopause [Fact sheet]. (2011, May).  Risk factors and warning signs. (n.d.).  Shah, D. (2014, October–December). Postmenopausal endometriosis: An enigma revisited.  Journal of Mid-Life Health ,  5 (4), 163–164.  Sonohysterography [Fact sheet]. (2016, December).  Symptoms &amp; causes of constipation. (2018, May).  Uterine fibroids. (2018, March 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What can cause cramps after menopause?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322748.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, August 13). "What can cause cramps after menopause?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  