 Service dogs are companion animals that help people who have physical or  mental health  conditions.  A service dog for  anxiety  can provide a sense of calm, anticipate anxiety attacks, and even fetch medication for their owner.  In this article, we look at the benefits of service dogs for people with anxiety. We discuss how to get an anxiety service dog, which breeds make the most successful anxiety service dogs, and how much they cost.  Service dogs offer practical and emotional support to people with a physical or mental health difficulty.  The most well-known service dogs are guide dogs, which assist people who have visual impairments.  However, people can train dogs to help with a wide range of conditions, including anxiety,  diabetes , and  depression .  A psychiatric service dog is a dog that helps someone with anxiety, depression, bipolar disorders, or other mental health conditions.  All service dogs have completed specialized training and are legally recognized by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).  These dogs can go anywhere with their owner, from restaurants to airplanes.  People can train service dogs to perform specific tasks depending on an individual's needs.  Roles carried out by service dogs for anxiety include:  Merely being around dogs provides many benefits, including:  A  2012 review  suggests that interacting with animals may:  People can get anxiety service dogs from specialist organizations if they meet specific criteria.  Criteria may include having:  Many people with anxiety issues may not qualify for getting a service dog. However, some of these people may benefit from having an emotional support animal.  Emotional support animals (ESA) differ from service dogs. While trained service animals perform specific tasks, the law considers ESAs as pets. However, people can still experience tremendous benefits from living with an ESA.  ESAs are companion animals that a medical professional thinks will provide support to a person with a mental or physical health difficulty.  ESAs do not have the same legal protections that service animals do. However, they do have some protections, such as an exemption from no-pet housing rules.  Those who would like an ESA must get a letter from a licensed mental health professional to say that an animal improves at least one characteristic of their condition.  Service dogs can be expensive because of the high cost of all the training that is involved.  According to  Little Angels Service Dogs , many service dog organizations throughout the United States spend between $30,000 and $40,000 per trained dog.  Each dog receives an average of more than 600 hours of training, along with veterinary care, boarding, and grooming.  Some people choose to train the dog themselves, with the help of a certified trainer. This option is less expensive, but it can still involve high costs.  However, some organizations can help people find service dogs at little or no cost. This is because they meet some or all the expenses through fundraising.  Any breed of dog can become a service dog. The most important factors are the individual dog's temperament, and its ability to complete training.  Some of the breeds that work well as service dogs include:  Service dogs are not the only option for people with an anxiety disorder. The most common ways to cope with the condition are psychotherapy and medication.  Psychotherapy helps people to reduce their anxiety symptoms. A common type of therapy for anxiety disorders is  cognitive behavioral therapy  (CBT).  People may use medications alone or alongside psychotherapy. These may include  antidepressants , anti-anxiety medications, or sedatives.  People with anxiety might consider making some lifestyle changes to help manage their symptoms. These include:  Having a service dog can provide a range of benefits to those with anxiety. But it is not always easy to get a service dog, and people must adhere to some strict criteria.  Those who wish to get a psychiatric service dog should speak with a licensed mental health professional to see if a service dog would be appropriate for them.  Individuals who experience anxiety but are not eligible for a service dog may instead get an emotional support animal. Other treatments for the condition include talk therapy, medication, and lifestyle changes.  With treatment, people can recover from their anxiety disorder and enjoy a good quality of life.    
 Any anxiety disorder. (2017, November).  Any anxiety disorder. (2017, November).  Beetz, A., Uvnäs-Moberg, K., Julius, H., &amp; Kotrschal, K. (2012, July 9). Psychosocial and psychophysiological effects of human-animal interactions: the possible role of oxytocin.  Frontiers in Psychology ,  3 , 234.  Brennan, J. &amp; Nguyen, V. (2014). Service animals and emotional support animals.  Gadomski, A. M., Scribani, M. B., Krupa, N., Jenkins, P., Nagykaldi, Z., &amp; Olson, A. L. (2015, November 25). Pet dogs and children's health: Opportunities for chronic disease prevention?  Preventing Chronic Disease ,  12 .  How to make your dog a service dog. (n.d.).  Psychiatric service dogs. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Can service dogs help with anxiety?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322784.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, August 15). "Can service dogs help with anxiety?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  