 Though Mountain Dew does not affect fertility, many other unrelated factors can lower sperm counts and affect male fertility. These include:  Exercising,  quitting smoking , and losing weight are some ways to improve fertility. Listed in this article are several other proven methods a person can try to boost their fertility.  Mountain Dew does not affect fertility. It has acquired the reputation of impacting fertility mainly due to caffeine and yellow dye 5:  The   Nutrition Journal   reviewed 28 studies that looked at different sperm measurements.  The researchers concluded that results were not consistent enough to be conclusive, despite some evidence of negative effects.  Mountain Dew has a higher amount of caffeine in a 12-ounce (oz) serving than some other soft drinks, which has lead to people taking it as proof that Mountain Dew affects fertility.   Comparing 12 oz servings  of Mountain Dew and other drinks shows only a small difference in the amount of caffeine in each:  People should still watch their caffeine intake, although caffeine is unlikely to affect fertility. But it is doubtful that Mountain Dew's caffeine content would affect fertility when consumed in moderation.  Yellow dye 5 is one of the most commonly used food additives.  The chemical name of yellow dye 5 is tartrazine. Tartrazine is what gives Mountain Dew its yellow color. Also, people often cite that tartrazine is a potential allergen as part of the myth.  There are not many current studies on the effects of tartrazine on fertility. One study in rats, although dating back to 1988, was published in   Food and Chemical Toxicology   and indicated no adverse effects to consuming tartrazine.  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have approved color additives, including tartrazine, for use in both food and drugs.  Tartrazine does pose a risk of allergy to a small portion of the population. People who are allergic to tartrazine may experience side effects from its consumption.  Side effects of tartrazine include:  People who are allergic to tartrazine should avoid its consumption in food and beverages, but not because of any concerns about effects on fertility.  Yellow dye 5, as well as other food dyes, may be contaminated with carcinogens or substances that convert to carcinogens in the body, according to the  Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI) .  Food dyes are among many additives that the CSPI recommend to avoid for a variety of health reasons.  Several proven factors can lower sperm counts and affect male fertility.  According to a review of studies in   Biochemistry &amp; Analytical Biochemistry  , risk factors for lowering male fertility include:  The same review of studies explored medical causes of male fertility issues, including:  Changes that can help improve fertility or sperm count include:  Mountain Dew does not cause  infertility  or lower sperm count when consumed in moderation.  Other factors can cause a person to be less fertile, but Mountain Dew does not appear to cause more health effects than other soft drinks.  Mountain Dew is not a healthy drink. People should avoid drinking excessive amounts of any soft drink and sugar-sweetened beverages, including Mountain Dew, so they control their blood sugars and weight, both of which are factors that can affect fertility.    
 Borzelleca, J. F., &amp; Hallagan, J. B. (1988). Chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity studies of FD &amp; C yellow no. 5 (tartrazine) in rats [Abstract].  Food and Chemical Toxicology ,  26 (3), 179–187.  Borzelleca, J. F., &amp; Hallagan, J. B. (1988). Chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity studies of FD &amp; C yellow no. 5 (tartrazine) in rats [Abstract].  Food and Chemical Toxicology ,  26 (3), 179–187.  Boxmeer, J. C., Smit, M., Utomo, E., Romijn, J. C., Eijkemans, M. J. C., Lindemans, J., ... Steegers-Theunissen, R. P. M. (2009, August). Low folate in seminal plasma is associated with increased sperm DNA damage.  Fertility and Sterility ,  92 (2), 548–556.  Caffeine content of popular drinks. (n.d.).  Chavarro, J. E., Toth, T. L., Sadio, S. M., &amp; Hauser, R. (2008, November). Soy food and isoflavone intake in relation to semen quality parameters among men from an infertility clinic.  Human Reproduction ,  23 (11), 2584–2590.  Chemical cuisine. (n.d.).  Chen, Q., Yang, H., Zhou, N., Sun, L., Bao, H., Tan, L., ... Cao, J. (2016, January 1). Inverse u-shaped association between sleep duration and semen quality: Longitudinal observational study (MARHCS) in Chongqing, China.  Sleep ,  39 (1), 79–86.  La Vignera, S., Condorelli, R. A., Balercia, G., Vicari, E., &amp; Calogero, A. E. (2013, March). Does alcohol have any effect on male reproductive function? A review of literature.  Asian Journal of Andrology ,  15 (2), 221–225.  Lafuente, R., González-Comadrán, M., Solà, I., López, G., Brassesco, M., Carreras, R., &amp; Checa, M. A. (2013, September). Coenzyme Q10 and male infertility: A meta-analysis.  Journal of Assisted Reproduction and Genetics ,  30 (9), 1147–1156.  Mahat, R. K., Arora, M., Bhale, D. V., Holkar, S., Kumar, S., &amp; Yadav, T. (2016, May 9). Risk factors and causes of male infertility–a review.  Biochemistry &amp; Analytical Biochemistry ,  5 , 271.  Ricci, E., Viganò, P., Cipriani, S., Somigliana, E., Chiaffarino, F., Bulfoni, A., &amp; Parazzini, F. (2017, June 24). Coffee and caffeine intake and male infertility: A systematic review.  Nutrition Journal ,  16 (1), 37.  Robbins, W. A., Xun, L., FitzGerald, L. Z., Esguerra, S., Henning, S. M., &amp; Carpenter, C. L. (2012, October 1). Walnuts improve semen quality in men consuming a western-style diet: Randomized control dietary intervention trial.  Biology of Reproduction ,  87 (4), 1–8.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Mountain Dew does not kill sperm."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322774.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, August 15). "Mountain Dew does not kill sperm."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  