 Some people take the  birth control  pill for much of their adult lives without a break. Others use long-term hormonal contraception devices, such as intrauterine devices (IUDs), that can stay in place for  several  years.  The safety of using long-term hormonal birth control may depend on a person's risk factors, age, and medical history.  Read on to find out the short-term and long-term effects of birth control.  Hormonal methods of birth control contain artificial  progesterone  or  estrogen  and progesterone. They affect the hormone levels in a person's body, so many people experience side effects shortly after taking them.  Not all people will experience side effects. Some side effects will go away within several months as the body adjusts to the hormones. Other side effects may develop after taking hormones for some time.  Possible short-term side effects of birth control include:  For most people, using contraceptives for a long time does not cause significant problems.  Many people use hormonal birth control for contraception. But, others take hormonal birth control to manage long-term medical conditions. Conditions include heavy or painful periods,  endometriosis , and  menopause  symptoms. Doctors approve the use of the pills for these conditions, so they should be okay to take.  A doctor can advise individuals about the safety and risks of using long-term birth control according to their medical history.  There are several factors and possible side effects to consider when taking long-term birth control:  According to the  National Cancer Institute , there is mixed evidence that hormonal contraceptives may increase the risk of breast and  cervical cancer  but reduce the risk of endometrial, ovarian, and  colorectal cancers .  The hormones in birth control, including progesterone and estrogen, may stimulate the growth of some types of  cancer  cells and reduce the risk of others developing.  The  American Cancer Society (ACS)  says that people who have taken birth control pills are slightly more likely to develop  breast cancer  than those who have never used them. However, this risk goes away when people have been off the pill for 10 or more years.  The ACS also report that taking birth control for more than  5 years  may increase the risk of cervical cancer. The longer people take the pill, the higher their risk. However, the risk should go back down gradually when someone stops taking the pill.  A large-scale study published in  2018  looked at the cancer prevalence in over 100,000 women aged 50 to 71 who were currently taking birth control pills. The study indicated that long-term use of birth control decreased the risk of both ovarian and endometrial cancer.  Researchers are not sure why birth control pills may lower the risk of certain cancers. It may be because the pill decreases the number of ovulations a person has in their lifetime, which exposes them to less naturally occurring hormones.  A  2013 meta-analysis  of 26 studies indicated that the use of oral contraceptives containing both progesterone and estrogen increased people's risk of developing a blood clot.  Blood clots increase a person's risk of a  stroke  and  heart attack . People who smoke may be especially at risk for developing blood clots when using birth control pills.  Most people can safely use hormonal contraceptives for many years, provided their doctor has recommended it.  However, many long-term birth control methods contain hormones. This can cause problems depending on a person's medical history, age, and overall health. Doctors may advise some people to avoid using certain types of birth control.  If a birth control pill causes side effects, people can speak to their doctor and change pills until they find one that works for them.  People with a history of blood clots may prefer progesterone-only birth control pills or the hormone-free IUD.  There are several long-term birth control options. All hormonal methods of birth control, including the pill, patch or implant, may cause similar side effects and long-term risks.  There is no one "best" method of birth control. The best option depends on a person's lifestyle and medical history.  Most long-term birth control options involve the use of hormones. The hormones work in two main ways: stopping  ovulation  and thickening the cervical mucus, which makes it difficult for the egg and sperm to meet.  Long-term non-hormonal options are also available, including the non-hormonal IUD.  Long-term contraception methods include the following:  Using hormonal birth control is safe for as long as you need, provided that a doctor has given the okay. People should discuss their individual needs and risk factors with a doctor when deciding whether to stay on hormonal contraception for an extended period.  Consider all the options and discuss all possible health risks and benefits with a healthcare provider.    
 Birth control. (n.d.).  Birth control. (n.d.).  Birth control &amp; cancer: Which methods raise, lower risk. (2016, January 21).  Birth control implant. (n.d.).  Birth control patch. (n.d.).  Birth control shot. (n.d.).  How do I use NuvaRing? (n.d.).  Kotsopoulos, J., Lubinski, J., Moller, P., Lynch, H. T., Singer, C. F., Eng, C., ... Narod, S. A. (2014, February). Timing of oral contraceptive use and the risk of breast cancer in  BRCA1  mutation carriers [Abstract].  Breast Cancer Research and Treatment ,  143 (3), 579–586.  Michels, K. A., Pfeiffer, R. M., Brinton, L. A., &amp; Trabert, B. (2018). Modification of the associations between duration of oral contraceptive use and ovarian, endometrial, breast, and colorectal cancers [Abstract].  JAMA Oncology ,  4 (4), 516–521.  Nexplanon (etonogestrel implant). (2017, May).  Oral contraceptives and cancer risk. (2018, February 22).  Paragard intrauterine copper contraceptive. (2018, January).  Stegeman, B. H., de Bastos, M., Rosendaal, F. R., van Hylckama Vlieg, A., Helmerhorst, F. M., Stijnen, T., &amp; Dekkers, O. M. (2013, September 12). Different combined oral contraceptives and the risk of venous thrombosis: Systematic review and network meta-analysis.  BMJ ,  3 (347), f5298.  What are the benefits of IUDs? (n.d.).  What are the risk factors for cervical cancer? (2018, June 27).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  de Pietro, MaryAnn. "What are the long-term side effects of birth control?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322762.php&gt;    APA  de Pietro, M. (2018, August 14). "What are the long-term side effects of birth control?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  