 After  skin cancer ,  prostate cancer  is the type most common among American men, according to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) . For the majority, prostate cancer is not fatal.   The American Cancer Society  estimate that males with prostate cancer have a 5-year survival rate of 99 percent.  Prostate cancer can still carry serious consequences for quality of life and may be life-threatening.  In this article, we describe several natural steps a person can take to reduce their risk of developing prostate cancer.  It is not possible to prevent prostate cancer, but it is possible to reduce a person's risk.  Most natural methods of reducing this risk are safe if a person follows a doctor's instructions and has no allergic response.  Incorporate these methods into a broader care plan, and speak with a doctor beforehand.  The best ways to reduce the risk of developing prostate cancer are to make positive changes involving diet and exercise, according to the  American Cancer Society .  If a person tries to reduce their risk in other ways, these are less likely to be effective without a healthful diet and exercise program.  Researchers continue to investigate the potential for medications and natural remedies to reduce the risk of prostate cancer.  The following drugs may  be effective :  However, no study to date definitively demonstrates that any drugs can eliminate the risk.  In recent years, rigorous biomedical research has tested the effectiveness of natural remedies. For example, results of laboratory studies have suggested that  saw palmetto  has beneficial properties. However, it is not an effective treatment for prostate cancer.  Below are some natural remedies that are commonly used to lower the risk of prostate cancer.  Isoflavones are a chemical compound with anti-inflammatory properties. The foods with the highest concentrations of isoflavones are soybean products, including:  Other foods that contain isoflavones include:  A  2016 study  concluded that isoflavones could benefit health in several ways, including helping to protect against prostate cancer.  The medical community currently holds that, while isoflavones cannot treat or prevent the disease, they can play a protective role.   Omega-3  fatty acids are present in fish and other types of seafood. Additional sources include:  There is  some evidence  that omega-3s fatty acids may reduce prostate cancer risk.  However, many experts no longer believe that the acids have significant cancer-fighting properties.  Processed tomatoes, including all cooked and canned varieties, contain a compound called lycopene.  Some  studies  suggest that this compound may reduce the risk of  cancers , especially those of the prostate, lung, and stomach.  A  review  from 2016 found that increased tomato consumption resulted in a reduced risk of prostate cancer, though the authors note that more research is needed.  Grapefruit, watermelon, and apricots also contain lycopene.  In 2016, researchers published a  review  of 105 studies that considered the effects of  coffee  on cancer risk.  They concluded that coffee and its  antioxidant  capabilities may reduce the risk of developing prostate cancer and some other types of the disease.  Some compounds in foods may increase a person's risk of developing prostate cancer.  Consider avoiding the following:  The medical community once considered  selenium  and  vitamin  E to be opponents of cancer.  However, more recent research suggests that these compounds, when taken together or in isolation, can  increase the risk  of prostate cancer in some people.  Anyone concerned about prostate cancer should avoid supplements containing vitamin E or selenium.  A diet excessively high in fat can increase the risk of many types of cancer, and the omega-6 fatty acids in vegetable oils may  promote the growth  of prostate cancer cells.  Oils derived from corn, sunflowers, safflowers, cottonseed, and soybeans, for example, can contain substantial amounts of omega-6 fatty acids.  The  National Cancer Institute  in the United States advises against eating meats cooked at high temperatures, typically by grilling or frying.  When a person cooks muscle meat, including beef, pork, and poultry, at high temperatures, the meat may  form chemicals  that cause changes in DNA, resulting in an increased risk of cancer.  The glycemic load and glycemic index measurements show how quickly  carbohydrates  and sugars affect a person's blood sugar and  insulin .  Some studies have suggested that a diet with a high glycemic load may increase the risk of developing prostate cancer.  The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute  report  that, while the relationship between sugar and cancer remains complex, sugar may have the highest impact on the risk of prostate, colorectal and  pancreatic cancers .   Risk factors  for prostate cancer include:  A lifestyle that includes exercise and a healthful diet can help to reduce the risk of prostate cancer.  However, attending regular checkups and screenings is still the best way to handle this risk.  Speak with a doctor before trying natural or alternative ways to prevent cancer.  While it is not possible to prevent prostate cancer, some lifestyle changes and natural compounds may reduce a person's risk.  Anyone concerned about their prostate cancer risk should attend regular checkups and screenings.    
 Aucoin, M., Cooley, K., Knee, C., Fritz, H., Balneaves, L. G., Breau, R., … Seely, D. (2017, March). Fish-derived omega-3 fatty acids and prostate cancer: A systematic review.  Integrative Cancer Therapies ,  16 (1), 32–62.  Aucoin, M., Cooley, K., Knee, C., Fritz, H., Balneaves, L. G., Breau, R., … Seely, D. (2017, March). Fish-derived omega-3 fatty acids and prostate cancer: A systematic review.  Integrative Cancer Therapies ,  16 (1), 32–62.  Can prostate cancer be prevented?. (2016, March 11).  Chemicals in meat cooked at high temperatures and cancer risk. (2017, July 11).  Does sugar cause cancer? (2018, July 19).  Nutrition and prostate cancer. (n.d.).  Prostate cancer. (2018, June 12).  Prostate cancer: Risk factors. (n.d.).  Risks and benefits of common prostate cancer treatments. (2017, April 7).  Rowles, J. L., Ranard, K. M., Applegate, C. C., Jeon, S., An, R., &amp; Erdman, J. W. (2018, January 9). Processed and raw tomato consumption and risk of prostate cancer: A systematic review and dose–response meta-analysis [Abstract].  Prostate Cancer and Prostatic Diseases .  Saw palmetto. (2017, September 11).  Skerrett, P. J. (2014, February 28). Selenium, vitamin E supplements increase prostate cancer risk.  Story, E. N., Kopec, R. E., Schwartz, S. J., &amp; Harris, G. K. (2013, December 4). An update on the health effects of tomato lycopene.  Annual Review of Food Science and Technology ,  1 .  Survival rates for prostate cancer. (2017, December 18).  Wang, A., Wang, S., Zhu, C., Huang, H., Wu, L., Wan, X., … Zhao, H. (2016, September 26). Coffee and cancer risk: A meta-analysis of prospective observational studies.  Nature: Scientific Reports ,  6 .  Zhang, H.-Y., Cui, J., Zhang, Y., Wang, Z.-L., Chong, T., &amp; Wang, Z-M. (2016, February 5). Isoflavones and prostate cancer: A review of some critical issues.  Chinese Medical Journal ,  129 (3), 341–347.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Harris, Scott. "What are the natural ways to prevent prostate cancer?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322795.php&gt;    APA  Harris, S. (2018, August 16). "What are the natural ways to prevent prostate cancer?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  