  Hemorrhoids  are often caused by straining while having a bowel movement. People may push too hard, sit on the toilet for too long, or have a stool that is hard and difficult to pass.  If an external hemorrhoid does not go away in 1 to 2 weeks, a doctor may prescribe stool softeners to make passing the stool easier. However, if a person is in severe pain, a doctor may recommend surgical removal of the hemorrhoid.  In addition to straining, other causes and risk factors for hemorrhoids include:  External hemorrhoids are different from other hemorrhoid types, mostly due to their location.  Internal hemorrhoids, for example, are inside the rectum. Usually, they are painless but may bleed.  Prolapsed hemorrhoids are internal hemorrhoids that sometimes bulge outside of the anus. It is possible to push these hemorrhoids back inside, but they may go back in without intervention.  External hemorrhoids protrude out of the anus. They tend to cause more pain than internal hemorrhoids because the outside of the anus is more sensitive than the inside.  People may have multiple hemorrhoid types at the same time.  External hemorrhoids are often itchy and may be painful.  People can often feel them if they touch the area around the anus. External hemorrhoids are typically slightly less pink than the surrounding skin.  People with external hemorrhoids may also notice some blood when they pass stool. The blood is typically on the stool's outer surface and  bright red  because it usually comes directly out of the hemorrhoid rather than anywhere else in the gastrointestinal tract.  Blood from hemorrhoids should be minimal. Anyone with external hemorrhoids who notices a significant amount of blood should contact their doctor.  External hemorrhoids can be very painful if they become thrombosed. Thrombosed hemorrhoids are usually purple-blue.  A thrombosed hemorrhoid occurs when the veins that cause the bulge in the hemorrhoid develop a blood clot. As a result, blood is unable to flow to the hemorrhoid, and the effect can be extremely painful.  The body will often absorb the blood clot, therefore reducing the symptoms and easing the pain.  When the blood clot passes or the body reabsorbs it, an external hemorrhoid may sometimes leave behind a  perianal skin tag . A doctor may recommend surgical removal if this skin tag regularly catches stool and is difficult to keep clean.  A doctor can diagnose external hemorrhoids by assessing symptoms as well as conducting a physical exam.  Anyone who suspects they have external hemorrhoids should see a doctor.  This is important because some of the symptoms, such as bleeding, can be due to other more severe conditions, including:  Treatments include home remedies and surgery.  Examples of home remedies people can use to treat hemorrhoids include:  Removing a painful thrombosed external hemorrhoid within 72 hours after it develops can provide more rapid pain relief than other treatments, according to a study in the journal   American Family Physician  .  A doctor can perform surgery with local anesthesia.  Surgery is only effective if the procedure takes place within 72 hours of the symptoms developing. After this time, surgery is not typically helpful, and symptoms will eventually improve on their own.  Pregnant women can try many of the home remedies listed above to treat their external hemorrhoids and ease the pain. However, they must always check with their doctor before using any topical application on external hemorrhoids to ensure it will not interfere with the pregnancy.  The main way to prevent external hemorrhoids from developing involves avoiding  constipation  and the development of hard, dry, stools that are difficult to pass.  Tips to prevent external hemorrhoids include:  People who have recurring problems with constipation and hemorrhoids should talk to their doctor about treatment options.  External hemorrhoids will usually go away on their own.  Taking steps to reduce the incidence of constipation and avoiding straining with bowel movements can help a person reduce the likelihood of developing any types of hemorrhoids.  Anyone who experiences extremely painful external hemorrhoids should see their doctor for recommended treatments.    
 Hemorrhoids. (n.d.)  Hemorrhoids. (n.d.)  Hemorrhoids. (2017, November 10).  Lohsiriwat, V. (2015, August 21). Treatment of hemorrhoids: A coloproctologist's view.  World Journal of Gastroenterology .  21 (31), 9245–9252.  Mott, T., Latimer, K., &amp; Edwards, C. (2018, February 1). Hemorrhoids: Diagnosis and treatment options [Abstract].  American Family Physician ,  97 (3), 172–179.  Mounsey, A. L., Halladay, J., &amp; Sadiq, T. S. (2011, July 15). Hemorrhoids.  American Family Physician .  84 (2): 204–210.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How do you treat an external hemorrhoid?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322732.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, August 10). "How do you treat an external hemorrhoid?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  