  Aspirin  and ibuprofen are both pain relievers from the same family of medicines known as  non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs , or NSAIDs.  Because they are from the same family of drugs, aspirin and ibuprofen have the same potential side effects. Taking them together may increase the risk of these side effects.  This article will look at what people use aspirin and ibuprofen for, if they can ever take them together, and what the alternatives are.  The pain relievers aspirin and ibuprofen are both classed as NSAIDs and so have similar side effects.  They can be purchased over the counter and used separately to treat mild pain. Over-the-counter uses of aspirin and ibuprofen include the relief of:  Both drugs are also treatment options for long-term medical issues, such as osteoarthritis and  rheumatoid arthritis .  Doctors often prescribe aspirin to people who have had a  heart attack  or suffer from a heart condition called  angina . It can help to prevent  strokes  and heart attacks in people who have risk factors for  heart disease .  If a person is already taking aspirin for aches and pains in an analgesic dose, then also taking ibuprofen does not make sense. Taking ibuprofen as well could increase their chances of side effects.  If someone is taking aspirin in low doses to prevent heart attacks, they may be able to take ibuprofen periodically for aches and pains, such as headaches and muscle aches.  Common side effects of NSAIDs include:  If a doctor has prescribed aspirin to someone to help prevent a heart attack, then taking ibuprofen at the same time for pain relief can interfere with the benefits of aspirin for the heart.  But the periodic or occasional use of ibuprofen should not prevent the beneficial effects of aspirin.  Some people should avoid NSAIDs altogether, including those who:  Aspirin is also not suitable for children and young people under 16 years of age.  Many people may choose not to mix aspirin and ibuprofen because of the increased chance of side effects, while others will do so despite the risk.  For people who take aspirin to protect the heart or to prevent a stroke, the  Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  recommend that ibuprofen for pain relief should be taken 8 hours before immediate-release aspirin or 30 minutes afterward.  Low dose aspirin is no longer recommended for use in  healthy older persons , and the use of enteric-coated aspirin should be avoided due to the  delayed release of aspirin .  However, the  FDA also recommend  that people who want to take both should contact their doctor for more information on the timings of when to take these two medicines so that both remain effective.  If a person has taken aspirin and ibuprofen together by accident, they may experience side effects. Making a note of side effects is important.  Most of the time, people can manage any side effects at home in the following ways:  If a person has any of the following serious side effects, they should report them to a doctor straight away:  A severe allergic reaction is an emergency that needs immediate medical attention. The signs are:  The best medication to take for pain depends on the type of pain a person is experiencing.  Acetaminophen is often a good choice for mild to moderate pain or fever. If people need stronger pain relief than this, they can talk to their doctor or pharmacist about other options.  People can take acetaminophen safely alongside NSAIDs.  A doctor or pharmacist may provide a prescription for pain relief and sometimes a further evaluation and consultation.  Doctors advise that people avoid using ibuprofen and aspirin together, as it increases the likelihood of side effects. This is because both drugs are from the same family of medicines known as NSAIDs.  For people who take aspirin regularly to look after their heart, it is essential for them to know that ibuprofen can interfere with this function of the medicine. Even so, occasionally taking ibuprofen will be ok. If people need to do this, they may want to consult a doctor first to ensure there is no conflict.  Taking acetaminophen alongside NSAIDs to provide pain relief is safe.   Article last updated by Phil Riches on Fri  5 April 2019.  Visit our  Pain / Anesthetics  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Pain / Anesthetics.   
 Aspirin. (2018, February 15).  Aspirin. (2018, February 15).  Aspirin: Questions and answers. (2015, December 18).  Concomitant use of ibuprofen and aspirin: Potential for attenuation of the antiplatelet effect of aspirin. (2006, September 8).  Daily low-dose aspirin found to have no effect on healthy life span in older people. (2018, September 16).  FDA: Separate ibuprofen and aspirin. (2006, November).  Ibuprofen. (2018, February 1).  Ibuprofen. (2016, July 15).  Information about taking ibuprofen and aspirin together. (2017, November 13).  NSAIDs (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs). (2018, June).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "Is it safe to mix aspirin and ibuprofen?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Apr. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322793.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2019, April 5). "Is it safe to mix aspirin and ibuprofen?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  