 According to the American College of Gastroenterology,  heartburn  is a common digestive complaint in the United States, affecting more than 60 million Americans each month.  Heartburn is not a condition on its own, and it has nothing to do with the heart. Instead, it is a symptom of  acid reflux .  If symptoms of acid reflux occur frequently, it can indicate that a person has gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ).  Distinguishing between heartburn, acid reflux, and GERD may be hard, because they may all feel the same in the moment. However, understanding the differences can help a person find the right treatment.  The following symptoms can help a person to tell the difference between acid reflux, heartburn, and GERD:   Symptoms of acid reflux   Acid reflux is sometimes called gastroesophageal reflux or GER. It occurs when stomach acid travels up the food pipe to the mouth.  This can happen when the muscle at the bottom of the food pipe, which acts as a gateway to the stomach, becomes weak or loose.  Heartburn is a burning sensation in the chest or abdomen, and it has nothing to do with the heart. People often feel heartburn behind the breastbone and after eating. It can get worse when sitting or lying down.  Heartburn is the  most common  symptom of acid reflux, though it does not appear in every case.  Acid reflux also causes the following symptoms:   Symptoms of GERD   GERD is the term for chronic acid reflux. The symptoms are the same, but they happen more frequently with GERD.  If a person experiences symptoms of acid reflux more than  twice a week  for a few weeks, they may have GERD. The disease affects about  20 percent  of the U.S. population.  The stomach is built to withstand acid. The food pipe is not, and when acid rises into it, a person experiences burning pain.  The muscle at the end of the food pipe is called the lower esophageal sphincter. It can weaken or relax, and potentially cause acid reflux, for several reasons.  For example, high amounts of pressure on the abdomen can cause the sphincter to grow slack. For this reason, acid reflux is common in people who are overweight, obese, or pregnant.  Other causes of acid reflux involve:  Various medications can also trigger acid reflux, including:  Chest pain and related symptoms are among the  top reasons  for visits to emergency departments in the U.S.  Acid reflux is a common cause of chest pain, and it can be easy to confuse this pain with that of a  heart attack .  Because heartburn can spread to the neck, throat, and jaw, it may feel like the radiating chest pain of a heart attack.  There are  a few ways  to tell the difference between heartburn and a heart attack. If the pain improves after a quick antacid or a belch, or if there is a sour taste in the mouth, a person most likely has heartburn.  A person having a heart attack often experiences a feeling of squeezing or pressure and shortness of breath.  Due to the seriousness of a heart attack, The American Heart Association recommend that anyone who believes they may be having a heart attack should seek medical care as soon as possible. This includes people who are unsure whether their chest pain results from a heart.  A doctor is a good place to start for an acid reflux or GERD diagnosis.  Assessments typically begin with a few questions and a review of the person's medical history. The doctor may suggest changes to the diet or medications because these can influence symptoms.  If the symptoms persist, especially any related to swallowing, the doctor may work with a gastroenterologist, surgeon, or another healthcare professional to confirm a diagnosis.  Tests that can help  diagnose GERD  include:  If a person does not receive treatment for GERD, it can lead to more severe complications, including:  Acid reflux and GERD are  treatable  with medications, lifestyle changes, or both.  Some medications for acid reflux include:  People with acid reflux or GERD can manage symptoms by taking steps to avoid triggers.  Weight loss can also help to reduce symptoms, as it decreases pressure on the food pipe.  People should also try not to eat late at night or lie down soon after eating.  In serious cases of GERD, surgery may help to strengthen the muscles in the gut.  Children, adolescents, and pregnant women often experience acid reflux.  Heartburn may occur with  17 to 45 percent  of pregnancies. Fortunately, over-the-counter heartburn and acid reflux treatments tend to be safe to use during pregnancy.  About  10 percent  of teenagers and pre-teens experience GERD, according to the North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition.  The symptoms, diagnosis, and treatments for children with GERD are similar to those for adults. Check with a pediatrician to learn more.  If acid reflux occurs on a regular basis, use an antacid, and try different brands if the first is ineffective. Also, try making lifestyle changes, such as eliminating certain foods or drinks from the diet.  If the acid reflux still recurs after making these changes, it may be time to  call the doctor .  Although chest pain is often a symptom of acid reflux or GERD, do not hesitate to visit the doctor or the emergency room if it seems more serious.  Sometimes GERD symptoms warrant urgent attention.  A person experiencing any of the following should seek immediate medical care:  The relationship between heartburn and acid reflux is that of a symptom and its cause.  Heartburn is a painful, common problem that can affect a person's quality of life. To eliminate it, a person needs to treat the underlying cause, which is acid reflux.  Manage symptoms of acid reflux by avoiding the many potential triggers. If acid reflux goes unchecked or untreated, it may develop into GERD.    
 Acid reflux. (n.d.).  Acid reflux. (n.d.).  Acid reflux (GER &amp; GERD) in adults. (n.d.).  Definition &amp; facts for GER &amp; GERD. (2014, November).  Diagnosis of GER &amp; GERD. (2014, November).  Heartburn or heart attack? (2016, December 13).  Rui, P., &amp; Kang, K. (2015). National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 2015 emergency department summary tables.  Symptoms &amp; causes of GER &amp; GERD. (2014, November).  Teen GERD. (n.d.).  Treatment for GER &amp; GERD. (2014, November).  Vazquez, J. C. (2015, September 8). Heartburn in pregnancy.  BMJ Clinical Evidence ,  2015 , 1411.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Harris, Scott. "What is the difference between heartburn and acid reflux?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322737.php&gt;    APA  Harris, S. (2018, August 10). "What is the difference between heartburn and acid reflux?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  