 It is common for adults to have between  10 and 40 moles . People with lighter skin tend to have more moles than those with darker skin.  Moles can change as a person ages. Some will become darker or lighter, and many moles grow. They can appear anywhere on the skin, from the scalp to the soles of the feet and even under the fingernails.  Most moles are harmless, but people should check them for changes, such as bleeding, that can indicate  melanoma .  In this article, learn why moles can bleed and when to seek medical treatment.  Raised moles can catch on things, such as jewelry, and start to bleed. They can also feel itchy, and a person may break the skin if they scratch too hard.  A bleeding mole may be painful, but a person can usually treat these minor wounds at home.  If a mole bleeds for no apparent reason, however, a person should see a doctor. Bleeding moles, or moles that look like open sores, can sometimes be signs of melanoma.  Melanomas are  skin cancers  that begin in the skin cells that produce pigment.  The cancerous cells may look like moles, or they may develop from moles. When spotted and treated early, melanomas are almost always curable.  People can use the "ABCDEs" to monitor new or existing moles. If any of the following signs are present, see a doctor for a professional evaluation:  If a mole bleeds or oozes, this can also point to melanoma. Other symptoms include:  Standard first aid for a bleeding mole involves covering the wound with a sterile dressing and applying pressure to stop the bleeding.  Most moles are harmless and do not require treatment. A doctor may remove a suspicious mole to test it for cancerous cells.  Some people also wish to remove moles that are bothersome or uncomfortable.  A dermatologist can remove a mole using surgical excision or a surgical shave.  During surgical excision, the doctor numbs the area, cuts away the mole, and closes the wound with stitches.  A surgical shave can remove small moles. After numbing the area, the doctor uses a small blade to remove the part of the mole that is raised above the rest of the skin.  Some people try to remove moles at home, but the  American Association of Dermatologists  warns against this for three reasons:  Exposure to the sun's harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays causes most skin cancers. The following are general tips to prevent skin cancer:  Most bleeding moles result from superficial cuts or snags. A person can treat them at home by applying pressure and a bandage.  If a mole bleeds for no apparent reason, or it starts to look like an open sore, contact a doctor for an evaluation.  The 5-year survival rate for very early-stage melanoma that has not spread is  99 percent . This means that nearly all the people with this type of skin cancer are still alive 5 years after diagnosis.  It is essential to monitor moles for signs of cancer and speak to a doctor about any concerns.    
 Melanoma. (n.d.).  Melanoma. (n.d.).  Melanoma: Statistics. (2016, July).  Melanoma symptoms. (2017, August 14).  Melanoma: Symptoms and signs. (2017, June).  Moles: Diagnosis and treatment. (n.d.).  Moles: Overview. (n.d.).  Signs and symptoms of melanoma skin cancer. (2016, May 20).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "What causes a bleeding mole?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322703.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, August 7). "What causes a bleeding mole?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  