  Earwax  is a waxy substance secreted in the ear canal. It is a natural cleanser with antifungal and antibacterial properties that help protect the ears.  However, too much earwax can cause problems. A buildup can plug the canal and lead to:  How can people remove excess earwax at home? Eardrops are a convenient solution, and these products often contain hydrogen peroxide.  The medical term for earwax is cerumen, and hydrogen peroxide is a cerumenolytic, which means that it can soften, break down, and dissolve earwax.  Ear drops can contain a variety of forms of hydrogen peroxide. A common type is carbamide hydroxide, which  adds oxygen  to the wax, causing it to bubble. This softens and helps to remove the buildup.  According to the results of a  2013 study , hydrogen peroxide may not be necessary. The researchers found that distilled water softened earwax effectively.  However, a large-scale Cochrane  review from 2018  found no strong evidence that one type of ear drop was better than another. The researchers also found little evidence that any treatment was effective.  When using ear drops, always follow the instructions on the packaging or the doctor's orders.  The instructions usually involve squeezing no more than  five drops  into each ear, two or three times a day, for up to 1 week.  The following general tips may help:  People can make ear drop solutions at home using a 1:1 ratio of water and hydrogen peroxide. However, always consult a doctor before using any homemade solutions.  Ear drops containing hydrogen peroxide are available for purchase over the counter or  online .  Hydrogen peroxide usually leads to no negative side effects. However, it can cause problems if a person has an ear infection or ear damage.  To avoid complications:  If a person experiences discomfort, blocked ears, or ear pain, or if the drops do not work, visit a doctor for advice and treatment.  No. A person with an ear infection should visit their doctor immediately for a medical evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment.  When ear drops are not doing the job, a doctor may recommend using an ear syringe for earwax irrigation.  Many drugstores and online shops sell ear syringes. Always follow the directions on the packaging. Anyone who is unsure how to use an ear syringe or wondering whether the solution is appropriate should speak with a doctor.  Do not use cotton swabs, paperclips, hairpins, or any other objects to clean or unblock the ears. These can push the earwax farther in, and cause infections, pain, or damage to the ear canal or eardrums. In the event of such damage, visit a doctor right away.  Natural methods of removing earwax include:  Always talk to a doctor before using natural or alternative methods of removing earwax.  Earwax protects the ears from infections and prevents water from reaching the inner structures. Usually, the ear releases this wax naturally.  However, some people produce more wax than necessary. Most of these people find that using ear drops does the trick. If not, a doctor can recommend effective treatments.  People who have excessive amounts of ear wax or who experience pain, discomfort, ear infections, or  hearing loss  should visit a doctor, who can check for underlying conditions and recommend treatment.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Aaron, K., Cooper, T. E., Warner, L., &amp; Burton, M. J. (2018, July 25). Ear drops for the removal of ear wax.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  7 .  Aaron, K., Cooper, T. E., Warner, L., &amp; Burton, M. J. (2018, July 25). Ear drops for the removal of ear wax.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  7 .  Hain, T. C. (2012, October). Ear wax.  Poulton, S., Yau, S., Anderson, D., &amp; Bennett, D. (2015, October). Ear wax management [Abstract].  Australian Family Physician ,  44 (10), 731–734.  Saxby, C., Williams, R., &amp; Hickey, S. (2013, November). Finding the most effective cerumenolytic.  The Journal of Laryngology &amp; Otology ,  127 (11), 1067–1070.  Sevy, J. O., &amp; Singh, A. (2017, October 9).  Cerumen Impaction .  Shakeel, M., Nair, S., Ahmad, Z., &amp; Gordon, A. (2015, November 2). Forgotten cause of ear infection: Forgotten cotton buds.  Journal of Otolaryngology – ENT Research ,  3 (5), 78–80.  Wright, T. (2015, July 27). Ear wax.  BMJ Clinical Evidence ,  2015 .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gal, Kat. "How does hydrogen peroxide remove ear wax?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322725.php&gt;    APA  Gal, K. (2018, August 9). "How does hydrogen peroxide remove ear wax?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  