 According to the  American Cancer Society ,  lung cancer  is the second most common  cancer  and the leading cause of cancer deaths among both males and females in the country. The organization also estimates that in 2018 in the United States there will be:  People who smoke have a much higher risk of developing lung cancer than nonsmokers. In the U.S., cigarette smoking is  more common  in men than in women.  In this article, we look at the early signs and symptoms of lung cancer in males. We also describe when to see a doctor, how the doctor makes a diagnosis, and tips for coping with symptoms.  In the early stages, lung cancers often do not cause symptoms in anyone. The symptoms tend to develop as the cancer spreads and progresses.  However, early diagnosis and treatment can significantly improve a person's outlook.  Non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC, is the  most common  type of lung cancer.  Symptoms tend to be similar in males and females and can include:  If squamous cell  carcinoma , a type of  skin cancer , develops in the lungs, a person may also experience paraneoplastic syndrome.  Paraneoplastic syndrome occurs when cancerous cells or cells from the immune system produce hormones or other substances that change surrounding tissue. It can cause symptoms, such as:  Another type of lung cancer, called small cell lung cancer or SCLC, was once  more common  in males than females. However, the gap is closing because the rate of lung cancer in men has dropped over the past decade.  SCLC typically develops near the central airways of the lungs, and it often spreads to the brain. Early symptoms may include:  People with lung cancer typically have few or no symptoms when the disease is in an initial stage. By the time it has advanced enough to cause symptoms, it may have spread to other parts of the body. This is true in both males and females.  When people do have symptoms, they often mistake them for the effects of smoking or symptoms of a less serious condition, such as an infection.  Early diagnosis and treatment of lung cancer can improve a person's outlook. If a person experiences any of the following, they should see a doctor:  In the U.S., doctors are now able to diagnose and successfully treat lung cancers at early stages in both males and females. People who receive treatment for lung cancer at an early stage have a  better chance of living longer .  To look for signs of lung cancer, a doctor may start by asking about a person's general health and any symptoms. The doctor may then perform a physical examination and a spirometry test. In this test, the doctor asks the person to breathe into a small device called a spirometer, which can help diagnose lung problems.  The doctor may also order a blood test to exclude other conditions that may be causing the symptoms, such as lung infections.  To ensure an accurate diagnosis and to rule out other conditions, a doctor may also recommend one or more of the following tests:  There are some simple measures a person can take to help relieve symptoms and prevent them from getting worse.  One of the most important steps is to stop smoking or using other tobacco products. A person should also reduce exposure to second-hand smoke. This can help a person to breathe more easily and improve symptoms such as breathlessness and coughing.  The following tips may also help with shortness of breath:  A doctor can also provide medications and oxygen to help relieve symptoms of breathlessness.  Some people with lung cancer also benefit from therapies that aim to relieve pain,  stress , and  anxiety , such as:  Lung cancer is the leading cause of death from cancer among men and women in the U.S.  However, early detection and treatment can significantly improve a person's outlook. Anyone who experiences the symptoms in this article should see a doctor.    
 Can lung cancer be found early? (2018, May 30).  Can lung cancer be found early? (2018, May 30).  Current cigarette smoking among adults in the United States. (2018, February 15).  Govindan, R., Page, N., Morgensztern, D., Read, W., Tierney, R., Vlahiotis, A., … Piccirillo, J. (2006, October 1). Changing epidemiology of small-cell lung cancer in the United States over the last 30 years: Analysis of the surveillance, epidemiologic, and end results database [Abstract].  Journal of Clinical Oncology ,  24 (28), 4539−4544.  Key statistics for lung cancer. (2018, January 4).  Key statistics for small cell lung cancer. (2018, January 4).  Lung cancer prevention and early detection. (n.d.).  Signs and symptoms of lung cancer. (2016, February 22).  What causes small cell lung cancer? (2016, May 16).  What is non-small cell lung cancer? (2016, May 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "What are the early signs of lung cancer in men?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 16 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322787.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, August 16). "What are the early signs of lung cancer in men?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  