 Skull  fractures  can vary in severity, and the extent of the injury depends on:  Skull fractures can either be linear, which means that they have a single fracture line, or communicated, where multiple fracture lines are present.  It is also possible to describe fractures as either open or closed. An open fracture, also called a compound fracture, is one where there is a break in the skin or an open wound near the fracture. In a closed fracture, the bone will not penetrate the skin.  A skull fracture will always result from head trauma.  Typical injuries that cause skull fractures include:  Doctors classify skull fractures by how severe they are and how much additional damage the injury has caused.  The different types of skull fracture include:  Some skull fractures can cause bleeding or swelling in the brain, which can compress the underlying brain tissue and result in brain damage.  The symptoms of a skull fracture may include:  As skull fractures occur as a result of severe head trauma, diagnosis tends to take place in a hospital setting.  A doctor will begin by checking the individual's cardiac and pulmonary function before giving them a thorough body examination and then carrying out a neurological exam.  They will use the  Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)  to work out how severe the injury is. This form of assessment involves determining how impaired a person's consciousness is to ascertain whether or not brain damage is likely.  The doctor will also check the pupils by shining a bright light in them to see if they shrink. A dilated pupil may indicate that a large lesion has developed.  Other tests to diagnose and assess the severity of a skull fracture may include a  CT scan , X-ray, or  MRI scan .  After assessing how severe a person's head injury is, the doctor will decide on the appropriate form of treatment. Some skull fractures heal by themselves while others need surgery.   First aid tips  for a person with a suspected skull fracture include:  If the person is conscious but appears to have a skull fracture or severe head injury, someone should take them to the emergency room immediately.  It is crucial to keep a close eye on someone with a suspected skull fracture. It is also vital not to leave them alone or provide any medication without consulting a doctor first.  People who experience mild head injuries can make a full recovery and may not need treatment for their skull fracture to heal.  Moderate or severe head injuries have less favorable outcomes. An estimated  25 percent  of people with moderate head injuries will retain some degree of disability.  Between  7 and 10 percent  of people with a moderate head injury will remain in a permanent vegetative state or will die as a result of their injuries.  Around  33 percent  of people with severe head injuries do not survive.  The outlook for a person with a skull fracture depends on the type of fracture and how severe it is.  While not all head injuries are avoidable, people can take certain measures to reduce the risk of head trauma. These include:  In some instances, skull fractures can heal by themselves without treatment. However, more severe skull fractures may require surgery and can cause other complications, including brain damage.    
 About skull fractures. (n.d.).  About skull fractures. (n.d.).  Arneitz, C., Sinzig, M., &amp; Fasching, G. (2016, November 16). Diagnostic and clinical management of skull fractures in children.  Journal of Clinical Imaging Science ,  6 , 47.  Glasgow Coma Scale. (n.d.).  Head injuries. (2018, April 17).  Skull fracture. (2018, August 23).  Skull fracture. (n.d.).  Skull fractures. (2018, July).  Traumatic brain injury. (n.d.).  Wilberger, J. E. (2017, November). Skull fracture.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "How serious is a fractured skull?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322871.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, August 24). "How serious is a fractured skull?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  