 In some cases, it may be a sign of a skin condition, an infection, or an allergic reaction.  This article will look at what it might mean to have an itch in the eyebrows that will not go away, and when to see a doctor.  There are a variety of health conditions and other factors that may cause someone's eyebrows to itch. These include:  Seborrheic dermatitis is a form of  eczema . It is a common skin condition, affecting  an estimated  1 to 3 percent of the otherwise healthy population, which rises to 34 to 83 percent of people with compromised immune systems.  It is a skin condition that affects parts of the body where there are a lot of oil-producing glands, including the eyebrows.  Seborrheic dermatitis appears as round, red areas that may be slightly scaly and tend to be itchy. People often notice these patches appear on the scalp, but it is not contagious.  People with neurological conditions, such as Parkinson's, or conditions that affect the immune system, such as  HIV , are more likely to experience seborrheic dermatitis.  The most common symptoms of seborrheic dermatitis include:   Psoriasis  is a skin condition that can affect the face. This is called facial psoriasis, and it usually appears on the eyebrows, the skin between the nose and the upper lip, the top of the forehead, and the hairline.  For some people, this may look or feel like eyebrow  dandruff .  Psoriasis causes thick, red patches of skin with silvery scales. It is an autoimmune condition. This means it is not contagious but happens when the body's immune system attacks healthy tissues.  People with psoriasis usually find the condition comes and goes. Specific things that happen in a person's life can trigger psoriasis. These triggers vary from person to person, but they might include:   Shingles  is a painful rash that can develop on one side of the face or body.  Before the rash appears, people often experience pain, itching, or tingling in the area. This may include one of the eyebrows.  According to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , the itch usually happens between 1 and 5 days before the rash breaks out.  A shingles rash consists of blisters that scab over in around 7 to 10 days and clears up within 2 to 4 weeks, according to the CDC. In some cases, shingles can affect the eyes and cause vision loss.  The  chickenpox  virus, called varicella-zoster virus (VZV), causes shingles. Once a person recovers from chickenpox, the virus stays in the body and can reactivate later on in life. Older people are more prone to shingles.  Symptoms of shingles include:  Itchy eyebrows may be a sign of an allergic reaction to a facial beauty product or treatment. More than  50 million Americans  suffer from allergies every year.  Allergies occur when the immune system overreacts to a specific substance. Someone having an allergic reaction may experience:  A mild allergic reaction will usually calm down by itself. A severe allergic reaction, however, can be life-threatening. This is called  anaphylaxis , and the symptoms include:  Contact dermatitis is a form of eczema that develops when the skin touches an irritating substance.  This is a form of allergic reaction that can cause  inflammation  and dry, flaky skin either immediately or several hours after contact with the irritant. Common irritants include fragrances and metals.  Contact dermatitis can cause itchy, flaking eyebrows if the skin around the eyebrows has come into contact with:  The  American Diabetes Association  state that people with  diabetes  may experience more skin problems than otherwise healthy individuals. In fact, skin conditions can be the first sign of diabetes.  Common skin issues that may cause itching in people with diabetes include:  Head lice, or  Pediculus humanus capitis , usually live on the scalp.  In some cases, they make their home in the eyebrows or eyelashes. Head lice are more common among children, affecting between  6 and 12 million children  in the United States every year.  These parasites feed on human blood and spread by head-to-head contact.  The bites can be itchy.  The other signs to look out for are:  Treatment will depend on the cause of the itching:  Wet compresses, calamine lotion, or colloidal oatmeal baths may help relieve the itching.  Anyone who thinks they may have a skin condition, such as seborrheic dermatitis or psoriasis, should make an appointment with a doctor.  People displaying the signs of shingles should also speak to a doctor as soon as possible to get treatment.  If someone has signs of anaphylaxis, they need emergency medical attention. If they do not receive treatment straight away, there is a risk of seizures, heart problems, or breathing difficulties, and anaphylaxis can be fatal.  Call the emergency services if someone is experiencing:  Itchy eyebrows can be annoying, but the itchiness usually goes away on its own.  Itchy eyebrows may also be a sign of a skin condition, an infection, or an allergic reaction.  It is relatively easy to treat itchy eyebrows, either with the help of a doctor or at home. Itch eyebrows are not usually a cause for concern.    
 Allergies. (2017, September 15).  Allergies. (2017, September 15).  Causes and triggers. (n.d.).  Clark, G. W., Pope, S. M., &amp; Jaboori, K. A. (2015, February 1). Diagnosis and treatment of seborrheic dermatitis.  American Family Physician ,  91 (3), 185–190.  Contact dermatitis. (n.d.).  Prevention &amp; treatment. (2018, January 19).  Psoriasis on the face. (n.d).  Seborrheic dermatitis. (n.d.).  Shingles (herpes zoster). (2018, January 19).  Skin complications. (2014, March 31).  Treatment. (2016, August 19).  What is psoriasis? (2018, June 28).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "Why are my eyebrows itchy?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322882.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, August 24). "Why are my eyebrows itchy?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  