 The dark color itself is not usually a cause for concern. However, some people dislike having dark underarms for cosmetic reasons and may wish to try using the following methods to treat them:  Acanthosis nigricans (AN) may also cause thickening of the skin or darkening in other areas of the body, such as the neck and groin. AN affects between  7 and 74 percent  of people, with the prevalence varying according to age, race, and  body weight .  Dark areas of skin may occur when pigment cells in the skin multiply faster than usual.  This can occur as a result of repeated hair removal.  Regularly shaving the underarms can lead to excessive production of pigment cells.  The following factors can also increase the likelihood of AN:  Everyone is at risk of developing AN in the underarms or other areas of the body. However, some people are more likely than others to get this skin condition.  Risk factors for dark underarms include:  Treatment typically involves managing the underlying cause of AN. Depending on the cause, treatment options may include:  If there is no underlying cause for AN then treatment is not necessary.  People with cosmetic concerns can attempt to lighten the skin using several methods, including:  Shaving or plucking underarm hair too often may cause dark underarms, so moisturizing can be helpful to reduce underarm irritation.  Always use a soap or shaving foam before shaving, and choose one for sensitive skin.  Apply a natural and unscented moisturizing lotion to the area after shaving to reduce irritation and prevent changes in the skin.  Some people claim that natural treatments can lighten dark skin. There is little, if any, scientific research to support these claims.  Popular natural remedies for dark underarms include:  Some of these home remedies may cause side effects. Lemon juice, for example, may dry out or irritate the skin.  It is best to talk to a doctor or dermatologist before using any home remedies for dark underarms.  Prescription creams, ointments, and gels are available to lighten the skin under the arms. These products include:  Many dermatologists  recommend topical creams and antibiotics  as they can reduce skin discoloration and improve the appearance of the underarms. However, it is worth noting that the manufacturers of these products did not design them specifically for AN.  For AN that is severe or does not respond to topical treatments, a dermatologist may prescribe retinoid pills. Retinoid pills also treat  acne ,  psoriasis , and other skin conditions.  Retinoid drugs can cause several side effects and are not suitable for pregnant women. People considering these medications for AN should discuss the advantages and disadvantages with their dermatologist before using them.  Laser therapy can reduce the skin thickness that often occurs alongside skin darkening. Reducing the thickness of the skin may make it appear lighter in color.  Laser therapy may also decrease hair growth and subsequently reduce the need to shave.  It is not always possible to prevent AN, but some ways to reduce the risk of developing dark underarms include:  AN is not generally a cause for concern. However, people with dark underarms should see their doctor as skin darkening may indicate an underlying medical condition that requires attention.  Treating the underlying condition often resolves the symptoms and lightens the skin. If that does not work, or if an underlying condition is not causing AN, a doctor or dermatologist can recommend home remedies, medications, and therapies.    
 Acanthosis nigricans: Diagnosis and treatment. (n.d.).  Acanthosis nigricans: Diagnosis and treatment. (n.d.).  Phiske, M. M. (2014, July–September). An approach to acanthosis nigricans.  Indian Dermatology Online Journal ,  5 (3), 239–249.  Puri, N. (2011, November–December). A study of pathogenesis of  acanthosis nigricans  and its clinical implications.  Indian Journal of Dermatology ,  56 (6), 678–683.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Ways to get rid of dark underarms."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322860.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, August 23). "Ways to get rid of dark underarms."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  