 Brain hypoxia is a medical emergency because the brain needs a constant supply of oxygen and nutrients to function properly.  There are several causes of brain hypoxia. They include drowning, suffocating, cardiac arrest, and  stroke . Mild symptoms include memory loss and problems with motor function, such as movement. Severe cases can result in seizures and brain death.  Read on to learn more about brain hypoxia, also known as cerebral hypoxia.  The symptoms of a lack of oxygen to the brain, or brain hypoxia, may be mild or severe and depend on the level and duration of oxygen deprivation.  Mild symptoms of brain hypoxia include:  Brain cells can begin to die after just  5 minutes  of oxygen loss. Symptoms become more dangerous the longer oxygen flow to the brain is cut off.  Severe symptoms of brain hypoxia include:  In cases of brain death, there is no brain activity. The pupils of the eyes do not respond to light and people cannot breathe without assistance from a life-support machine. However, the heart continues to pump blood around the body.  There are many reasons why someone may experience brain hypoxia.  Some medical conditions and situations that reduce oxygen supply to the brain include:  Brain hypoxia can affect anyone who experiences a shortage or lack of oxygen to the brain, but some people are at higher risk than others.  Risk factors for brain hypoxia include:  Sports enthusiasts may be at higher risk if they engage in activities that have a higher risk than others of resulting in a head injury or trauma to the windpipe.  Those who must hold their breath for long periods or travel to high altitudes are also at increased risk.  Examples of risky activities include:  Many medical conditions have the potential to affect the oxygen flow to the brain. Examples of such conditions include:  People experiencing exposure to intense smoke or carbon monoxide through their job, such as firefighters, may be at increased risk of brain hypoxia.  A doctor will usually diagnose brain hypoxia based on a person's medical history, a physical examination, and other tests.  During the medical history and physical examination, the doctor will ask about someone's current symptoms and recent activities.  The doctor may request tests to confirm hypoxia and find out its cause. These tests include:  Brain hypoxia is a medical emergency that requires immediate treatment. It is vital that normal oxygen supply to the brain resumes quickly to prevent complications or brain death.  Treatment will vary, depending on the cause and severity of the hypoxia. Basic life support systems are often necessary. People with severe hypoxia may need a machine known as a ventilator to breathe for them.  Other treatments include:  In some cases, a doctor may cool the person down to slow their brain activity and reduce its need for oxygen. However, it is unclear how beneficial this treatment is.  How long a person has experienced oxygen deprivation will determine their outlook and recovery from brain hypoxia.  It is difficult to predict how quickly a person will recover, but some factors can help foresee the outcome.  Having low brain oxygen levels for several hours can suggest a poorer recovery. Also,  research  suggests that a person's functional status on admission to hospital strongly indicates their recovery prospects.  According to the Family Caregiver Alliance, in cases of hypoxic or anoxic brain injury, other factors that predict outcome  include :  During recovery from brain hypoxia, people may experience several challenges. These typically resolve over time. They include:  Complications include a prolonged vegetative state, where a person has basic functions but is not awake or alert. These people may develop conditions such as:  Eventually, brain hypoxia can be fatal.  It can be challenging to avoid all cases of brain hypoxia. For example, it is difficult to prevent a brain injury received during an unexpected car collision.  To have the best chance of preventing hypoxia, people should monitor health conditions and avoid high altitudes. People should wear proper protective equipment, such as helmets when playing sports with high risks of head injury.  If a person receives cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) after a fire or head injury, they may be less likely to experience brain hypoxia, or for it to be less severe. CPR can save lives, especially if carried out immediately.  Brain hypoxia is a medical emergency. If someone displays the symptoms of brain hypoxia or if they are losing consciousness, call the emergency services without delay.  People have their best chance of recovery if they receive medical treatment right away. Prompt medical attention reduces the amount of time that oxygen flow to the brain is limited.    
 Cerebral hypoxia information page. (2018, June 21).  Cerebral hypoxia information page. (2018, June 21).  Heinz, U. E., &amp; Rollnik, J. D. (2015, June 17). Outcome and prognosis of hypoxic brain damage patients undergoing neurological early rehabilitation.  BMC Research Notes ,  8 , 243.  Hypoxic-anoxic brain injury [Fact sheet]. (2004).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to know about brain hypoxia."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322803.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, August 17). "What to know about brain hypoxia."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  