 In this article, we look at what healthy spots on the tongue do, and the causes of unusual spots. We also cover diagnosis, treatment, and prevention tips.  There are four kinds of healthy spots or bumps that typically appear on the tongue. The medical term for these spots is papillae.  Papillae help people to sense and taste with the tongue. Nerves that send messages about flavor to the brain are connected to taste buds. Papillae are also important for giving information about temperature, chewing food, and speaking.  Tongue spots that are unusual in color, size, or appearance or are accompanied by other symptoms could signal a health problem.  Causes of unusual tongue spots include:  Transient lingual papillitis is a condition more commonly referred to as lie bumps. A key symptom is small red or white bumps on the tongue. These bumps are enlarged or inflamed papillae.  Lie bumps can affect one or several papillae. Other symptoms can include:  Lie bumps commonly result from injury to the tongue, for example, when a person accidentally bites their tongue.  Viruses, psychological  stress , and poor  nutrition  can also cause the condition.  Lie bumps usually heal without treatment within a week. If treatment is necessary, a person can try a medicated mouthwash or antihistamines to help them reduce the swelling.  A person with lie bumps can quicken the healing of the tongue by:  If a person burns their tongue on hot food or liquid, it can cause blisters. These can appear as small, fluid-filled spots on the tongue.  Blisters will heal more quickly if they remain unbroken. A person can promote healing and prevent blisters from breaking by taking care when brushing the teeth and eating and drinking.  A burn on the tongue does not usually require treatment. Keeping the mouth clean by using mouthwash can help to prevent an infection.  Canker sores are very common. These small ulcers look white or yellow and can appear on the tongue, inside of the mouth, and on the lips. The cause of canker sores is not clear.  Canker sores usually go away without treatment. Directly applying an over-the-counter (OTC) medication, such as benzocaine, to the ulcer can relieve discomfort and promote healing.  In some cases, canker sores can be a sign of an underlying health condition. If a person has other symptoms, they may wish to seek medical advice. These symptoms include  fever , stomach pain, and a rash elsewhere on the body.  The medical term for geographic tongue is benign migratory glossitis.  Geographic tongue causes  inflammation  on the sides or top of the tongue and usually appears as a blotch or spot of redness surrounded by a white border.  Doctors are not sure what causes geographic tongue, but it may be related to stress, allergies, or  diabetes . The condition does not usually cause any other symptoms and should heal without treatment.  A yeast infection known as  oral thrush  can affect the mouth and tongue. Symptoms include:  If a person scrapes off a white patch on the tongue, they will usually see a red, inflamed patch underneath.  Oral thrush results from an overgrowth of yeast that occurs naturally in the mouth. Certain groups of people are more at risk of developing the infection, including:  A person can usually treat oral thrush using OTC antifungal medications. A doctor may also recommend:   Scarlet fever  is a bacterial infection in the nose and throat. One of the key symptoms is a red, bumpy tongue that people often refer to as "strawberry tongue." Other symptoms include:  Doctors treat scarlet fever with  antibiotics . Following antibiotic treatment, scarlet fever usually goes away in around one week, but the rash can last for longer.  Scarlet fever most commonly affects children and is contagious. The infection can be passed on through:  An allergy to certain raw fruits and vegetables can cause itching and swelling in the mouth or on the tongue. Swollen patches on the tongue may appear red and irritated.  The reaction is often mild, and a person can avoid it by cutting out the foods that cause the allergy. Cooking or peeling the fruit or vegetable can often prevent a reaction.  Tongue  cancer  is a form of head and neck cancer. Drinking alcohol, smoking, and infection with the  human papillomavirus  (HPV) can increase a person's risk of developing tongue cancer.  A bump or spot on the side of the tongue, or a red patch on the tongue, is usually harmless. But if it does not go away, it could be a symptom of tongue cancer. Other symptoms include:  Anyone who has a painless sore, lump, or red or white patch on the tongue that does not go away should see a dentist or doctor.  People should consider seeing a dentist or doctor for:  A doctor will usually ask about any other symptoms, when the spots appeared, and any pain a person is feeling. This information can help a doctor give a diagnosis and offer further advice or treatment.  Practicing good oral hygiene can help to prevent oral yeast infections and may help the tongue to heal after an injury or illness. To keep the mouth, teeth, and tongue healthy, dentists usually recommend:  It is not possible to prevent all spots on the tongue, particularly those due to infections and canker sores.  Taking medication correctly, keeping the mouth clean, and avoiding irritating the mouth when eating or cleaning teeth can promote healing and prevent spots from reoccurring.  People have many tiny spots on their tongues that are crucial for taste and sensation. But spots that are unusual in color, size, or appearance could be the signs of a health problem.  Unusual spots can have a range of causes, from tongue injuries to an infection. They often go away without treatment but can sometimes be a symptom of a more serious medical condition, such as scarlet fever or tongue cancer.  People may wish to see a dentist or doctor if tongue spots do not go away on their own within a week. If a person has other symptoms, or if the spots bleed or become more painful, they may need treatment.    
 About tongue cancer. (2018, July 18).  About tongue cancer. (2018, July 18).  Canker sores. (2016, August 30).  Canker sores. (2017, June 9).  Geographic tongue. (2015, May 13).  How does our sense of taste work? (2016, August 17).  Kalogirou, E.-M., Tosios, K. I., Nikitakis, N. G., Kamperos, G., &amp; Sklavounou, A. (2017, January). Transient lingual papillitis: A retrospective study of 11 cases and review of the literature.  Journal of Clinical and Experimental Dentistry ,  9 (1), e157–e162.  Murchison, D. F. (2015, June). Tongue sores and bumps.  Oral allergy syndrome (OAS) or pollen fruit syndrome (PFS). (n.d.).  Oral cancer. (2018, July).  Oral yeast infections. (2015, October 21).  Scarlet fever: A group A streptococcal infection. (2018, January 22).  Signs and symptoms of oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer. (2018, March 9).     Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "What can cause spots on the tongue?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322841.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2018, August 22). "What can cause spots on the tongue?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  