 Flares are periods of increased disease activity during which people's  arthritis  symptoms, which typically include joint pain, swelling, and stiffness, are more severe.  People with  rheumatoid arthritis  (RA) often find that flares come and go in waves throughout their lives. The duration of flares varies from a few days to several months. The specific symptoms and their severity may also differ between people and situations.  In this article, we discuss how people can reduce and manage RA flares.  There are currently no medications that can cure RA or consistently prevent flares. The goal of treatment is to reduce symptoms, minimize  inflammation , and prevent joint damage.  People can try the following techniques and home remedies to relieve their symptoms when they feel an RA flare coming on:  Being aware of the early symptoms of flares is useful for preventing and dealing with them.   1. Keep a symptoms journal   It can be beneficial to keep a journal of potential flare triggers and symptoms to try to identify when and why the flares happen. Avoiding triggers and resting may be enough to manage a minor flare.   2. Rest more   Once a flare starts, many people will need to reduce their activity levels.  During severe flares, people may need to rest completely. Working from home and having a reliable support system of family and friends in place can help.   3. Exercise gently   Doing gentle range-of-motion exercises and stretches  can prevent  stiffness when an RA flare occurs.   4. Use hot or cold packs   Hot or cold packs can help reduce joint pain and swelling. People can start using these packs as soon as symptoms appear and continue to use them throughout the flare.  It is essential to avoid placing hot or cold substances directly on the skin. Instead, wrap the pack in a towel before applying it to the affected area.   5. Make dietary changes   Following an anti-inflammatory diet can help prevent flares and improve RA symptoms when they do occur.  People wishing to follow this diet should avoid processed foods, refined sugars, and artificial ingredients, and eat a  Mediterranean diet  that is rich in whole foods.  Foods that people with RA should incorporate into their diet  include :   6. Try a dietary supplement   According to the  Arthritis Foundation , certain herbal supplements can help relieve the symptoms of a flare. These supplements include:  Specific  vitamin  and mineral supplements may also be helpful,  including :   7. Reduce stress   Reducing  stress  is essential for preventing flares or shortening their length and reducing symptoms. People can try the following techniques to reduce stress when they feel a flare coming on:  It is possible to divide the  medications  that doctors usually prescribe for RA into three major groups:  Everyone with RA will experience flares differently, but it is common for RA symptoms to come and go in waves.  RA flares usually begin with an initial phase, during which people may sense that something is not quite right and that a flare is coming soon. The distinct symptoms of the flare will follow.  The symptoms of an RA flare may  include :  These symptoms may lead to a loss of functioning and interfere with people's mood, sleep quality, and ability to perform everyday activities.  Symptoms tend to increase until they reach their peak. As the flare ends, the symptoms will lessen and may completely disappear.  In mild cases, a person's symptoms may be absent for a long time, and periods of disease activity may be brief. However, the condition is usually more severe, and most people will experience some symptoms throughout their lives.  There is also a link between RA and an increased risk of  depression  and  anxiety , which can worsen the symptoms of a flare. It is vital that anyone who is feeling depressed or worried about developing depression speaks to a doctor.  There are two types of RA flare, which doctors refer to as predictable and unpredictable.  Predictable flares usually occur in response to one or more triggers.  Unpredictable flares do not have an apparent trigger and people can struggle to link them to any specific causes. This type of flare is more challenging to prevent and treat than predictable flares.  Typical triggers of an RA flare include:  People who have predictable flares may be able to take precautions to prevent them or reduce their severity.  RA is a chronic disease that does not currently have a cure. RA generally comes in waves, meaning that people experience flares in alternation with periods of remission.  Each person is different, but it is often possible to manage RA flares using medication and lifestyle strategies.  A doctor can help people create a management plan that is specific to their needs, symptoms, and situation.    
 9 supplements for arthritis. (n.d.).  9 supplements for arthritis. (n.d.).  Andwele, M. (n.d.). Coping with an arthritis flare: Tips for managing episodes of increased pain and other symptoms.  Anti-inflammatory diet. (n.d.).  Arthritis medication. (n.d.).  Vitamin and mineral guide. (n.d.).  Watson, S. (2016, February). Understanding RA flares.  Williams, M. A., Williamson, E. M., Heine, P. J., Nichols, V., Glover, M. J., Dritsaki, M., … Lamb, S. E. (2015, March). Strengthening and stretching for rheumatoid arthritis of the hand (SARAH). A randomized controlled trial and economic evaluation.  Health Technology Assessment ,  19 (19).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gal, Kat. "Tips for dealing with rheumatoid arthritis flare-ups."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322884.php&gt;    APA  Gal, K. (2018, August 28). "Tips for dealing with rheumatoid arthritis flare-ups."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  