 The recommended dietary allowance or RDA for protein depends on factors, such as:  Adults are generally recommended to eat 0.8 g per kilograms (kg) of  body weight  daily.  According to the  Institute for Medicine (IOM) , the daily RDA for protein is as follows:  Being physically active can increase the RDA of protein that people should eat. A  2016 study  recommends eating:  Anyone who is pregnant or breastfeeding will need to eat a lot more protein than other people.  Some studies have also found that people may need to increase the protein intake as they age.  A  2016 study  concluded that older adults should eat more protein than is currently recommended to promote healthy aging.  The researchers recommended that adults should ideally consume protein in the range of 1.2–1.6 g per kg of body weight daily, to prevent age-related muscle loss or sarcopenia.  The study also concluded that these amounts would also improve appetite control, satiety, and weight management.  People can typically consume 2 g of protein per kg of their body weight daily, long-term, without any significant side effects.  Some people, such as elite athletes, may be able to eat as much as 3.5 g per kg of body weight daily without any side effects.  Most research indicates that eating  more than 2 g per kg  of body weight daily of protein for a long time can cause health problems.  Symptoms associated with too much protein include:  There are serious risks associated with chronic protein overconsumption, including:  Doctors have also linked certain conditions to chronic protein overconsumption:  The IOM recommend people get between  10 and 35 percent  of their daily energy intake from protein.  Most people can safely eat between 2 and 3.5 g per kg of body weight daily, especially those who need more protein than others, such as:  Researchers are still unsure whether very high protein diets are safe, especially when someone is also cutting back on their  carbohydrate  intake.  It seems  higher protein diets may assist  with weight loss.  It is likely that high-protein diets promote weight loss because high protein foods tend to promote a feeling of fullness, helping reduce hunger cravings and overeating.  One  small study  in adolescent overweight or obese girls found evidence that eating breakfast, especially one high in protein, may help control neural signals that regulate food cravings and reward-driven food behaviors.  More research is needed to understand the full relationship between high protein diets and weight loss.  A large variety of plant and animal-based foods are high in protein, including:  Not all protein-rich foods are ideal for people looking to lose weight or maintain a healthy diet.  Examples of protein-rich, low-calorie foods include:  Some people cannot eat as much protein as others because of conditions that interfere with digestion.  Risk factors associated with developing side effects from protein overconsumption include the following:  High-protein diets are popular, and studies show that high-protein foods may help to:  According to national statistics gathered between 2011 and 2014, most American adults of 20 years of age or more only consumed between  15.6 and 16.1 percent  of their daily energy intake from protein.  Most people can, therefore, probably increase their protein intake safely, as long as they are not also cutting back on carbohydrates or have liver or kidney conditions.  People should talk with a doctor or nutritionist before starting a very high-protein diet long-term.    
 Dietary reference intakes (DRAs): Recommended dietary allowances and adequate intakes, total water and macronutrients. (2011).  Dietary reference intakes (DRAs): Recommended dietary allowances and adequate intakes, total water and macronutrients. (2011).  Diet/nutrition. (2017, May 3).  Hernández-Alonso, P., Salas-Salvadó, J., Ruiz-Canela, M., Corella, D., Estruch, R., Fitó, M., ... Bulló, M. (2016, April). High dietary protein intake is associated with an increased body weight and total death risk.  Clinical Nutrition ,  35 (2), 496–506.  Leidy, H. J., Ortinau, L. C., Douglas, S. M., &amp; Hoertel, H. A. (2013, February 27). Beneficial effects of a higher-protein breakfast on the appetitive, hormonal, and neural signals controlling energy intake regulation in overweight/obese, “breakfast-skipping,” late-adolescent girls.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition , &lt;em&lt;97(4), 677–688.  Phillips, S. M., Chevalier, S., &amp; Leidy, H. J. (2016, February 2). Protein “requirements” beyond the RDA: Implications for optimizing health.  Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism ,  41 (5), 565–572.  Wu, G. (2016, March). Dietary protein intake and human health.  Food &amp; function ,   7 (3), 1251–1265.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "How much protein is too much?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322825.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, August 21). "How much protein is too much?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  