 When it comes to the  Medical News Today  editorial office, however, this stereotype couldn't be further from the truth.  Our editorial office was first established in the United Kingdom a little over 5 years ago.  The team has grown more than fourfold in that time, and while there have been many changes, one thing remains the same: our culture.  From day 1, it was clear that the  MNT  team is something special. It abounds with wonderfully unique people, with interests ranging from rapping to paragliding. We all have different skillsets, and we all have very different tastes in music (cue the great ABBA debate).  However, there are some things that run throughout the team. "I love working with people who are so passionate about what they do, super hard-working, and determined to do the job well, but who also have an excellent sense of humor and can have fun," one colleague commented.  "Empathy is always a priority," said another, "and I can't  stress  enough how much this contributes to sustaining a great work environment."  It's no secret that  a happy team is a productive one . We're so happy to be part of a team with one distinct aim: to provide  you , our readers, with reliable and actionable health content.  It seems that you like what we're doing. July was a record-breaking month for  MNT ; more than 35 million of you came to our site. What is more,  MNT  have moved up the ranks to become the  7th biggest health website in the United States !  This month, our article about  how to lose weight without diet or exercise  proved popular, and you were keen to learn about the  health benefits of cranberry juice , as well as  which foods can help reduce anxiety .  Our report on a study about  an existing drug that could prevent Alzheimer's disease  piqued your scientific curiosity in August, as did our feature on the  latest research on the health benefits of vitamin D .  You were also interested in our article on a study that  links the keto diet to diabetes , and our story on how  probiotics could be linked to "brain fog" and bloating  caught your eye.  As always, we're open to article suggestions. Is there a health topic you'd like to learn more about?  Get in touch  and we'll get on the case! You can also reach out to us via  Facebook , and you can keep up with the latest medical research by following us on  Twitter  and  Pinterest .  You'll hear more from me and the rest of the weirdly wonderful  MNT  team next month.   Have a happy and healthful September!    Honor Whiteman , Managing Editor  