 Medical treatment usually involves the use of prescription-strength antifungal medications. Though effective, some people experience unpleasant side effects, ranging from  upset stomach  to other skin issues.  As a result, some people may choose home remedies to treat toenail fungus. The following are some of the more popular home methods that people have tried to treat toenail fungus.  Baking soda soaks up moisture that may cause toenail fungus. In one  small study , researchers studied the effect of baking soda on common fungi that cause infections, such as toenail fungus.  The researchers found that baking soda prevented fungal growth in 79 percent of the specimens tested. In another 17 percent, baking soda reduced fungal growth, though it did not eradicate it.  A person can try putting baking soda inside their socks and shoes to soak up moisture.  People can also apply a paste of baking soda and water directly to the affected nail and let it sit for at least 10 minutes before rinsing. Repeat this several times a day until the fungus clears.  Mentholated topical ointments could help treat toenail fungus.  Doctors often recommend these types of ointments to help treat cough and cold symptoms. The same active ingredients in mentholated ointments — menthol, eucalyptus oil, and camphor — have other properties that may be effective in treating toenail fungus.  One  small study  examined the use of one of these ointments to treat toenail fungus. All 18 participants reported being satisfied or very satisfied with the results of using the rub on their toenail fungus. However, mentholated topical ointment cured just five participants at the end of the 48-week-long study.  More research is needed to prove further that a mentholated ointment is an effective option for treating toenail fungus.  Apply mentholated ointment directly to the affected nail. Do this about once a day for several weeks or until the nail shows noticeable improvements.  Vinegar is a common household product found in cooking and some home cleaning solutions. Though no clinical evidence exists to date, there is anecdotal evidence to suggest that vinegar is an effective tool to help treat toenail fungus.  Anyone interested in trying vinegar can apply vinegar directly to the affected nails by soaking the toes in a bowl of warm water mixed with vinegar. People should use a 2–1 mix of water to vinegar.  As with vinegar, there is no direct scientific evidence to support using mouthwash to treat toenail fungus. However, some studies suggest that many types of mouthwash have antifungal properties.  One  study  reports that seven commercial types of mouthwash showed some antifungal activity in laboratory samples.  Try soaking the toenails in a small bowl of mouthwash.  Typically used for seasoning food, garlic may help treat toenail fungus as well. Though limited, there is some evidence to support this claim.  One  study  found that a garlic extract showed strong antifungal properties against fungi that cause fungal infections in laboratory samples. Another  study  also reported promising results for garlic oil against certain strains of fungus, again in lab-based samples.  Many people use chopped cloves of garlic to help treat their toenail fungus. To use garlic, chop up a clove and apply it to the affected nails and leave it on for about 30 minutes.  Be careful when using garlic to treat toenail fungus, as raw garlic can sometimes cause a  chemical burn  on the skin.  Snakeroot is not well-known in the United States but is a traditional treatment for fungal infections in Mexico. Snakeroot, also known as  Ageratina , is a part of the sunflower family and is known for its antifungal properties.  One  laboratory review  observed that specific compounds within snakeroot showed antifungal properties against strains of fungus that can cause athlete's foot.  Another recent but small  study  found no significant differences in the results for treating vaginal yeast infections with snakeroot extract compared with a common antifungal medication.  Those interested in snakeroot extract can buy it at specialty stores or online. People can apply the extract to affected toenails two to three times a week. Treatment typically lasts for about 3 months.  Blends of certain essential oils may have an antifungal effect when applied to fungus.  These blends included:  One  study  suggests that blends of these oils have an antifungal and antimicrobial effect in laboratory samples. However, the efficacy depends on the mix of the oils and the amount of the chemicals linalool and linalyl acetate that the oils contain.  A person interested in trying a blend of essential oils can buy the oils online or from a health food store. Mix the oil with a carrier oil before applying the mixture to the affected nails.  Ozonized oils are oils infused with ozone gas. Examples of oils that are available in ozonized form include sunflower oil and olive oil.  According to  one study , ozonized oils show positive effects similar to a traditional medication called terbinafine cream in treating one type of fungus. In this study, the researchers used rabbits to test the effectiveness of the treatment.  Another study carried out on 400 people tested how ozonized oils affected fungal infections. In this  2011 study , researchers used ozonized sunflower oil to treat toenail fungus.  Their results indicated that ozonized oils cured up to 90.5 percent of the total infections with only a 2.8 percent relapse rate after 1 year. The researchers concluded the ozonized sunflower oil works more effectively than ketoconazole cream, which is an antifungal medication.  To use ozonized oils, apply the oil to affected nails twice a day for 3 months.  Some researchers have identified olive leaf extract as a potential home remedy for toenail fungus. People have used olive leaf extract for centuries, though not many people in the U.S. use it, today.  According to  one review , olive leaf extract is a safe way to help treat toenail fungus.  However, olive leaf extract may cause potential side effects. These include flu-like symptoms, such as:  A person should start slowly to help avoid the side effects. If taking capsules, a person can typically take between one and three capsules two times a day with a meal once they are used to them.  A person can change their diet to improve their overall health. Though no clinical evidence suggests a dietary change can cure toenail fungus, certain diets may help improve a person's overall health and well-being.  Diets should include plenty of nutrients. In particular, a person can eat foods rich in  vitamins , minerals, and other materials that help aid nail growth and development.  Some foods to include in a nail-healthful diet:  Toenail fungus is not a significant problem for most people.  Those most at risk for complications are people with  diabetes  and those with weakened immune systems. People in either of these groups should seek medical treatment for their toenail fungus and avoid home remedies altogether.  Any person who does not see improvements or has complications as a result of home remedies should talk to their doctor and stop using the home remedy as soon as possible. Always speak to a doctor before trying any treatment for toenail fungus.  Home remedies for toenail fungus may be a safe alternative to traditional medications. In most cases, the remedies are considered safe and simple to apply.  When purchasing alternative remedies and supplements, it is essential to buy from a trusted retailer. These treatment options are not regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the same way as medications, and so people should take more care when buying them.  A person should speak to their doctor if they have any doubts about treatment, if their infection is not clearing, or they have underlying conditions, such as diabetes.    
 Daud, F. V., Ueda, S. M. Y., Navarini, A., &amp; Mímica, L. M. J. (2011, January-March). The use of ozonized oil in the treatment of dermatophitosis caused by  Microsporum canis  in rabbits.  Brazilian Journal of Microbiology ,  42 (1), 274–281.  Daud, F. V., Ueda, S. M. Y., Navarini, A., &amp; Mímica, L. M. J. (2011, January-March). The use of ozonized oil in the treatment of dermatophitosis caused by  Microsporum canis  in rabbits.  Brazilian Journal of Microbiology ,  42 (1), 274–281.  Derby, R., Rohal, P., Jackson, C., Beutler, A., &amp; Olsen, C. (2011, February). Novel treatment of onychomycosis using over-the-counter mentholated ointment: A clinical case series.  The Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine ,  24 (1), 69–74.  El Gendy, S. G., Seddek, N. H., &amp; Mohammed, S. M. (2016, April). Activity of some natural oils on dermatophytes isolated from Assuit University Hospitals [Abstract].  Egyptian Journal of Medical Microbiology ,  25 (2), 85–91.  Fu, J., Wei, P., Zhao, C., He, C., Yan, Z., &amp; Hua, H. (2014, November 12).  In vitro  antifungal effect and inhibitory activity on biofilm formation of seven commercial mouthwashes [Abstract].  Oral Diseases ,  20 (8), 815–820.  Letscher-Bru, V., Obszynski, C. M., Samsoen, M., Sabou, M., Waller, J., &amp; Candolfi, E. (2013, February). Antifungal activity of sodium bicarbonate against fungal agents causing superficial infections. [Abstract].  Mycopathologia ,  175 (1-2), 153–158.  Mahboubi, M., &amp; Kazempour, N. (2015, March). The anti-dermatophyte activity of  Allium hirtifolium  Boiss aqueous extract [Abstract].  Journal de Mycologie Médicale ,  25 (1), e10–e14.  Menéndez, S., Falcón, L., &amp; Maqueira, Y. (2011, September 13). Therapeutic efficacy of topical OLEOZON in patients suffering from onychomycosis [Abstract].  Mycoses ,  54 (5), e272–e277.  Parashar, B., Yadav, V., Maurya, B., &amp; Sharma, L. (2012). Natural therapy of fungal nail disease: Review  The Pharma Innovation ,  1 (4).  Romero-Cerecero, O., Islas-Garduño, A. L., Zamilpa, A., &amp; Tortoriello, J. (2017, June). Effectiveness of  Ageratina pichinchensis  extract in patients with vulvovaginal candidiasis. A randomized, double-blind, and controlled pilot study.  Phytotherapy Research ,  31 (6), 885–890.  Sharp, O., Waseem, S., &amp; Wong, K. Y. (2018, July 3). A garlic burn.  BMJ Case Reports ,  2018 .  Tadtong, S., Suppawat, S., Tintawee, A., Saramas, P., Jareonvong, S., &amp; Hongratanaworakit, T. (2012, October). Antimicrobial activity of blended essential oil preparation [Abstract].  Natural Product Communications ,  7 (10), 1401–1404.  Wei, Y.-X., Xu, X.-Y., Xu, &amp; Song, X. (2017). A review of antifungal natural products against the pathogenic fungi causing athletes' foot disease.  Current Organic Chemistry ,  21 , 1–13.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What is the best home remedy for toenail fungus?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322895.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, August 28). "What is the best home remedy for toenail fungus?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  