 Common causes of muscle aches include:  Muscle aches, also known as myalgia, can be felt in any area of the body that has muscles. Depending on the cause, the discomfort may be mild or extremely severe.  The most common causes of muscle aches include:   Stress  makes it harder for the body to fight off disease. In people who are unwell and stressed, the muscles may ache  as the body struggles to combat inflammation  or infection.  Symptoms of stress include:  People can try to combat stress by learning relaxation techniques and removing themselves from stressful situations where possible.  A person may experience muscular aches and pains because they are not getting the proper  nutrition  from their diet.   Vitamin D  plays a particularly important role in ensuring that the muscles function correctly.  Vitamin D  helps with the absorption of  calcium , and a deficiency can lead to hypocalcemia.  Hypocalcemia is a condition in which the blood calcium level is low, which can affect the bones and organs in addition to the muscles.  A person who is dehydrated may experience muscle aches.  Drinking enough water is vital to keep the body functioning properly as it can quickly begin to shut down without adequate fluids.  Dehydration  causes essential bodily functions, such as breathing and digestion, to become more difficult.  People should be aware of how much water they are drinking. The recommended amount is 6–8 glasses of water each day. If hot weather or exercise causes a person to sweat more than usual, they will need to drink more than this.  Strains, sprains, and other injuries can cause muscle pain and discomfort.  People may find that a particular area of the body becomes stiff and achy if it is injured. Pulling muscles can also cause muscle soreness.  Some sprains and strains do not need treatment, but a person should rest, take over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers, or use heat packs to ease the symptoms.  However, if the injury is causing significant pain, restricting normal movement, or not improving with time, it is advisable to make an appointment with a doctor.  A lack of sleep can have a  severe impact on the body .  Sleep allows the body to rest and recuperate, and a person's muscles may ache if they do not get enough sleep.  A lack of quality sleep can also make people feel sluggish and slow. It can affect people's ability to think clearly and make it harder for them to carry out everyday tasks.  Overdoing exercise can lead to stiff, sore muscles.  The following factors can make a person more susceptible to muscle aches and pains when exercising:  Many different medical issues can cause muscle aches. Conditions that most commonly affect the muscles include:  Some people who have muscle aches may notice the following symptoms alongside the soreness and discomfort in their muscles:  Some of these symptoms, such as a very high fever or difficulty breathing, will require immediate medical attention.  If the cause of the ache is a strain, an injury, tension, or stress, people will usually feel discomfort in a particular area.  When aches occur throughout the entire body, this is more likely to be due to an infection, medication, or underlying illness.  Home remedies are often sufficient to relieve aches resulting from minor injuries, too much exercise, or stress.  Many people can treat their symptoms using the  R.I.C.E method , which involves:  Other helpful home remedies include:  Muscle aches and pains that are severe or do not resolve may be a symptom of an underlying condition that requires medical assessment and treatment.  A person should see a doctor if they:  It is crucial to seek immediate medical assistance if muscle pain occurs alongside:  People may be able to prevent aching muscles from occurring due to tension, stress, and intense physical activity by doing the following:  Most causes of muscle aches are benign, but persistent aching may require medical care.    
 About infectious mononucleosis. (2018, May 8).  About infectious mononucleosis. (2018, May 8).  Anemia. (n.d.).  Arthritis. (2018, July 12).  Cohen, S., Janicki-Deverts, D., Doyle, W. J., Miller, G. E., Frank, E., Rabin, B. S., &amp; Turner, R. B. (2012, April 17). Chronic stress, glucocorticoid receptor resistance, inflammation, and disease risk [Abstract].  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,  109  (16), 5995–5999.  Dermatomyositis. (n.d.).  Fibromyalgia. (2014, July 30).  Fong, J., &amp; Khan, A. (2012, February). Hypocalcemia: Updates in diagnosis and management for primary care.  Canadian Family Physician,  58  (2), 158–162.  Intermittent claudication. (n.d.).  Lupus detailed fact sheet. (2018, May 3).  Lyme disease symptoms. (n.d.).  Multiple sclerosis (MS). (n.d.).  Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. (2018, June 29).  Sleep deprivation and deficiency. (n.d.).  Sprains, strains and other soft-tissue injuries. (2015, July).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Cadman, Bethany. "What are the causes of unexplained muscle aches?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322869.php&gt;    APA  Cadman, B. (2018, August 24). "What are the causes of unexplained muscle aches?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  