 Spotting will often subside with the continued and regular use of  birth control  pills. Anyone who is still experiencing spotting after 6 months of taking the pill should speak to a doctor.  The doctor may recommend a different type of pill or investigate other possible causes of the bleeding.  Spotting often occurs in the first 6 months of taking a new birth control pill. It may take time for the pills to regulate the menstrual cycle as the body needs to adjust to the new hormone levels. As a result, a person may still experience some irregular bleeding between periods initially.  Doctors do not fully understand why spotting occurs at this time. One possible reason is that an increase in progestin leads to changes in the lining of the uterus, called the endometrium.  Progestin may thin the endometrial lining, which can cause some bleeding initially. A thinner lining helps prevent pregnancy as a fertilized egg cannot implant as effectively.  Other potential causes of spotting while on the pill include:  If a person has taken birth control pills for more than 6 months and still experiences spotting, it may indicate another underlying condition.  Some underlying conditions that can cause spotting include:  However, most of the time, spotting occurs because the levels of hormones in birth control pills are not high enough to prevent occasional bleeding. The body may require more  estrogen , which thickens the uterine lining and may reduce the likelihood of bleeding and spotting.  Alternatively, the body may not respond as effectively to the synthetic progestin in the pills, allowing spotting to occur.  Neither of these issues is cause for concern, but both could indicate that the individual should try another pill type.  People should adopt habits that can maximize a pill's effectiveness and help prevent spotting. These include:  If it has been longer than 6 months and spotting still occurs, switching to a different type of pill may help.  Spotting may be light enough that a person does not have to wear a pad or tampon. However, some people may wish to wear a thin panty liner to avoid staining clothing. A light or regular tampon can also help.  While some people take birth control pills for decades without any problems, others experience troublesome side effects. A person should call the doctor if any of the following occur:  If a person is still spotting after taking the pill for 6 months, the doctor may wish to change the prescription. Several different types and brands of birth control pill are available.  The doctor may prescribe a pill with a higher estrogen dose or one with a different progestin formulation.  People should also look for possible signs and symptoms of an infection. In addition to spotting, these can include:  If a person has an infection, they are likely to require treatment, such as antibiotics.  Spotting on the pill is likely to occur in the first 6 months of starting hormonal birth control. If it occurs after this time or there are symptoms of infection, it is best to speak to a doctor for further evaluation.  A doctor may prescribe a different type of pill or recommend nonhormonal birth control methods instead.    
 Birth control pills: All guides. (2018, May 18).  Birth control pills: All guides. (2018, May 18).  Continuous birth control pill use and extended cycling: Frequently asked questions [Fact sheet]. (2015, July).  Cooper, D. B., &amp; Adigun, R. (2017, April 20). Oral contraceptive pills.  StatPearls [Internet] , Treasure Island (FL), StatPearls Publishing.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How to stop spotting on the pill."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322840.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, August 22). "How to stop spotting on the pill."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  