 Salmon is a very popular fish, eaten by millions of people around the world. Due to its popularity, a lot of salmon now comes from fish farms rather than the wild.  This article compares wild salmon with farmed salmon and discusses the differences between them, including their environment and their diet.  Eating fatty fish, such as salmon every week has health benefits. The 2015–2020 American Dietary Guidelines recommend eating  8 ounces (oz)  of seafood per week  Salmon is an excellent  source  of:  We explore the differences between farmed and wild salmon below.  Farmed salmon are fish stocks kept in netted pens. The farmers control breeding, feed them, and  provide medicine  if needed. Sometimes, the pens are very crowded and the salmon cannot swim very far.  Overfishing of the world's fish stocks has led to an increase in fish farming. Fish farming also keeps the price of fish lower.  Wild salmon live and breed in their native bodies of water. Humans have no control over their breeding, feeding, or health. Wild salmon swim long distances with no restriction.  Environmental and chemical contaminants affect wild salmon as well as farmed salmon.  Typically,  wild salmon  have fewer  calories , saturated fat and vitamins A and D than  farmed salmon  but contain more protein.  In both wild and farmed salmon, the omega 3 content will vary depending on what the salmon eats.  According to a  2017 review , wild salmon have higher levels of omega-6 fatty acids than farmed salmon. Both farmed and wild salmon had comparable levels of an omega-3 acid called EPA, but farmed salmon had lower levels of the omega-3 acid DHA than wild salmon.  According to the  Washington State Department of Health , "Farmed salmon fillets contain as many grams of omega-3 fatty acids as wild salmon because farmed salmon are fattier than wild salmon."   Omega-3s  are important for:  Both farmed and wild salmon contain some compounds that are not good for the body. This is because salmon can absorb some chemicals and pollutants through their diet and their environment.  Wild and farmed salmon may differ in color due to their  diet .  Wild salmon eat a lot of krill,  crabs , and shrimp. These shellfish are high in a carotenoid called astaxanthin, which gives the salmon their  pale pink-red color .  Sometimes wild salmon are white because of the way they process astaxanthin.  Astaxanthin is a potent  antioxidant  and anti-inflammatory that is essential for the general health of the fish. Fish farmers feed the salmon with pellet foods containing an artificial version of astaxanthin. The synthetic version of astaxanthin is not as strong as the natural version but is still beneficial.  Neither the natural and synthetic versions of astaxanthin are toxic to humans.  According to an article in   Diabetology &amp; Metabolic Syndrome  , POPs are human-made organic chemicals that take a long time to break down. POPs can build up in animal tissue. Fatty fish can contain high amounts of POPs.  POPs are also known as:  POPs include:  The same article states that POPs can increase the risk of  type 2 diabetes  in humans. POPs do this by affecting  insulin . Insulin controls the body's blood sugars.  Another  study  looking at POPs in indigenous communities where the people eat a lot of wild fish found an increase in type 2 diabetes.  POPs may also cause  neurotoxicity . Neurotoxicity may increase the risk of Parkinson's and  Alzheimer's disease .  A recent  study  found that wild Atlantic salmon contained higher levels of POPs than farmed salmon. This may be because their environment is uncontrolled and due to pollutants in the oceans.  A  study  looking at farmed Norwegian Atlantic salmon found levels of some POPs and pesticides were decreasing.  It appears that farmed salmon may contain fewer POPs than wild salmon. However, this is dependent on the type of fishmeal that farmed salmon eat. According to the  Environmental Working Group (EWG) , in 2003 farm-raised fish contained 5–10 times more of a POP called polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) than wild salmon.  If choosing farmed salmon, it is beneficial to find a reputable, responsible, and sustainably-raised source.  Heavy metals, such as mercury can create  oxidative   stress  in the human body. Oxidative stress can cause damage to the cells, which can, in turn, cause a variety of health conditions.  Other heavy metals in fish  include :  One  study  found that wild Atlantic salmon contained more mercury than farmed Atlantic salmon.  All salmon have some level of mercury in their tissues. The omega-3s in salmon may help prevent the mercury causing damage.  Fish farmers sometimes give the salmon  antibiotics  and  animal drugs  to keep them in good health. Some people have concerns that the use of antibiotics could increase human antibiotic resistance.  Wild salmon have less exposure to animal drugs than farmed salmon.  Choosing wild salmon is the safest option for people who are worried about ingesting animal drugs.  Other concerns involve the impact of farmed salmon on the local waterways. Wild salmon fit into their natural ecosystem and do not increase environmental pollution.  Fish farms can be a pollution risk, particularly if they are located in low current areas. This is because pollution caused by fish excrement and uneaten feed can enter the local ecosystem and pollute the habitats underneath the netted pens.  When located in  high current  areas, the waste is dispersed by the water.  Some fish farmers stock their farms with salmon that are not native to the area. This can cause problems if the fish escape.  Escaped salmon compete with local species for food and reproduction. Escaped salmon can also introduce  disease  and parasites.  The intensity of fish farming is also of concern. High-intensity fish farming for profit often leads to overcrowding, which can lead to increased disease.  From an ethical and environmental perspective, wild salmon is the best option when fished sustainably.  Farmed salmon contains more fat than wild salmon. The fat may be visible, and farmed salmon may look rounder in shape than wild salmon.  Wild salmon are seasonal and only available in the summer. They may have a wider variety of color as they have a different diet to farmed salmon.  Unfortunately, it is not always possible to tell the difference between wild and farmed salmon by reading the labels on the packages. The organization  Oceana , found that 43 percent of the restaurants and shops they surveyed mislabeled salmon.  Judging whether farmed salmon is safe to eat is difficult. The level of contaminants in farmed salmon varies from location to location and depends on their diet.  Exposure to pollutants is still a risk for wild salmon, but studies may not always capture the level of risk.  Typically, wild salmon are nutritionally better, and sustainably-fished salmon have a lower impact on the environment.  Both wild and farmed salmon are safe to eat and are excellent sources of nutrients.    
 About seafood. (2015, December).  Dietary Guidelines 2015-2020 .  About seafood. (2015, December).  Dietary Guidelines 2015-2020 .  A closer look inside healthy eating patterns. (n.d.).  Aquacultured seafood. (2017, November 26).  Basic report: 15209, Fish, salmon, Atlantic, wild, cooked, dry heat. (2018, April).  Basic report: 15237, Fish, salmon, Atlantic, farmed, cooked, dry heat. (2018, April).  Choosing sustainable seafood. (n.d.).  Cladis, D. P., Kleiner, A. C., Freiser, H. H, &amp; Santerre, C. R. (2014, October). Fatty acid profiles of commercially available finfish fillets in the United States [Abstract].  Lipids ,   49 (10), 1005–1018.  Farmed salmon vs. wild salmon. (n.d.).  Finding omega-3 fats in fish: Farmed versus wild (2015, December 23).  Galassso, C., Orefice, I., Pellone, P., Cirino, P., Miele, R., Ianora, A., … Sansone, C. (2018, July 24). On the neuroprotective role of asataxanthin: New perspectives?  Marine Drugs ,  16 (8), 247.  Is it better to eat farmed salmon or wild salmon? Which one has more omega-3s and less contamination with PCBs, mercury, etc.? (2017, August 4).  Karimi, R., Vacchi-Suzzi, C., &amp; Meliker, J. R. (2016, April). Mercury exposure and a shift toward oxidative stress in avid seafood consumers [Abstract].  Environmental Research ,  146 , 100–107.  Lundebye, A.-K., Lock, E.-J., Rasinger, J. D., Nøstbakken, O. J., Hannisdal, R., Karlsblakk, E., … Ørnsrud, R. (2017, May). Lower levels of persistent organic pollutants, metals and the marine omega 3-fatty acid DHA in farmed compared to wild Atlantic salmon ( Salmo salar ) [Abstract].  Environmental Research ,  155 , 45–59.  Marushka, L., Hu, X., Batal, M., Sadik, T., Schwartz, H., Ing, A., … Man Chan, H. (2018, March 17). The relationship between persistent organic pollutants exposure and type 2 diabetes among first nations in Ontario and Manitoba, Canada: A difference in difference analysis.  International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health ,  15 (3), 539.  Morton, A., Routledge, R., Hrushowy, S., Kibenge, M., &amp; Kibenge, F. (2017, December 13). The effect of exposure to farmed salmon on piscine orthoreovirus infection and fitness in wild pacific salmon in British Columbia, Canada.  PLoS One ,  12 (12).  Nekouei, O., Vanderstichel, R., Thakur, K., Arriagada, G., Patanasatienkul, T., Whittaker, P., … Revie, C. W. (2018, March 5). Association between sea lice ( Lepeophtheirus salmonis ) infestation on Atlantic salmon farms and wild Pacific salmon in Muchalat Inlet, Canada.  Scientific Reports ,  8 (4023).  Ngwa, E. N., Kenga, A.-P., Tiedeu-Atoho, B., Mofo-Mato, E.-P., &amp; Sobngwi, E. (2015, April 30). Persistent organic pollutants as risk factors for type 2 diabetes.  Diabetology and Metabolic Syndrome ,  7 (41).  Nøstbakken, O. J., Hove, H. T., Duinker, A., Lundebye, A,-K., Berntssen, M. H. G., Hannisdal, R., … Julshamn, K. (2015, January). Contaminant levels in Norwegian farmed Atlantic salmon (S almo salar ) in the 13-year period from 1999 to 2011.  Environmental International ,  74 , 274-280.  Oceana reveals mislabelling of America's favourite fish: Salmon [Fact sheet]. (n.d.).  Omega-3 fatty acids. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, June 6).  PCBS in farmed salmon: Wild versus farmed. (2003, July 31).  Pham, D. K., Chu, J., Do, N. T., Brose, F., Degand, G., Delahaut, P., … Wertheim, H. F. L. (2015, September). Monitoring antibiotic use and residue in freshwater aquaculture for domestic use in Vietnam [Abstract].  EcoHealth ,  12 (3), 480–489.  Thompson, T. (n.d.). What makes King salmon flesh red or white?  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "What is the difference between wild and farmed salmon?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322847.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, August 22). "What is the difference between wild and farmed salmon?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  