  Research  suggests that people have been eating pistachios for thousands of years. People consume them today in a variety of dishes from salads to ice creams.  Here are 10 science-backed benefits of eating pistachio nuts.  According to science, pistachios are:  Pistachios contain many important nutrients.  According to the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), 1 ounce or approximately 49 kernels of unroasted nuts  contain :   Calories : 159   Protein : 5.72 grams (g)   Fat : 12.85 g   Carbohydrates : 7.70 g   Fiber : 3.00 g   Sugars : 2.17 g   Magnesium : 34 milligrams (mg)   Potassium : 291 mg   Phosphorus : 139 mg   Vitamin B-6 : 0.482 mg   Thiamin : 0.247 mg  A serving of pistachios provides about 37 percent of the recommended daily  vitamin  B-6 intake or  1.3 mg for adults .  Vitamin B-6 plays a vital role in the body, particularly in relation to protein metabolism and cognitive development.  Pistachios are one of the lowest calorie nuts, which means people can enjoy the health benefits of nuts while more easily staying within their daily calorie limits.  One ounce of macadamia nuts, for example, contains  204 calories , while 1 ounce of pecans provides  196 calories . The same 1 ounce of pistachios contains just 159  calories .   Antioxidants  are substances that play a critical role in health. They reduce the risk of  cancer  and other diseases by preventing damage to the body's cells.  Nuts and seeds contain several antioxidant compounds, but pistachios may have higher levels of some antioxidants than other nuts.   Research  reports that pistachios have among the highest levels of antioxidants including:  These substances have high antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects.  In one small  study  involving 28 participants with high  cholesterol  who ate 1 or 2 daily servings of pistachios over 4 weeks, researchers showed that they experienced an increase in their levels of the antioxidants lutein, α-carotene, and β-carotene compared to those who ate none.  The antioxidants lutein and zeaxanthin are essential for eye health. Pistachios are a  rich source  of both of these substances.  According to the  American Optometric Association , lutein and zeaxanthin reduce the chances of developing eye conditions, including age-related  macular degeneration  (AMD) and  cataracts .  AMD and cataracts are the leading causes of blindness in the United States.  Eating a healthful diet, including pistachios, is a promising way to help prevent these eye diseases from developing.  All nuts are rich in fiber, which encourages a healthy digestive system by moving food through the gut and preventing  constipation .  A type of fiber called prebiotics may also feed the good bacteria in the gut. Feeding the good bacteria helps them multiply and "crowd out" harmful bacteria.  According to a small,  2012 study , eating pistachios may increase the levels of beneficial bacteria in the gut. In the study, volunteers ate a standard diet with either 0 ounces, 1.5 ounces, or 3 ounces of pistachios or almonds.  Researchers collected stool samples and found that people who ate up to 3 ounces of pistachios daily showed an increase in potentially helpful gut bacteria, much more so than those who ate almonds.  Pistachios contribute to a person's daily protein needs, at almost 6 g of protein per 1 ounce serving.  Protein accounts for approximately  21 percent  of the total weight of the nut, making it a good source for vegetarians and vegans, among others.  Pistachios also boast a  higher ratio  of essential amino acids, the building blocks of protein, when compared with other nuts, including almonds, hazelnuts, pecans, and walnuts.  Regularly eating nuts helps to  reduce the risk  of weight gain. Pistachios may be especially beneficial for those who wish to lose weight or maintain their weight thanks to their caloric values and fiber and protein content.  In a 2012  study , people who ate 1.87 ounces of pistachios over a 12-week period experienced twice the reduction in their body mass index ( BMI ) as people who ate pretzels instead of pistachios. Both groups consumed roughly the same amount of calories.  Having to shell pistachios before eating them may also aid weight loss.  Research  suggests that seeing the shells provides a visual reminder of how much people have eaten.  Women who frequently eat nuts may enjoy modest protection from cardiovascular disease, according to a 12-year  study  published in 2001 based on the Iowa Women's Health Study.  The study also showed a small link between regularly eating nuts and reduced risk of death from other causes.  Pistachios, in particular, may protect the heart by reducing cholesterol levels and  high blood pressure .   Research  on a small sample of 28 participants that looks specifically at pistachios for heart health, reports that two portions daily reduces the risk of cardiovascular disease. Another  study  suggests that pistachios may help reduce levels of harmful cholesterol.  A 2015  analysis  of 21 studies reports that eating nuts may lead to a significant reduction in  blood pressure  in people without  type 2 diabetes . Pistachios had the strongest effect of all the nuts tested on reducing both systolic and diastolic blood pressure.  Pistachios have a  low glycemic index , so they do not cause a sharp rise in blood sugar after someone has eaten them.  In a  small study  of 10 people, eating pistachios reduced high blood sugar when eaten with a carbohydrate-rich meal, such as white bread. The researchers suggest that this is one of the ways that nuts lower the risk of  diabetes .  For people with diabetes, another  study  suggests that eating pistachios as a snack is beneficial for blood sugar levels, blood pressure,  obesity , and  inflammation  markers.  Pistachios may reduce the risk of some cancers, such as  colon cancer , due to their high fiber content.  Scientists demonstrated this in  2017 research  that showed that roasting the nuts did not affect their health benefits in relation to colon cancer cells.  Some people may avoid eating pistachios because of various common myths including:  People may avoid pistachios and other nuts because they believe they contribute to weight gain.  When eaten as part of a healthful and calorie-controlled diet, research suggests that pistachios may actually aid weight loss.  Consuming salted pistachio nuts can increase daily sodium intake, sometimes beyond the recommended level. Choosing unsalted pistachio nuts is a low-sodium alternative.  Pistachios are a great option for people who wish to eat more healthfully, as long as they eat them as part of a balanced diet. To avoid filling up on nuts before meals, stick to 1 ounce or one-half of an ounce daily and do not eat them too close to mealtimes.  Pistachios are a very nutritious food. They offer several health benefits, especially for the heart, gut, and waistline.  Regularly eating pistachios may be a good way to improve health and wellbeing. But people should stick to plain, unsalted pistachio nuts in their shells and avoid eating more than one ounce a day.  Pistachios are available for purchase in most grocery stores and  online .  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Basic report: 12142, nuts, pecans. (2018, April).  Basic report: 12142, nuts, pecans. (2018, April).  Basic report: 12151, nuts, pistachio nuts, raw. (2018, April).  Bes-Rastrollo, M., Sabaté, J., Gómez-Gracia, E., Alonso, A., Martínez, J. A., &amp; Martínez-González, M. A. (2007, January). Nut consumption and weight gain in a Mediterranean cohort: The SUN study [Abstract].  Obesity ,  15 (1), 107–116.  Dreher, M. L. (2012, April). Pistachio nuts: Composition and potential health benefits [Abstract].  Nutrition Reviews ,  70 (4), 234–240.  Ellsworth, J. L., Kushi, L. H., &amp; Folsom, A. R. (2001, December). Frequent nut intake and risk of death from coronary heart disease and all causes in postmenopausal women: The Iowa Women's Health Study [Abstract].  Nutrition, Metabolism, and Cardiovascular Diseases ,  11 (6), 372–377.  Gebauer, S. K., West, S. G., Kay, C. D., Alaupovic, P., Bagshaw, D., &amp; Kris-Etherton, P. M. (2008, September). Effects of pistachios on cardiovascular disease risk factors and potential mechanisms of action: A dose-response study [Abstract].  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  88 (3), 651–659.  Glei, M., Ludwig, D., Lamberty, J., Fischer, S., Lorkowski, S., &amp; Schlörmann, W. (2017, December 18). Chemopreventive potential of raw and roasted pistachios regarding colon carcinogenesis [Abstract].  Nutrients,  9  (12).  Hernández-Alonso, P., Bulló, M., &amp; Salas-Salvadó, J. (2016, May 19). Pistachios for health: What do we know about this multifaceted nut?  Nutrition Today ,  51 (3), 133–138.  Kay, C. D., Gebauer, S. K., West, S. G., &amp; Kris-Etherton, P. M. (2010, June 1). Pistachios increase serum antioxidants and lower serum oxidized-LDL in hypercholesterolemic adults.  The Journal of Nutrition ,  140 (6), 1093–1098.  Kendall, C. W., Josse, A. R., Esfahani, A., &amp; Jenkins, D. J. (2011, June). The impact of pistachio intake alone or in combination with high-carbohydrate foods on post-prandial glycemia [Abstract].  European Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  65 (6), 696–702.  Kennedy-Hagan, K., Painter, J. E., Honselman, C., Halvorson, A., Rhodes, K., &amp; Skwir, K. (2011, October). The effect of pistachio shells as a visual cue in reducing caloric consumption [Abstract].  Appetite ,  57 (2), 418–420.  Li, Z., Song, R., Nguyen, C., Zerlin, A., Karp, H., Naowamondhol, K., ... Heber, D. (2010, June). Pistachio nuts reduce triglycerides and body weight by comparison to refined carbohydrate snack in obese subjects on a 12-week weight loss program [Abstract].  Journal of the American College of Nutrition ,  29 (3), 198–203.  Lutein &amp; zeaxanthin. (n.d.).  Mai, V., Fredborg, M., Ukhanova, M., Wang, X., Daniel, S., Novotny, J., ... Baer, D. (2012, April 1). Human gut microbiota changes after consumption of almonds or pistachios [Abstract].  The FASEB Journal ,  26 (1).  Mohammadifard, N., Salehi-Abargouei, A., Salas-Salvadó, J., Guasch-Ferré, M., Humphries, K., &amp; Sarrafzadegan, N. (2015, May). The effect of tree nut, peanut, and soy nut consumption on blood pressure: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials [Abstract].  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  101 (5), 966–982.  Parham, M., Heidari, S., Khorramirad, A., Hozoori, M., Hosseinzadeh, F., Bakhtyari, L., &amp; Vafaeimanesh, J. (2014, August 10). Effects of pistachio nut supplementation on blood glucose in patients with type 2 diabetes: A randomized crossover trial [Abstract].  The Review of Diabetic Studies ,  11 (2), 190–196.  Vitamin B6 [Fact sheet]. (2018, March 2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What are the benefits of pistachios?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322899.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, August 29). "What are the benefits of pistachios?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  