 However, popular American breakfast foods, such as donuts, pastries, and pancakes, are laden with saturated fat and sugar and contain little protein or fiber.  A healthful breakfast is one that contains nutritious foods that provide energy and make a person feel full, which can help prevent overeating later in the day. In this article, learn about the best foods to eat in the morning.  Oatmeal is a nutritional powerhouse. It contains beta glucan, which is a thick, sticky fiber that helps a person to feel full for longer and may also lower  cholesterol .  One study revealed that people who ate oatmeal for breakfast  felt fuller  and ate less at lunchtime than people who ate cornflakes. This was particularly true in people who were overweight.  Oats are also rich in  antioxidants ,  omega-3  fatty acids,  folate , and  potassium . Steel-cut oats, which contain more protein and fiber than other types of oats, are a good option because they have a lower glycemic index (GI). A low GI means a person's blood sugar will not increase as much.  Eggs are a popular breakfast food. They are nutritious and contain high-quality protein.  Some people think that eggs are unhealthful because of the amount of cholesterol they contain. However,  research  has shown that the dietary cholesterol from eggs has only a minor impact on bad cholesterol, or low-density lipoprotein (LDL), in the blood.  A  small study  on people at high risk of developing  type 2 diabetes  or cardiovascular disease found that eating whole eggs and moderately reducing  carbohydrate  consumption resulted in improvements in blood cholesterol levels. It also reduced waist circumference, weight, and body fat.  If a person does not eat animal products, eating nuts is another excellent way to get enough protein. Nuts also contain antioxidants,  magnesium , potassium, and heart-healthful fats.  According to a 30-year-long study in the   New England Journal of Medicine  , people who consumed nuts seven or more times per week had a 20 percent lower risk of death compared to people who did not eat nuts.  Nut butter is very versatile. People can spread nut butter on whole grain toast, mix it into oatmeal or yogurt, or use it as a dip for fresh fruit.  Healthful kinds of nut butter include:  Drinking  coffee  with breakfast is popular due to its caffeine content. Coffee also offers other health benefits due to its antioxidants, which help fight  inflammation .  One  review  from the American Diabetes Association suggests that drinking either regular or decaffeinated coffee could decrease the risk of developing type 2 diabetes.  The researchers also suggested that some components of coffee improve glucose metabolism.  However, adding cream or sugar will reduce the beneficial effects of coffee. It is best to reduce or avoid adding sugar to coffee and choose nonfat or plant-based milk instead of cream.  Berries of all kinds, such as  blueberries , strawberries, raspberries, and blackberries, are an excellent way to start the morning. They are low in  calories , high in fiber, and contain disease-fighting antioxidants.  A study from the  American Heart Association  showed an association between a higher intake of the antioxidants found in berries with a lower risk of  heart attack  in young women.  Sprinkle berries on cereal, oatmeal, or yogurt, or blend them into smoothies. If fresh berries are expensive or not in season, buy frozen berries, which are just as nutritious. However, it is best to choose frozen berries without any added sugar for optimal health benefits.  Flaxseeds are rich in omega-3 fatty acids, protein, and fiber.  The health benefits of flaxseed include  lowering blood levels of cholesterol , improving  insulin  sensitivity, lowering blood sugar, and even  protecting against breast cancer .  People can sprinkle flaxseeds on yogurt or oatmeal, or blend them into smoothies. It is essential to purchase ground flaxseed or to grind the seeds at home, as whole flaxseeds will pass through the body without breaking down.  Greek yogurt is another excellent source of protein to eat in the morning. Greek yogurt is thick and creamy and contains more protein than regular strained yogurt.  Greek yogurt is also rich in  calcium  and contains probiotics that help support a healthy gut and immune system.  People can pair this low-fat, high-protein food with other foods on this list, such as berries or nut butter.  Black, green, and white teas all contain antioxidants, but  green tea  is probably the most healthful. According to  one study , green tea may help burn fat and promote weight loss.  These teas contain some caffeine but not as much as coffee. Tea can also help a person stay hydrated.  Cottage cheese is another protein powerhouse.  One study  showed that cottage cheese could curb hunger just as efficiently as eggs do.  Cottage cheese is also rich in B  vitamins , vitamin A, and calcium. People can eat cottage cheese by itself, or mix it with other savory foods, such as pepper and spring  onions , or fruit or nuts.   Bananas  are a quick and convenient addition to a nutritious breakfast. They also make a good mid-morning snack to keep hunger at bay.  Bananas contain resistant starch. The body does not digest resistant starch, so it travels through the body unchanged, which helps support digestive health. Unripe bananas contain more resistant starch than ripe bananas, which have more natural sugars.  Bananas are also a great source of potassium, which  may support healthy blood pressure  in some people. Bananas are great with nut butter or on top of oatmeal or cereal.  When eating breakfast in the morning, make sure to choose foods that are filling and contain lots of nutrients. Choosing the best foods to eat in the morning can help curb hunger and kick-start a person's metabolism for the day.    
 Bao, Y., Han, J., Hu, F. B., Giovannucci, E. L., Meir, J., Stampfer, M. D., … Fuchs, C. S. (2013, November 21). Association of nut consumption with total and cause-specific mortality.  The New England Journal of Medicine ,  369 , 2001–2011.  Bao, Y., Han, J., Hu, F. B., Giovannucci, E. L., Meir, J., Stampfer, M. D., … Fuchs, C. S. (2013, November 21). Association of nut consumption with total and cause-specific mortality.  The New England Journal of Medicine ,  369 , 2001–2011.  Binia, A., Jaeger, J., Hu, Y., Singh, A., &amp; Zimmermann, D. (2015, August). Daily potassium intake and sodium-to-potassium ratio in the reduction of blood pressure: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.  Journal of Hypertension ,  33 (8), 1509–1520.  Blesso, C. N., Andersen, C. J., Barona, J., Volk, B., Volek, J. S., &amp; Fernandez, M. L. (2013, September–October). Effects of carbohydrate restriction and dietary cholesterol provided by eggs on clinical risk factors in metabolic syndrome [Abstract].  Journal of Clinical Lipidology ,  7 (5), 463–471.  Cassidy, A., Mukamal, K. J., Liu, L., Franz, M., Eliassen, A. H., &amp; Rimm, E. B. (2013, September 4). High anthocyanin intake is associated with a reduced risk of myocardial infarction in young and middle-aged women.  Circulation ,  127 (2), 188–196.  Ding, M., Bhupathiraju, S. N., Chen, M., van Dam, R. M., &amp; Hu, F. B. (2014, February). Caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and a dose-response meta-analysis.  Diabetes Care ,  37 (2), 569–586.  Edel, A. L., Rodriguez-Leyva, D., Maddaford, T. G., Caligiuri, S. P., Austria, J. A., Weighell, W., . . . Pierce, G. N. (2015, April). Dietary flaxseed independently lowers circulating cholesterol and lowers it beyond the effects of cholesterol-lowering medications alone in patients with peripheral artery disease [Abstract].  The Journal of Nutrition ,  145 (4), 749–757.  Flower, G., Fritz, H., Balneaves, L., Verma, S., Skidmore, B., Fernandes, R., . . . Seely, D. (2014, May). Flax and breast cancer: A systematic review. [Abstract].  Integrative Cancer Therapies ,  13 (3), 181–192.  Geliebter, A., Grillot, C. L., Aviram-Friedman, R., Haq, S., Yahav, E., &amp; Hashim, S. A. (2015, January 23). Effects of oatmeal and corn flakes cereal breakfasts on satiety, gastric emptying, glucose, and appetite-related hormones [Abstract].  Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism ,  66 (2–3), 93–103.  Griffin, B. A. (2016, August). Eggs: Good or bad? [Abstract].  Proceedings of the Nutrition Society ,  75 (3), 259–264.  Janssens, P., Hursel, R., &amp; Westerterp-Plantenga, M. (2016, August 1). Nutraceuticals for body-weight management: The role of green tea catechins [Abstract].  Physiology &amp; Behavior ,  162 , 83–87.  Marsset-Baglieri, A., Fromentin, G., Nau, F., Airinei, G., Piedcoq, J., Rémond, D., . . . Gaudichon, C. (2015, July). The satiating effects of eggs or cottage cheese are similar in healthy subjects despite differences in postprandial kinetics [Abstract].  Appetite ,  90 , 136–143.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Brosek, Shannon. "The best breakfast foods for health."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322811.php&gt;    APA  Brosek, S. (2018, August 20). "The best breakfast foods for health."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  