 The anti-inflammatory diet can help relieve joint pain and reduce  inflammation .  According to the  Arthritis Foundation , certain foods can help tackle inflammation, strengthen bones, and boost the immune system.  Following a specific anti-inflammatory meal plan can help people make tasty, nutritious food while helping to keep their inflammation under control.  The anti-inflammatory diet contains plenty of prebiotics, fiber,  antioxidants , and omega-3s. This means a diet rich in vegetables, whole fruit, whole grains, legumes, and fatty fish.  Read on for 26 anti-inflammatory recipes to try for breakfast, lunch, dinner, and snacks.  Start off the day with the following nutritious anti-inflammatory recipes:  Oats with berries delivers high doses of prebiotics, antioxidants, and fiber.  Oats are high in a type of fiber called beta-glucans. Beta-glucans are an important prebiotic for the gut bacteria  Bifidobacterium , which  may help  reduce diabetes-related inflammation and  obesity .  Prebiotics help the healthy gut bacteria to flourish, which can help reduce inflammation.  Berries are high in antioxidants, and  blueberries  are especially high in anti-inflammatory polyphenols called  anthocyanins .   Dietary tip : Traditional rolled and steel cut oats are higher in fiber than quick oats.   Recipe   Buckwheat groats are gluten-free and a great substitute for oats for people who are sensitive to gluten.  Adding chia seeds will boost the healthful  omega-3  content of this breakfast choice.  Omega-3s help reduce inflammation in the body, and  research shows  that they can improve joint tenderness and stiffness in people with RA.  Chia seeds are also high in fiber and protein, which will keep people feeling full for longer.   Recipe   Buckwheat is also a good source of two key anti-inflammatory polyphenols called quercetin and rutin.  According to a  2016 study , quercetin is an antioxidant, while rutin has anti-inflammatory properties, which may help with  arthritis .  Despite its name, buckwheat is not a grain. It is the seed of a fruit and is gluten-free. Buckwheat is especially popular in Japanese cuisine.  Many health food supermarkets and  online stores  sell buckwheat.   Recipe   Eggs are an excellent source of protein, and the egg yolk contains  vitamin D .  A  2016 review  stated that  vitamin  D could limit the process of inflammation due to its effects on the immune system. The report also noted that people with RA had lower vitamin D levels than other people studied.  Add turmeric to scrambled eggs for an extra anti-inflammatory boost. Turmeric is rich in a compound called curcumin, which  studies suggest  can help manage oxidative and inflammatory conditions.   Recipe   Salmon and avocado are both rich sources of anti-inflammatory omega-3 fatty acids.  Eating plenty of healthful fatty acids can also improve heart health and lower a person's risk of cardiovascular disease.  This hearty breakfast is great for very active days or weekend brunches. For gluten-free options, use gluten-free bread.   Recipe   A smoothie is a good breakfast on the go. A smoothie is full of fiber and protein, which makes people feel fuller for longer.  Pineapple contains high levels of bromelain, which has  anti-inflammatory properties . There is growing interest in bromelain supplements due to its anti-inflammatory properties.   Recipe   For lunch, try these nutritious recipes:  Choose this healthful vegetarian version of the Reuben for an anti-inflammatory boost.  Sauerkraut contains probiotics that are essential for a person's gut bacteria. Probiotics  may have an impact  on arthritis-related inflammation by improving inflammation in the intestinal tract.  This grilled sandwich contains all the benefits of sauerkraut but contains less salt and  calories  than the Reuben. Adding hummus and avocado to replace the meat, provides protein and a smooth, creamy texture.   Recipe   Green leafy vegetables, such as spinach and broccoli, contain high levels of two polyphenols called quercetin and coenzyme Q10.  Coenzyme Q10 may reduce inflammation in some metabolic diseases,  including  RA,  multiple sclerosis  (MS), and  diabetes .  Frittatas are quick and easy to make, and people can enjoy experimenting with a range of flavors. Having a side salad adds further benefits from vegetables.   Recipe   A  quinoa  and citrus fruit salad is gluten-free and great for people on a vegan diet. Quinoa contains lots of protein and nutrients.  Add citrus fruits, such as lemon, lime, or grapefruit, to the salad for an antioxidant boost. Citrus fruits are full of vitamin C, which is  an important antioxidant  that can also help renew other antioxidants in the body.  Vitamin C also helps the body absorb iron from plant-based sources, such as spinach and quinoa.  Quinoa is easy to cook and store, so people can prepare it ahead of time and keep it in the fridge until needed.   Recipe   Lentil salads are a simple, protein-rich lunchtime option for people on a vegetarian diet.  Lentils and beetroot increase the fiber content, while the hazelnuts provide extra protein and vitamin E. Vitamin E is an  antioxidant .  Beetroots contain high amounts of a compound called betaine. Betaine is an  anti-inflammatory and antioxidant .   Recipe   A cauliflower steak is a great vegetarian and vegan option to steak.  Cauliflower is high in fiber and antioxidants. It is part of the cruciferous vegetable family. Including white beans to the dish adds essential fermentable fibers for healthy gut bacteria.  One  study  found that women who ate more cruciferous vegetables had lower inflammation biomarkers.   Recipe   Trout is a fatty fish that contains anti-inflammatory omega-3s.  To make this meal more filling, try using wholemeal or gluten-free wraps, or adding brown rice as a side.  To ensure this recipe is gluten-free, check the  nutrition  label on the fish sauce. If it contains gluten, people may choose to leave it out. Skip the sweet chili sauce to lower the sugar content.   Recipe   Try the following recipes for a healthful and filling dinner:  Zucchini pasta is a great gluten-free alternative to pasta.  This recipe is light yet filling and includes plenty of omega-3 rich ingredients, including salmon and avocado. People can replace the salmon with another fatty fish, such as tuna or mackerel, to get the same omega-3 benefits.   Cooking tip : Make zucchini noodles using a potato peeler. Peel the full length, rotating the zucchini, to get even, linguine-like noodles.   Recipe   Vegetables are full of anti-inflammatory compounds called polyphenols.  The added  ginger  gives this meal an extra anti-inflammatory and antioxidant boost.  Thick soups, such as this roasted cauliflower and fennel soup, can help people to increase their vegetable intake.   Recipe   Another filling soup option, the sweet potato, and lentils ramp up this soup's fiber, protein, and nutrients content.  Sweet potatoes are a great source of vitamin A, vitamin C, and B-vitamins. They also contain  calcium , iron, and healthful antioxidants.  Use leftover roast chicken or store-bought chicken to save time.   Recipe   Salmon and cauliflower rice is a nutritious, simple option for an evening meal. Subbing cauliflower rice for regular rice can help increase veggies intake, decrease calories, and provide extra nutrients.  Add healthful green vegetables to go towards the daily recommended vegetable intake of  2–3 cups .  Brussel sprouts and cauliflower are both cruciferous vegetables high in fiber, antioxidants, and polyphenols.   Cooking tip : Not entirely sold on cauliflower rice? Try a combo of cauliflower and brown rice together.   Recipe   Shrimp is another good food to include because it contains astaxanthin, which has  antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects .  Add carrots, red peppers, and peas for their healthful polyphenol content.  Try adding 2 tbsp. of turmeric for extra inflammatory benefits.  Turmeric is nearly tasteless so people can use it in all curries, soups, and casseroles.   Recipe   Vegetarian chili is a versatile dish. With a variety of beans full of fermentable fibers, this chili looks after gut health.  Beans are also good sources of antioxidant vitamin C and are high in plant proteins.  Try experimenting with different beans and vegetables to find the preferred combination.   Recipe   Salmon cakes are full of omega-3s, as well as colorful vegetables.  Bake these in the oven to lower their saturated fat content. Make the cakes ahead of time, and freeze immediately for future dinners.  To make salmon cakes gluten-free, use gluten-free breadcrumbs or almond meal to combine.   Recipe   To incorporate healthful anti-inflammatory snacks into the diet, try the following recipes:  Power balls are an easy snack to make. The sesame seeds are an excellent source of omega-3s.  This versatile snack provides both nutrients and energy, and makes an ideal, healthful pick-me-up to eat during the day.  Power balls are gluten-free and dairy-free and make great lunchtime or school snacks.   Recipe   Chia seed pudding is quick to prepare and makes a great, filling snack or dessert.  Chia seeds are a great source of omega-3, plant-based protein, and fiber.  These puddings are incredibly versatile. Choose a favorite fruit to go with it. Use a dairy-free yogurt, such as coconut yogurt to make it vegan.   Recipe   A small pot of yogurt or probiotic delivers beneficial bacteria to the gut. A healthy gut microbiome is  essential  to reduce leaky gut and inflammation.  Yogurt also contains plenty of calcium and protein, which are essential nutrients to keep the body healthy.  Add this versatile food to cereals, fruits, or berries for a more substantial snack.  Making nachos at home can be a more healthful and more nutritious alternative to store-bought options.  These nachos are high in turmeric, which can help reduce inflammation.  They also contain almond meal, making them a good source of antioxidant vitamin E.   Recipe   Matcha is a  green tea  powder. Many people use it to make tea, lattes, or tasty smoothie bowls.  Like other green teas and black tea, matcha is high in a polyphenol called epigallocatechin (EGCG). These compounds provide  anti-inflammatory benefits .  Matcha is available through most tea specialists, Asian grocers, or  online .   Recipe   It is easy to make trail mix at home by mixing together nuts and seeds.  This is a versatile snack because people can mix different types of nuts and seeds together depending on their prefrences.  Nuts and seeds are high in omega-3, protein, and healthful fats. Try adding goji berries, which are high in vitamin C.   Recipe   This is a fun recipe to make with kids. Involve them in cooking and get the creative juices flowing.  Grapes are also a good source of another anti-inflammatory polyphenol called anthocyanins. Red grapes are a great source of  resveratrol , which may help reduce inflammation.  Apples are high in fiber, which also has anti-inflammatory properties.   Recipe   An anti-inflammatory diet is high in plant foods, such as vegetables, legumes, and fruit.  Fermented products, such as yogurt and sauerkraut, are also important, as are fatty fish and seafood.  Although it is great to know what ingredients in food provide healthful benefits, it is essential to include a wide variety of whole food in the diet.  Reduce foods with added sugars, fats, and salts. This will help restore balance in the gut and reduce inflammation.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 All about the vegetable group. (2018, January 3).  All about the vegetable group. (2018, January 3).  Best foods for arthritis. (n.d.).  Fish oil. (n.d.).  Fukui, H. (2016, October). Increased intestinal permeability and decreased barrier function: Does it really influence the risk of inflammation?  Inflammatory Intestinal Diseases ,  1 (3), 135–145.  Galassso, C., Orefice, I., Pellone, P., Cirino, P., Miele, R., Ianora, … Sansone, C. (2018, July 24). On the neuroprotective role of astaxanthin: New perspectives?  Marine Drugs ,  16 (8), 247.  Gmiat, A., Mieszkowski, J., Prusik, K., Kortas, J., Kochanowicz, A., Radulska, A., … Zieman, E. (2017, March). Changes in pro-inflammatory markers and leucine concentrations in response to Nordic walking training combined with vitamin D supplementation in elderly women.  Biogerontology ,  18 (4), 535–548.  Helmer, J. (2015, April). The promise of probiotics for arthritis.  Hernández-Camacho, J. D., Bernier, M., López-Lluch, G., &amp; Navas, P. (2018, February 5). Coenzyme q10 supplementation in aging and disease.  Frontiers in Physiology ,  9   , 44.  Hewlings, S. J. &amp; Kalman, D. S. (2017, October). Curcumin: A review of its' effects on human health.  Foods ,  6 (10), 92.  Hussain, T., Tan., B., Yin, Y., Blacjier, F., Tossou, M. C. B., &amp; Rahu, N. (2016, September 22). Oxidative stress and inflammation: What polyphenols can do for us?  Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity ,  2016 .  Jiang, Y., Wu, S.-H., Shu, X.-O., Xiang, Y.-B., Ji, B.-T., Milne, G. L., … Yang, G. (2015, May 1). Cruciferous vegetables intake is inversely correlated with circulating levels of proinflammatory markers in women.  Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,  114 (5), 700–708.  Lin, J., Liu, J., Davies, M. L., &amp; Chen, W. (2016, January 11). Serum vitamin D level and rheumatoid arthritis disease activity: Review and meta-analysis.  PLOS ONE ,  11 (1).  Martin, C. R., Osadchiy, V., Kalani, A., &amp; Mayer, E. A. (2018, April 12). The brain-gut-microbiome axis.  Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology ,  6 (2), 133–148.  Minihane, A. M., Vinoy, S., Russell, W. R., Baka, A., Roche, H. M., Tuohy, K. M., … Calder, P. C. (2015, October 14). Low-grade inflammation, diet composition and health: Current research evidence and its translation.  The British Journal of Nutrition ,  114 (7), 999–1012.  Oz, H. S. (2017, June 1). Chronic inflammatory diseases and green tea polyphenols.  Nutrients ,  9 (6), 561.  Paturel, A. (2015, October). The ultimate arthritis diet.  Rathnavelu, V., Alitheen, N. B., Sohila, S., Kanagesan, S., &amp; Ramsen, R. (2016, September). Potential role of bromelain in clinical and therapeutic applications.  Biomedical Reports ,  5 (3), 283–288.  Rebello, C. J., O'Neil, C. E., &amp; Greenway, F. L. (2016, February). Dietary fiber and satiety: The effects of oats on satiety.  Nutrition Reviews ,  74 (2), 131–147.  Vitamin C. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Vitamin E. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, August 17).  Wen, L. &amp; Duffy, A. (2017, July). Factors influencing the gut microbiota, inflammation, and type 2 diabetes.  The Journal of Nutrition ,  147 (7), 1468s–1475s.  Zhao, G., He, F., Wu, C., Li, P., Nengzhang, L., Deng, J., … Peng, Y. (2018, May 24). Betaine in inflammation: Mechanistic aspects and applications.  Frontiers in Immunology ,  9 , 1070.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Crichton-Stuart, Cathleen. "Anti-inflammatory meal plan: 26 recipes to try."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322897.php&gt;    APA  Crichton-Stuart, C. (2018, August 28). "Anti-inflammatory meal plan: 26 recipes to try."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  