 In this article, we look at the symptoms, causes, diagnosis, and treatment of nummular  eczema  and  ringworm .  Nummular eczema, also known as  discoid eczema , is a condition in which people develop red or brown areas on their skin that are coin-shaped or oval.  These spots or patches can appear on the arms, hands, legs, or torso. They can be present in clusters or may join up to form larger patches. As a result, they can range in size from 1 to 4 inches.  Other symptoms of nummular eczema may include:  If the spots become open, they are vulnerable to bacterial infection. Infected nummular eczema can cause:  According to the  National Eczema Association , nummular eczema most commonly affects men, usually between the ages of 55 and 65 years old. If women experience the condition, they typically notice it between the ages of 13 and 25 years old.  Doctors do not know exactly what causes nummular eczema, but some triggers and risk factors may  include :  Ringworm, also known as tinea corporis, is a skin condition that can closely resemble nummular eczema. Despite the name of this condition, it is a type of fungus rather than a worm that is responsible for causing it.  Ringworm typically causes ring-shaped patches of skin that often affect the arms and legs but can develop anywhere on a person's body, including:  The symptoms of ringworm include:  Ringworm typically causes less severe symptoms than nummular eczema. However, unlike nummular eczema, ringworm can spread between people. Risk factors for getting ringworm include:  A doctor will diagnose nummular eczema or ringworm by examining the skin and asking about the signs and symptoms. They may ask when the rash first appeared, what makes it better or worse, and if the individual has already tried any treatments.  The doctor may also take a tissue sample from one of the patches to determine if an infection is present or to confirm their diagnosis.  Keeping the skin clean and hydrated can help treat nummular eczema. People can also prevent flare-ups and relieve symptoms by:  Doctors may also prescribe topical or oral corticosteroids to treat nummular eczema. Other treatment options include:  In cases where nummular eczema becomes infected, a doctor may also prescribe topical or oral  antibiotics .  People can treat ringworm using antifungal creams, ointments, tablets, or shampoos. Many of these medications are available over the counter (OTC).  It will usually be necessary to apply these medications to the skin for 2 to 4 weeks before the fungus will go away. It is best to see a doctor if the ringworm rash does not clear up within this time. A doctor or dermatologist can prescribe stronger antifungal medications to treat the condition if necessary.  Nummular eczema and ringworm are both skin conditions that can cause round patches of red, itchy skin. However, these conditions have different causes and treatments, so it is important to be able to differentiate between them.  Nummular eczema typically causes coin-shaped patches, while ringworm produces ring-shaped patches.  Ringworm is a fungal infection that can spread between people. It is usually treatable with antifungal medications and should clear up within a couple of weeks.  Nummular eczema is an inflammatory skin condition. There is currently no cure for nummular eczema, but keeping the skin hydrated, avoiding known triggers, and using eczema medications can relieve symptoms and help prevent future flare-ups.    
 Nummular dermatitis — overview. (n.d.).  Nummular dermatitis — overview. (n.d.).  Nummular eczema. (n.d.).  Nummular eczema — nummular dermatitis — discoid eczema. (n.d.).  Poudel, R. R., Belbase, B., &amp; Kafle, N. K. (2015, June 15). Nummular eczema.  Journal of Community Hospital Internal Medicine Perspectives ,  5 (3), 27909.  Ringworm. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Rachel Nall BSN CCRN. "What is the difference between nummular eczema and ringworm?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322822.php&gt;    APA  Rachel Nall BSN CCRN. (2018, August 20). "What is the difference between nummular eczema and ringworm?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  