  Birth control  pills are a safe and effective method of preventing unintended pregnancy. For some people, the pill can also help reduce symptoms caused by their periods, such as heavy bleeding and irregular cycles.  In this article, we examine whether a person can start their birth control pills midcycle, and the benefits, risks, and side effects of doing so.  To understand how the pill works, it is important to know what happens during a typical menstrual cycle.  The average cycle takes place over the course of 28 days:  Most people can start taking birth control pills at any point during their menstrual cycle. However, it can take several days for the pill to establish a consistent hormone cycle that prevents pregnancy.  By starting the pill midcycle, around the point of ovulation, a person is at risk of pregnancy and should use a backup contraceptive method until they have taken the pill for at least 7 consecutive days. To be extra cautious, use another form of birth control, such as condoms and foam, during the first month.  No hard-and-fast rule exists as to when to start the pill. The recommendations on when to start also depend upon what type of pill a woman is taking. There are two main types of birth control pill:  Doctors often recommend starting the combined pill either on the first day of a person's period or the first Sunday after starting their period.  Starting on the first Sunday serves two purposes: it provides a consistent day for starting pills and may affect the menstrual timing so that the person will not likely be on their period over a weekend. This may or may not be a benefit to some people.  However, not everyone has a regular menstrual cycle. A person may start their period and then have it again 2 weeks later. In this instance, some people may find it difficult to time their pills according to "starting a cycle."  For a person with  irregular periods , the best time to start taking the pill may be whenever they are ready to begin regulating their periods.  A person can usually start the minipill at any time during their cycle. The minipill typically protects against pregnancy within 48 hours of starting it.  However, people who do not start taking the minipill during their period should use another form of contraception for at least the first 2 days. It might be wise to use other contraceptive measures for a full cycle.  For maximum effectiveness, it is crucial to take the minipill during the same 3-hour window each day. A person should choose a time of day that is convenient and easy to remember.  Many people set up a daily reminder to ensure they take their pill at the same time each day.  While there are no clear health benefits to starting midcycle, some people may find it convenient to begin taking their birth control pills as soon as they get them.  However, starting the pill midcycle means that a person will not be protected from pregnancy immediately.  Anyone who chooses to start the pill outside the first 5 days of their menstrual cycle should use a backup method of contraception, such as condoms, for at least:  Another potential risk of starting the pill midcycle is that a woman may already be pregnant. However, a large  Danish study  suggests that taking birth control pills during early pregnancy will not harm the fetus.  When starting midcycle, it can also take longer for a person's body to adjust to the new hormone cycle. In some people, this may cause spotting or irregular bleeding. It may take a few months after starting the pill midcycle for more regular periods to return.  The possible side effects of birth control pills are the same regardless of when the person starts taking them and include:  Typically, these symptoms will subside within 3 months of taking the pill. However, if a person continues to experience bothersome side effects after this time, they may wish to talk to their doctor about switching to another type of birth control pill.  Deciding when to start taking birth control pills is largely down to personal preference and the type of pill. A person who starts the pill during the first 5 days of the start of their period should have immediate protection against pregnancy.  Anyone who chooses to start the pill midcycle should use backup contraception for at least 7 days if using the combined pill and at least 2 days if using the minipill.  To be extra careful, a person may wish to consider using another form of birth control during the first month of taking either type of birth control pill.    
 Balaagh, S. A. (n.d.). Starting birth control pills.  Balaagh, S. A. (n.d.). Starting birth control pills.  Birth control pills. (2017, January).  Birth control pills: General information. (2018, May 18).  Charlton, B. M., Mølgaard-Nielsen, D., Svanström, H., Wohlfahrt, J., Pasternak, B., &amp; Melbye, M. (2016). Maternal use of oral contraceptives and risk of birth defects in Denmark: Prospective, nationwide cohort study.  BMJ ,  352 , h6712.  US selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016: Combined hormonal contraceptives. (2017, February 1).  US selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016: Progestin-only pills. (2017, February 1).  What happens during the typical menstrual cycle? (2018, March 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Rachel Nall MSN CRNA. "Can you start the birth control pill midcycle?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322867.php&gt;    APA  Rachel Nall MSN CRNA. (2018, August 24). "Can you start the birth control pill midcycle?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  