 Chancroid is a  sexually transmitted infection  (STI) caused by the bacteria  Haemophilus ducreyi . It is rare in North America and Europe.  Having chancroid also increases the risk of developing other STIs because the sores compromise the skin barrier and immune system.  People with chancroid should seek medical treatment as soon as they notice symptoms. Anyone diagnosed with chancroid, or who suspects they have it, should also inform recent sexual partners so they can get tested as soon as possible.   Antibiotics  can treat chancroid in most cases.  Most people with chancroid begin to notice symptoms between 3 and 10 days after contracting the infection.  Some people do not have any visible symptoms of chancroid.  The most common symptoms of chancroid are painful, red-colored bumps in the genital region that become ulcerated, open sores.  The base of the ulcer can appear grey or yellow.  Chancroid sores are often very painful in men but less noticeable and painful in women.  Additional symptoms associated with chancroid include:  To positively diagnose chancroid, a doctor must identify the presence of  H. ducreyi  in fluids taken from the ulcers.  However, a definite diagnosis is not always possible because some of the substances needed to identify the bacteria are not widely available in the United States. In any case, these tests are accurate less than  80 percent  of the time.  To diagnose chancroid, a doctor will ask a person questions about their symptoms, sexual history, and travel history. Usually, a doctor will make a diagnosis of chancroid if a person's symptoms match typical chancroid symptoms, and they test negative for other STIs.  The number one risk factor for contracting chancroid is through contact with the open sores of a person who has chancroid.  Additional risk factors for contracting chancroid include:  A doctor will typically prescribe antibiotics to clear the infection.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  recommend  one of the following rounds of antibiotic therapy for treating chancroid:  It is essential to take all the medications a doctor prescribes. Chronic or untreated chancroid infections are more difficult to treat because the bacteria can spread to other areas of the body.  A doctor will assess chancroid symptoms 3 to 7 days after prescribing antibiotic therapy. If symptoms remain, a doctor might:  Recovery time from chancroid mostly depends on the severity of the infection and the size of the sores. Large ulcers from chancroids can take more than 2 weeks to heal fully.  The only sure way to prevent chancroid is to avoid all sexual activities and contact. However, total celibacy is not a realistic lifestyle choice for the majority of people.  Other ways to reduce the risk of developing chancroid include:  Simple antibiotics can treat chancroid in many cases.  Chancroid can develop into a more serious, difficult to treat infection if left untreated.  Talk with a doctor or medical professional as soon as possible after chancroid symptoms develop.    
 Badu, T. (2018, July). Chancroid.  Badu, T. (2018, July). Chancroid.  Chancroid. (n.d.).  Chancroid. (2015, June 4).  Morris, S. R. (2018, March). Chancroid.  Reduce your risk. (n.d.).  Shah, A. P. (2017, March). Dysuria.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "How do you treat chancroid?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 21 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322835.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, August 21). "How do you treat chancroid?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  