 Acetaminophen, also known as paracetamol or Tylenol, is a drug that people use to treat mild-to-moderate pain and  fever .  In combination with alcohol, acetaminophen can cause side effects or severely damage the liver. This can also be the case when people who drink alcohol regularly take too much of this medication.  In this article, we outline the side effects and risks of taking acetaminophen and alcohol together and give tips on how to stay safe.  The liver is responsible for breaking down acetaminophen and alcohol, and studies have linked both of these substances to liver damage. For this reason, many people believe that drinking alcohol while taking acetaminophen is dangerous.  According to the  National Health Service (NHS)  in the UK, it is usually safe to drink a small amount of alcohol while taking this pain reliever.  However, when people take acetaminophen at high doses or together with alcohol, it can cause side effects ranging from minor to severe, with the possibility of fatal liver damage. This risk may be higher for people with alcohol use disorder (AUD), which was previously known as  alcoholism .  Possible side effects of taking acetaminophen and alcohol together  include :  According to the  U.S. National Library of Medicine , taking acetaminophen can be dangerous for people who regularly drink alcohol. Manufacturers currently recommend that people who have more than 3 alcoholic drinks per day should ask their doctor before taking acetaminophen.  Acetaminophen by itself can cause toxic damage to the liver, which is called acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity. This toxicity is the  most common cause of acute liver failure in the U.S . Around  30,000  patients are hospitalized each year in the U.S. to undergo treatment for this condition.  The liver damage results from the way in which the body breaks down acetaminophen.  When a person takes acetaminophen, liver enzymes break down most of the drug. The body then excretes it either in the urine, via the kidneys, or the bile.  The digestion process turns  around 5–10 percent  of the acetaminophen into a toxin called NAPQI. The liver produces an  antioxidant  called glutathione, which it holds in limited supply, to remove this toxin.  When the body receives more than the recommended dose of acetaminophen, the liver is overwhelmed with more NAPQI toxin than it can break down, which is why an overdose of acetaminophen is dangerous.  Alcohol also includes toxins that the liver must break down, so people combining it with acetaminophen have an increased risk of liver damage.  A  2016 review  highlights that the risk of acetaminophen-induced liver damage is higher for individuals who have AUD and also overdose on acetaminophen.  However, there is no scientific evidence that people with AUD who take the recommended dose of acetaminophen increase their risk of liver damage.  Damage to the liver can impair its ability to carry out vital functions. Not only does this organ filter out toxins from the blood, but it assists with blood clotting and plays an essential role in food digestion.  Around  half  of all acetaminophen overdoses are unintentional. They mainly occur when people take acetaminophen alongside certain opioid drugs in an attempt to relieve pain.  People can reduce their risk of liver damage by taking the following precautions:  Around  17 percent  of people who unintentionally overdose on acetaminophen each year will get liver damage.  The symptoms of liver damage include:  Popular alternatives to acetaminophen include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ), such as ibuprofen and  aspirin . People can safely take acetaminophen and NSAIDs at the same time.  NSAIDs work slightly differently to acetaminophen as they not only relieve pain but also have anti-inflammatory effects.  Taking NSAIDs along with alcohol is usually fine, although side effects can  include  an upset stomach. Aspirin and alcohol may cause bleeding.  A  2013 review  found that proper use of acetaminophen carries less risk of liver and kidney diseases than the NSAIDs ibuprofen and naproxen sodium.  Drinking alcohol in moderation while taking acetaminophen should generally be safe as long as a person:  When people take acetaminophen responsibly, it can be safer than some NSAID alternatives.  What should I do if I have taken acetaminophen and alcohol together?  If you have taken acetaminophen and alcohol at the same time, do not drink any more alcohol and only take the recommended dose and frequency of acetaminophen on the bottle label, even if more is necessary to manage your pain or fever. To be safe, continue to abstain from alcohol while regularly taking any medication containing acetaminophen.    
 Acetaminophen. (2018, August 15).  Acetaminophen. (2018, August 15).  Blieden, M., Paramore, L. C., Shah, D., &amp; Ben-Joseph, R. (2014, March 28). A perspective on the epidemiology of acetaminophen exposure and toxicity in the United States [Abstract].  Expert Review of Clinical Pharmacology ,  7 (3), 341–348.  Can I drink alcohol if I’m taking painkillers or NSAIDs? (n.d.)  Can I drink alcohol if I’m taking painkillers? (2017, November 1).  Harmful interactions: Mixing alcohol with medicines. (2014).  Lancaster, E. M., Hiatt, J. R., &amp; Zarrinpar, A. (2015, February). Acetaminophen hepatotoxicity: An updated review.  Archives of Toxicology ,  89 (2), 193–199.  Mazaleuskaya, L. L., Sangkuhl, K., Thorn, C. F., FitzGerald, G. A., Altman, R. B., &amp; Klein, T. E. (2015, August). PharmGKB summary: Pathways of acetaminophen metabolism at the therapeutic versus toxic doses.  Pharmacogenetics and Genomics ,  25 (8), 416–426.  Rothman, K. J., &amp; Lanza, L. L. (2013). Estimated risks of fatal events associated with acetaminophen, ibuprofen, and naproxen sodium used for analgesia.  Advances in Pharmacoepidemiology &amp; Drug Safety ,  2 (1), 1–5.  TYLENOL dosage for adults. (n.d.).  WHO model list of essential medicines. (2017, August).  Yoon, E., Babar, A., Choudhary, M., Kutner, M., &amp; Pyrsopoulos, N. (2016, June 28). Acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity: A comprehensive update.  Journal of Clinical and Translational Hepatology ,  4 (2), 131–142.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lillis, Charlotte. "Is it safe to mix acetaminophen and alcohol?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322813.php&gt;    APA  Lillis, C. (2018, August 20). "Is it safe to mix acetaminophen and alcohol?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  