 In this article, we explain how the menstrual cycle works and provide some possible causes of a missed period other than pregnancy. We also cover how to make a home pregnancy test as accurate as possible and when to see a doctor.  The ovaries release an egg in a process called  ovulation , which occurs approximately every 28 days. If no sperm fertilizes the egg, a person's period will usually start about 14 days later.  While a missed period is one of the first signs of pregnancy, there are a variety of other reasons why it can occur.  If a person does not menstruate for 3 months in a row, this is called  amenorrhea . This condition affects  3–4 percent  of women.  Amenorrhea usually happens when the ovaries stop making enough of the female hormone  estrogen . A range of factors, including those below, can cause a lack of estrogen.  The rapid gain or loss of a significant amount of weight can lead to hormonal imbalances. These imbalances can cause a person to miss periods initially, but they tend to resolve over time.  Long-term or intense  stress  can affect the part of the brain that controls the reproductive hormones. This can cause ovulation and periods to stop.  Once the cause of the stress goes or the person learns coping strategies to manage it, their regular cycle may return.  Excessive exercise can cause missed periods, particularly for people with low  body weight  or very little body fat. Missing periods due to excessive exercise is called exercise-associated amenorrhea.  Prolactin is a hormone that the body usually makes during breastfeeding. It can halt menstruation and is the reason why most breastfeeding women do not have periods.  In people who are not breastfeeding, a milky discharge from the nipples can signify that the body is making an abnormally high amount of prolactin. Doctors can treat excessive prolactin production with medication.  The thyroid is a gland that produces hormones to control the body's metabolism.   Hypothyroidism , or an underactive thyroid, is a condition in which the thyroid does not produce enough of these hormones.  Hyperthyroidism , or an overactive thyroid, results in the levels of thyroid hormones in the body being too high.  Both conditions can affect the frequency of periods. Other signs to look out for include:  Doctors can usually diagnose thyroid problems using a simple blood test.  People with PCOS have a hormonal imbalance that can affect their overall health and appearance in addition to causing  ovarian cysts .  Up to  10 percent  of women of childbearing age have PCOS and may have enlarged ovaries with clusters of small, benign  cysts .  Signs of PCOS include:  Eating disorders, particularly  anorexia , can cause periods to stop. This happens when a person's body fat becomes too low for ovulation to occur.  People enter  menopause  when they have not had a period for at least 12 months. The average age of people entering menopause in the United States is  52 years old . However, the transition to menopause, known as perimenopause, may cause symptoms that begin at a younger age.  The symptoms of perimenopause include:  Home pregnancy tests can sometimes give a false negative result, indicating that someone is not pregnant when they are.  The accuracy of a home pregnancy test varies depending on how and when a person takes it. Some of the reasons a test may give a false negative result include:  People who miss more than three periods in a row and have a negative pregnancy test result should see a doctor.  A person may miss a period as a result of several causes, including specific medical conditions, so it is essential to get a proper diagnosis.  To ensure that a home pregnancy test is accurate, people should follow the instructions on the packaging and wait until at least a week after the first day of the missed period before taking the test.    
 Menopause basics. (2018, May 22).  Menopause basics. (2018, May 22).  Period problems. (2018, March 16).  Polycystic ovary syndrome. (2018, May 22).  Stagnaro-Green, A., Abalovich, M., Alexander, E., Azizi, F., Mestman, J., Negro, R., … Wiersinga, W. (2011, October). Guidelines of the American Thyroid Association for the diagnosis and management of thyroid disease during pregnancy and postpartum.  Thyroid ,  21 (10), 1081–1125.  Too much of a good thing – Exercise Association Amenorrhea. (n.d).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "Can you miss a period and not be pregnant?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322893.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2018, August 28). "Can you miss a period and not be pregnant?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  