 According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), adverse reactions to  antibiotics  are responsible for  1 in 5  medication-related emergency room visits.  People should always talk with a doctor if antibiotics cause bothersome symptoms.  Call 911 and immediately stop taking antibiotics if side effects are severe or interfere with breathing.  People take antibiotics to clear bacterial infections. However, antibiotics may cause adverse side effects in some people.  Side effects may include:  Issues with digestion are one of the most commonly reported side effects of taking antibiotics.  Symptoms of digestion problems include:  Most digestive problems go away once someone stops take an antibiotic.  Anyone experiencing severe or persistent symptoms should stop taking the antibiotics and talk with a doctor.  Severe symptoms include:  To decrease the risk of developing digestive issues, be sure to read the instructions that come with the medication.  Antibiotics are designed to kill harmful bacteria. However, they sometimes kill the good bacteria that protect people from fungal infections.  As a result, many people taking antibiotics develop fungal infections in the:  People taking antibiotics or who have taken them and think they may have a fungal infection should talk with their doctor as soon as possible.  Antifungal medications treat fungal infections in most cases.  Symptoms of common fungal infections include:  Some common medications interact with certain antibiotics. These include:  People should always tell a doctor or pharmacist about all medications they are taking to help avoid interactions. The pamphlet in the package should also list any drugs that might interact with that specific type of antibiotic.  Many types of antibiotics make the skin more sensitive to the sun (photosensitive).  While taking antibiotics that may cause photosensitivity, people should:  Anyone who experiences extreme sensitivity to the sun while taking antibiotics should talk to a doctor.  Some estimates suggest that  3 to 6 percent  of the people who take tetracycline develop stains on their teeth enamel. The staining is irreversible in adults because their teeth do not regrow or change.  Staining can also appear on some bones. However, bones are continuously remodeling themselves, so bone stains caused by antibiotics are typically reversible.  Talk to a doctor about switching medications if taking antibiotics causes tooth discoloration or staining.  Some of the more serious side effects associated with antibiotics include:  In rare cases, antibiotics can cause an extremely severe allergic reaction known as  anaphylaxis .  Signs of anaphylaxis include:  Anaphylaxis  generally develops  within 15 minutes of taking an antibiotic, but anaphylaxis can occur up to an hour or more after a dose.  Anaphylaxis can be fatal without immediate emergency care. If people suspect anaphylaxis, they should dial the emergency services or go to the emergency room right away.   Clostridium difficile , or  C. difficile , is a type of bacteria that can infect the large intestine and cause  Clostridium difficile -induced colitis, an infection that causes intestinal  inflammation  and severe diarrhea.   C-difficile -induced colitis is challenging to treat because the bacterium is resistant to most antibiotics available.  Severe, chronic, or untreated cases of  C-difficile -induced colitis can lead to death.  Anyone who has any concerns about developing an antimicrobial-resistant infection when taking antibiotics should talk to a doctor.  Some bacteria have developed resistance to antibiotics.  Some infections caused by an antibiotic-resistant strain of bacteria do not respond to any available antibiotics.  Antibacterial-resistant infections can be severe and potentially life-threatening.  Ways to help reduce the risk of developing antibiotic-resistant infections include:  The kidneys are responsible for removing toxins, including medications, from the blood and body through urine. Antibiotics can overburden and damage the kidneys in people with kidney conditions.  As people age, their kidneys also naturally become less effective. Doctors will often prescribe older people or people with kidney conditions lower doses of antibiotics to begin with.  Anyone who has a severe reaction of any kind to antibiotics should immediately stop taking the medications and seek medical attention.  People who experience unpleasant side effects should also tell their doctor about symptoms.  People are often only sensitive or allergic to a specific type or family of antibiotics.  A doctor can usually prescribe a different type of antibiotic if someone is sensitive or allergic to one kind. If a person's symptoms are mild, a doctor may decide they can continue taking the antibiotic if the benefits outweigh the side effects.  A doctor should assess more severe side effects of antibiotics as soon as symptoms appear.    
 Antibiotics aren't always the answer. (n.d.).  Antibiotics aren't always the answer. (n.d.).   Candida  infections of the mouth, throat, and esophagus. (2017, August 4).  Delves, P. J. (2018, January). Anaphylactic reactions (anaphylaxis).  Fayock, K., Voltz, M., Sandella, B., Close, J., Lunser, M., &amp; Okon, J. (2014, July). Antibiotic precautions in athletes.  Sports Health ,  6 (4), 321–325.  Khalili, H., Bairami, S., &amp; Kargar, M. (2013, February 26). Antibiotics induced acute kidney injury: Incidence, risk factors, onset time and outcome.  Acta Medica Iranica ,  51 (12), 871–878.  Raymond, J., &amp; Cook, D. (2015, April 30). Still leaving stains on teeth—the legacy of minocycline?  The Australasian Medical Journal ,  8 (4), 139–142.  Schlecht, H. P., &amp; Bruno, C. (2017, November). Overview of antibiotics.  Using medication: Using antibiotics correctly and avoiding resistance. (2013, December 18).  Vaginal candidiasis. (2017, August 4).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What are the side effects of antibiotics?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322850.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, August 23). "What are the side effects of antibiotics?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  