 A morning cup of  coffee  might help a person manage  sleep deprivation , but many people worry about the effects of caffeine on their babies. However, caffeine is safe in moderation for people who are breastfeeding.  In this article, learn about drinking coffee while breastfeeding, including the risks, benefits, and other sources of caffeine.  Many people are told to limit or even eliminate caffeine during pregnancy due to the risk of caffeine crossing the placenta and affecting the developing fetus. However, caffeine is much less likely to affect a breastfeeding infant.  The body metabolizes most of the caffeine in coffee is before it reaches breast milk or has a chance to affect the baby.  According to Dr. Thomas Hale in   Medications and Mothers Milk  , caffeine is a low-risk drug in moderation. Only about  1 percent  of the caffeine a woman consumes gets into her breast milk, and this minuscule amount is not enough to harm most babies.  Breastfeeding parents who want to take the safest approach should consider limiting caffeine intake to about 300 milligrams (mg) a day, according to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) . This amount of caffeine is equivalent to 2–3 cups of coffee.  Even caffeine consumption of more than 300 mg is unlikely to harm a baby. However, the CDC note that extreme caffeine consumption of more than 10 cups a day may cause symptoms in the baby, such as fussiness and jitteriness.  Caffeine levels in breast milk peak  1–2 hours  after drinking coffee. A person who has recently breastfed may choose to watch their baby during this time to see whether they experience any effects from the caffeine.  While the potential risks of drinking coffee during pregnancy sound scary, the risks of caffeine in breastfeeding infants are mild.  Some experts express concern that caffeine might affect a baby's sleep, but a  2012 study  carried out on 885 babies in Brazil disagrees. The study found no statistically significant impact on the sleep quality of babies aged 3 months when breastfed by someone who consumes caffeine.  A  Korean study  also found no serious risks of drinking coffee caffeine while breastfeeding, especially with moderate consumption of a few cups a day.  Some people believe that the acids in coffee may lower the iron content of breast milk, though there is no recent scientific evidence to confirm this. Breast milk is naturally low in iron, but babies need iron to develop normally, so people who drink coffee  should discuss iron supplementation  with a doctor.  People should do what feels comfortable for them, as there is no medical reason to avoid drinking coffee while breastfeeding.  There is also no evidence that caffeine directly benefits the baby.  Decaf coffee has a small amount of caffeine in it. It is just as safe or even safer than caffeinated coffee. Decaf coffee is still highly acidic, so may affect the amount of iron in breast milk.  Coffee is not the only source of caffeine. People concerned about their caffeine consumption or those who notice that caffeine seems to adversely affect the baby should be mindful of other caffeine-rich foods.  Some  common sources of caffeine include :  No scientific evidence says that someone should give up caffeine while breastfeeding, though it is wise to enjoy it in moderation.  Some ways to manage caffeine intake include:  For more advice about balancing the risks and benefits of caffeine, people who are breastfeeding can talk to a doctor or lactation consultant.    
 Caffeine. (2018, March 1).  Caffeine. (2018, March 1).  Hale, T. W., Rowe, H. E. (2016, December 30). Medications and Mothers' Milk 2017. Amarillo, TX: Hale Publishing. Available from  https://www.amazon.co.uk/Medications-Mothers-Milk-Thomas-Wright/dp/0826128580   Jeong, G., Park, S. W., Lee, Y. K., Ko, S. Y., &amp; Shin, S. M. (2017, March 27). Maternal food restrictions during breastfeeding.  Korean Journal of Pediatrics ,  60 (3), 70–76.  Maternal diet. (2018, March 21).  Santos, I. S., Matijasevich, A., &amp; Domingues, M. R. (2012, April). Maternal caffeine consumption and infant nighttime waking: Prospective cohort study [Abstract].  Pediatrics ,  129 (5).  Thursday tip: Breastfeeding and caffeine. (2014, September 25).  Vitamin D &amp; iron supplementation for babies. AAP recommendations. (2016, May 27).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Can you drink coffee while breastfeeding?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322805.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, August 17). "Can you drink coffee while breastfeeding?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  