 One way to control blood sugar is to eat a healthful diet. Generally, foods and drinks that the body absorbs slowly are best because they do not cause spikes and dips in blood sugar.  The glycemic index (GI) measures the effects of specific foods on blood sugar levels. People looking to control their levels should pick foods with low or medium GI scores.  A person can also pair foods with low and high GI scores to ensure that a meal is balanced.  Below are some of the best foods for people looking to maintain healthy blood sugar levels.  Many kinds of bread are high in  carbohydrates  and quickly raise blood sugar levels. As a result many breads should be avoided.  However, pumpernickel bread and 100 percent stone-ground whole wheat bread have low GI scores, at 55 or less on the GI scale.  Pumpernickel and stone-ground whole wheat breads have lower GI scores than regular whole wheat bread because the ingredients go through less processing.  Processing removes the fibrous outer shells of grains and cereals. Fiber slows digestion and helps to stabilize blood sugar levels.  In a  2014 study , researchers reported that spelt and rye both caused low initial glycemic responses in rats. They also found that these ancient wheat types, as well as emmer and einkorn, suppressed genes that promote glucose metabolism.  Except for pineapples and melons, most fruits have low GI scores of 55 or less.  This is because most fruits contain lots of water and fiber to balance out their naturally occurring sugar, which is called fructose.  However, as fruits ripen, their GI scores increase. Fruit juices also have very high GI scores because juicing removes the fibrous skins and seeds.  A large  2013 study  found that people who consumed whole fruits, especially  blueberries , grapes, and apples, had significantly lower risks of developing  type 2 diabetes .  The researchers also reported that drinking fruit juice increased the risk of developing the condition.  Regular potatoes have a high GI score, but sweet potatoes and yams have low scores and are very nutritious.  Some  research  indicates that the flesh of the sweet potato contains more fiber than the skin, indicating that the whole vegetable could be beneficial for those with  diabetes .  Reporting the findings of an animal study, the researchers also noted that sweet potato consumption may lower some markers of diabetes.  While there is still no conclusive evidence that sweet potatoes can help to stabilize or lower blood sugar levels in humans, they are undoubtedly a healthful, nutritious food with a low GI score.  People can substitute sweet potatoes or yams for potatoes in a variety of dishes, from fries to casseroles.  Oats have a GI score of 55 or lower, making them less likely to cause spikes and dips in blood sugar levels.  Oats also contain B-glucans, which can do the following:  A  2015 review  of 16 studies concluded that oats have a beneficial effect on glucose control and lipid profiles in people with type 2 diabetes. Determining the impact of oat consumption on  type 1 diabetes  requires more research.  Doctors still recommend that people with diabetes limit their consumption of oatmeal because 1 cup contains roughly 28 grams of carbohydrates.  Nuts are very rich in dietary fiber and have GI scores of 55 or less.  Nuts also contain high levels of plant proteins, unsaturated fatty acids, and other nutrients, including:  A  2014 systemic review  concluded that eating nuts could benefit people with diabetes.  As with other foods in this article, it is best to eat nuts that are as whole and unprocessed as possible. Nuts with coatings or flavorings have higher GI scores than plain nuts.  Legumes, such as beans, peas, chickpeas, and lentils, have very low GI scores.  They are also a good source of nutrients that can help maintain healthy blood sugar levels. These nutrients include:  A  2012 study  found that incorporating legumes into the diet improved glycemic control and lowered the risk of  coronary heart disease  in people with type 2 diabetes.  Avoid legume products that contain added sugars and simple starches, such as those in syrups, sauces, or marinades. These additions can significantly increase a product's GI score.  Garlic is a popular ingredient in traditional medicines for diabetes and a wide variety of other conditions.  The compounds in garlic may help reduce blood sugar by improving insulin sensitivity and secretion.  In a  2013 study , 60 people with type 2 diabetes and  obesity  took either metformin alone or a combination of metformin and garlic twice daily after meals for 12 weeks. People who took metformin and garlic saw a more significant reduction in their fasting and post-meal blood sugar levels.  People can eat garlic raw, add it to salads, or use it in cooked meals.  Fish and other meats do not have GI scores because they do not contain carbohydrates.  However, cold-water fish may help manage or prevent diabetes better than other types of meat.  A  2014 study  included data taken from 33,704 Norwegian women over a 5-year period. The researchers found that eating 75–100 grams of cod, saithe, haddock, or pollock daily reduced the risk of developing type 2 diabetes.  However, the researchers were uncertain whether the reduction in risk was a direct result of eating the fish or whether other healthful lifestyle factors, such as exercise, could have influenced the findings.  Eating plain yogurt daily may reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes.  Authors of a  large 2014 meta-analysis  concluded that yogurt may be the only dairy product that lowers the risk of developing the condition. They also noted that other dairy products do not seem to increase a person's risk.  Researchers are still unsure why yogurt helps lower the risk of type 2 diabetes.  However, plain yogurt is generally a low-GI food. Most unsweetened yogurts have a GI score of 50 or less.  It is best to avoid sweetened or flavored yogurts, which often contain too much sugar for a person looking to lower their blood sugar levels. Greek-style yogurt can be a healthful alternative.  Eating a healthful, well-balanced diet is key. Additional strategies to help lower or manage blood sugar levels include:  People with diabetes may also need to take medications and measure their blood sugar regularly to reduce the risk of potentially dangerous symptoms and complications.  Speak with a doctor about how to incorporate a healthful diet into a diabetes care plan.    
 Afshin, A., Micha, R., Khatibzadeh, S., &amp; Mozaffarian, D. (2014, July 1). Consumption of nuts and legumes and risk of incident ischemic heart disease, stroke, and diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  100 (1), 278–288.  Afshin, A., Micha, R., Khatibzadeh, S., &amp; Mozaffarian, D. (2014, July 1). Consumption of nuts and legumes and risk of incident ischemic heart disease, stroke, and diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ,  100 (1), 278–288.  Carbohydrate counting &amp; diabetes. (2014, June).  Chen, M., Sun, Q., Giovannucci, E., Mozaffarian, D., Manson, J. E., Willett, W. C., &amp; Hu, F. B. (2014, November 25). Dairy consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes: 3 cohorts of US adults and an updated meta-analysis.  BMC medicine ,  12 , 215.  Diabetes diet, eating, &amp; physical activity. (2016, November).  Glycemic index and diabetes. (2014, May 14).  Hou, Q., Li, Y., Li, L., Cheng, G., Sun, X., Li, S., &amp; Tian, H. (2015, December 10). The metabolic effects of oats intake in patients with type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  Nutrients ,  7 (12), 10369–10387.  Jenkins, D. J. A., Kendall, C. W. C., Augustin, L. S. A., Mitchell, S., Sahye-Pudaruth, S., Mejia, S. B., … Josse, R. G. (2012, November 26). Effect of legumes as part of a low glycemic index diet on glycemic control and cardiovascular risk factors in type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized controlled trial.  JAMA Internal Medicine ,  172 (21), 1653–1660.  Kumar, R., Chhatwal, S., Arora, S., Sharma, S., Singh, J., Singh, N., … Khurana, A. (2013, January 19). Antihyperglycemic, antihyperlipidemic, anti-inflammatory and adenosine deaminase–lowering effects of garlic in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus with obesity.  Diabetes, Metabolic Syndrome and Obesity: Targets and Therapy ,  6 , 49–56.  Mohanraj, R., &amp; Sivasankar, S. (2014, June). Sweet Potato ( Ipomoea batatas  [L.] Lam) – a valuable medicinal food: A review.   Journal of Medicinal Food ,  17 (7), 733–741.  Muraki, I., Imamura, F., Manson, J. E., Hu, F. B., Willett, W. C., van Dam, R. M., &amp; Sun, Q. (2013, September 28). Fruit consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes: Results from three prospective longitudinal cohort studies.  BMJ ,  347 .  Ooi, C. P., &amp; Loke, S. C. (2013, December 12). Sweet potato for type 2 diabetes mellitus.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , 9 .  Rylander, C., Sandanger, T. M., Engeset, D., &amp; Lund, E. (2014, Feburary 24). Consumption of lean fish reduces the risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: A prospective population based cohort study of Norwegian women.  PloS One ,  9 (2).  Thorup, A. C., Gregersen, S., &amp; Jeppesen, P. B. (2015, February 10). Ancient wheat diet delays diabetes development in a type 2 diabetes animal model.  The Review of Diabetic Studies: Journal of the Society for Biomedical Diabetes Research ,  11 (3), 245–257.  Wolever, T. M. S. (2017, June 14). Yogurt is a low–glycemic index food.  The Journal of Nutrition ,  147 (7), 1462S–1467S.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "Which foods lower blood sugar?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322861.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, August 23). "Which foods lower blood sugar?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  