 The quads' primary purpose is to straighten the knee. Athletes and other physically active people are most likely to pull a muscle in this group.  Most people recover after applying ice and resting. However, some require further treatment, depending on the severity of the injury.  The most common symptoms include:  Some people can feel the injury as it occurs, while others only feel the effects.  An athlete who habitually makes sudden, forceful leg movements, especially when fatigued, is most likely to pull a quad.  According to  research  from 2010, the most common causes of a strain or a pull in the quads include:  The researcher also described the grading system for pulled quadriceps:  A person should stop any activity if they feel a pulling sensation followed by pain when moving the leg. Seek medical attention as soon as possible.  For athletes, this may involve letting a coach know. The coach should examine the injury and begin treatment.  The area around the quads will likely swell when the injury first occurs. The  American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons  recommends using the RICE method for initial treatment of muscle strains in the thigh.  The RICE method stands for:  Using the RICE method and resting will help the quad to recover fully.  Some light stretches can encourage recovery, and a person may benefit from applying mild heat to the area before stretching.  Stretching should only last for a few minutes, and be careful not to stretch very hard or far.  Over-the-counter medications, such as ibuprofen, can help ease pain and swelling.  A doctor may also recommend  physical therapy  to restore the range of motion.  Ultimately, the best treatment for a pulled quad is time. The body will repair itself over the course of a few weeks.  Recovery times can vary, depending on the extent of the injury.  A person with a grade 1 injury will likely recover within 1–2 weeks if they rest the muscle as much as possible.  It can take longer to recover from a grade 2 or 3 strain, in some cases over 1 month.  When the pain has disappeared, and the strength of the muscle has returned, a person can go back to their normal activities.  Most people do not need to worry about pulling their quadriceps. Those most at risk tend to be athletes engaged in intense physical activities.  Some risk factors include:  Taking the following precautions can help:  A person may not need to see a doctor for a mild quad pull. However, if a person has sustained the injury while playing a team sport, it may be a good idea to see a doctor. The doctor can recommend ways to speed the recovery.  Seek medical attention for a quad pull if the injury:  A doctor will examine the leg and thigh. They may then use imaging to check the muscle for tears or additional damage.  The doctor can recommend medications to ease the pain and swelling. They may also suggest physical therapy.  Finally, a doctor may advise about returning to daily activities and write an excusal letter, if necessary.  For most people, a pulled quad would be an unusual injury. Those most at risk are athletes and others who participate in physically demanding activities.  It is essential to allow the body to heal by resting the muscles as much as possible. A person should also use the RICE method to reduce swelling.  Many people can return to their regular activities within a few weeks of the injury.    
 Kary, J. M. (2010, October). Diagnosis and management of quadriceps strains and contusions.  Current Reviews in Musculoskeletal Medicine ,  3 (1–4), 26–31.  Kary, J. M. (2010, October). Diagnosis and management of quadriceps strains and contusions.  Current Reviews in Musculoskeletal Medicine ,  3 (1–4), 26–31.  Muscle strains in the thigh. (2014, March).  Quadriceps contusion. (2016, May 24).  Quadriceps tendon tear. (2016, February).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "How long does it take to heal a pulled quad?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322812.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, August 20). "How long does it take to heal a pulled quad?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  