  Acid reflux  occurs when stomach acid flows up into the food pipe. This common condition affects  60 million  Americans per month and  20 to 30 percent  of people in the Western world. It can be a symptom of gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ).  Many people are interested in home remedies to relieve the symptoms of acid reflux. In this article, we look at the evidence for lemon water.  Acid reflux causes  inflammation  and irritation in the esophageal lining. This may result in a burning sensation known as  heartburn , as well as belching, regurgitation, and nausea.  According to a  2012 review , lemon juice has a history of use in Eastern and Western practices to aid digestion and gastrointestinal issues, including acid reflux.  However, there is no research to suggest that it works. In fact, because of its acidity, lemon juice could make acid reflux worse.  Some sources say that lemon water has an alkalizing effect, meaning that it can neutralize stomach acid, which may reduce acid reflux. However, this is not backed up by research.  Lemon juice is acidic, with a  pH of 3 , while water has a pH of around 7, which is neutral. This means it is neither acidic nor alkaline.  Some people may find that drinking a glass of lemon water can improve their reflux. For others, an acidic liquid, such as lemon water, could even make their symptoms worse.  There is no research to suggest that lemon water will relieve the symptoms of acid reflux. If a person still wants to try this home remedy, they can consider the following advice:  Lemon water has several benefits and a few risks to be aware of.  According to some people, lemon water can have a range of health benefits.  Lemon water contains  vitamin  C, which is an  antioxidant . According to the  National Institutes of Health (NIH) , Vitamin C helps improve the immune system, which helps the body fight off infection. Vitamin C also helps the body to absorb iron from the diet.  People also suggest that lemon juice can improve kidney function, skin appearance, and even reduce the risk of  cancer . However, there is little high-quality evidence to support these claims.  Lemon water is usually safe to drink. However, there are a few possible side effects.  Lemon water can damage the teeth and the enamel. Drinking through a straw can prevent such damage. Rinse your mouth after drinking lemon water.  For some people, the lemon juice can make acid reflux or GERD worse. Always watch the body's signals and stop using a home remedy if it makes symptoms worse.  For mild or moderate acid reflux, some over-the-counter (OTC) or prescription drugs are available, such as antacids and proton pump inhibitors-PPIs. Talk to a doctor before taking any new medication.  The following home remedies may help to reduce acid reflux:  Specific lifestyle changes can also help people manage their acid reflux:  Acid reflux is an uncomfortable condition that often leads to belching and heartburn.  Drinking lemon water is a potentially helpful remedy to reduce symptoms. Always drink it diluted and pay attention to the body's reaction.  Some people report that drinking lemon water can reduce their symptoms of acid reflux after a meal. For others, lemon water can make their acid reflux worse.  There are few risks to trying this natural home remedy, though people may want to talk to their doctor beforehand, particularly if they have any pre-existing medical conditions that affect the digestive system.  For those that do not find lemon water to be helpful, other home remedies and lifestyle changes can help.    
 Abdel-Salam, O. M. E., Youness, E., R. Mohammed, N. A., Yousef Morsy, S. M., Omara, E. A., &amp; Sleem A. A. (2014, May 1). Citric acid effects on brain and liver oxidative stress in lipopolysaccharide-treated mice.  Journal of Medical Food ,  17 (5), 588–598.  Abdel-Salam, O. M. E., Youness, E., R. Mohammed, N. A., Yousef Morsy, S. M., Omara, E. A., &amp; Sleem A. A. (2014, May 1). Citric acid effects on brain and liver oxidative stress in lipopolysaccharide-treated mice.  Journal of Medical Food ,  17 (5), 588–598.  Acid reflux. (n.d.).  Acid reflux treatment. (n.d.).  Aditi, A. &amp; Graham, D. Y. (2013, December 28). Vitamin C, gastritis and gastric disease: A historical review and update.  Digestives Diseases and Sciences Journal ,  57 (10).  Assini, J. M., Mulviill, E. E., &amp; Huff, M. W. (2013, February). Citrus flavonoids and lipid metabolism [Abstract].  Curated Opinion in Lipidology ,  24 (1), 34–40.  di Petro, M. &amp; Fitzgerald, R. C. (2013, October 1). Research advances in esophageal diseases: Bench to bedside.  F1000 Prime Reports ,  5 (44).  GERD. (2018, May 9).  Gomes, D. C., &amp; Dantas, R. O. (2014, June–September). Acidic and neutral liquid ingestion in patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease.  Arquivos de Gastroenterologia ,  51 (3), 217–220.  Goodman, H. (2018, April 13). Digestive enzyme supplements for heartburn.  Kato, Y., Domoto, T., Hiramitsu, M., Katagiri, T., Sato K., Miyake, Y., …Harada, T. (2014, April 10). Effects on blood pressure of daily lemon ingestion and walking.  Journal of Nutrition and Metabolism .  Panahi, Y., Khedmat, H., Valizadegan, G., Mohtashami, R., &amp; Sahebkar, A. (2015, December 15). Efficacy and safety of Aloe vera syrup for the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease: A pilot randomized positive-controlled trial.  Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine ,  35 (6), 632–636.  Valussi, M. (2012, March). Functional foods with digestion-enhancing properties [Abstract].  International Journal of Food Sciences and Nutrition ,  63 (1), 82–89.  Vitamin C: Fact sheet for consumers. (2011, June 24).  Vitamin C: Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gal, Kat. "Can lemon water help with acid reflux?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322879.php&gt;    APA  Gal, K. (2018, August 24). "Can lemon water help with acid reflux?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  