 According to  2017 research  carried out on a group of pregnant women in California, about 7 percent of the women surveyed used marijuana.  Research  suggests that marijuana can get into breast milk, which means that it may not be safe to use while breastfeeding.  However, little research is available, and much of the research that does exist is incomplete, poorly designed, or very outdated. In this article, learn about whether it is safe to use marijuana while breastfeeding, as well as about the possible risks for the baby.  The body metabolizes marijuana very slowly, unlike other drugs and alcohol.  It stores marijuana in fat cells, meaning it can remain in the body for weeks or longer.  Because the body uses fat to make breast milk, the marijuana may pass into the milk and the baby. This means that marijuana that entered the bloodstream weeks before can still get into the breast milk.  Research typically focuses on how much marijuana passes to the baby, and whether it is harmful. Many older studies have shown that marijuana does pass to the baby and may have adverse effects.  However, many studies on the use of marijuana while breastfeeding have failed to consider other factors. These factors can include exposure to secondhand smoke, the health of the women who use marijuana, and the amount of marijuana they use.  This lack of research makes it difficult for doctors to offer any recommendations about marijuana and breastfeeding, or to assess whether any amount of marijuana might be safe for breastfed babies. However, it is best to err on the side of caution.  Some potential risks of using marijuana while breastfeeding include:  A  2018 study  suggests that babies will receive about 2.5 percent of the active chemicals in marijuana through breast milk. However, the study did not look at the effects on the babies. Moreover, it only looked at eight breastfeeding women, meaning the study was too small to draw any conclusions about safe levels of use.  The active chemicals in marijuana accumulate in the body with more use, so frequent use of marijuana is more likely to be harmful.  Breastfeeding women making decisions about marijuana should know that not all studies have found a link between marijuana and adverse outcomes.  A  2014 review  found only one human study that linked marijuana exposure in breast milk to developmental issues.  A  2017 review  looked at six previous studies, including animal studies. Four of the studies associated the use of marijuana while breastfeeding with adverse effects.  However, no studies have followed babies over several years to determine the long-term developmental effects, so it is impossible to say whether using marijuana while breastfeeding is safe or not. Since we cannot guarantee safety, avoiding marijuana is best.   Dr. Heather Bradshaw  is a specialist in cannabinoid pharmacology at Indiana University's  Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences . She believes that there is no safe level of consumption while breastfeeding as this can lead to developmental issues:  Research has suggested that early exposure of THC to the brain can affect cerebellar development. Since abnormal cerebellar development is associated with an increased chance of  schizophrenia  later in life, this could be a risk factor.  Dr. Heather Bradshaw  Cannabidiol (CBD) derives from marijuana. It does not usually contain Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), which is the chemical that causes people to feel "high."  CBD is increasingly popular as an herbal remedy and a form of medical cannabis. CBD is also a medication and may not be safe for a baby.  However,  research from 2017  suggests that some strains of CBD may contain THC, which could be dangerous for babies.  Dr. Bradshaw would also recommend avoiding CBD products when breastfeeding:  While there is little developmental data on this issue, we do know that CBD is incredibly effective at treating seizures and works rigorously in the brain. I would therefore suggest that it is not a good idea to expose a developing baby to a very active brain drug."
  Dr. Heather Bradshaw  As there is little research available as to whether some CBD products may contain THC and other substances, women should be wary of using it while breastfeeding.  Some women may wonder if they can pump breast milk and throw it away after using marijuana. However, even after a single use of marijuana, a drug test for THC can be positive for weeks or even months.  The body stores marijuana in fat cells and also uses fat to make breast milk, so chemicals from marijuana could pass to the baby even weeks after a single use.  Pumping and dumping for a few hours, or even a few days, after using marijuana will not prevent it from getting to the baby. There is no benefit to this strategy, and it may create a false sense of safety.  There is too little research to determine whether using marijuana while breastfeeding is unsafe or if it is safe in certain amounts. A  2017 review  attempted to assess whether the risks of cannabis outweigh the benefits of breastfeeding, but argued that further research is needed to make clear recommendations.  Breastfeeding women should not use marijuana. Those who do should be extremely cautious and actively work to reduce their use. Talking to a doctor can help them take steps to reduce their consumption.    
 Anderson, P. O. (2017, December 1). Cannabis and breastfeeding.  Breastfeeding Medicine ,  12 (10).  Anderson, P. O. (2017, December 1). Cannabis and breastfeeding.  Breastfeeding Medicine ,  12 (10).  Baker, T., Datta, P., Rewers-Felkins, K., Thompson, H., Kallem, R. R., &amp; Hale, T. W. (2018, May). Transfer of inhaled cannabis into human breast milk.  Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  131 (5), 783–788.  Cannabis. (2018, June 4).  Miller, C. W. (2012, October 1). Marijuana use and breastfeeding [Abstract].  Clinical Lactation ,  3 (3), 101–107.  Mourh, J., &amp; Rowe, H. (2017, December 1). Marijuana and breastfeeding: Applicability of the current literature to clinical practice.  Breastfeeding Medicine ,  12 (10), 582–596.  Ordean, A. (2014, January 24). Marijuana exposure during lactation: Is it safe?  Pediatrics Research International Journal (2014), 1–6.  Seabrook, J. A., Biden, C. R., &amp; Campbell, E. E. (2017). Does the risk of exposure to marijuana outweigh the benefits of breastfeeding? A systematic review.  Canadian Journal of Midwifery ,  16 (2).  The transfer of drugs and other chemicals into human milk. (2001).  Pediatrics ,  108 (3), 776–789.  Young-Wolff, K. C., Tucker, L.-Y., Alexeeff, S., Armstrong, M. A., Conway, A., Weisner, C., &amp; Goler, N. (2017, December 26). Trends in self-reported and biochemically tested marijuana use among pregnant females in California from 2009–2016.  JAMA ,  318 (24), 2490–2491.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Is it safe to use marijuana while breastfeeding?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322855.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, August 23). "Is it safe to use marijuana while breastfeeding?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  