 Muscle injuries are the  most common injuries  in sports. Correctly diagnosing and treating muscle strain is vital for a full and speedy recovery. Identifying the injured muscle and getting suitable treatment can help prevent reinjury.  In this article, learn about soleus strains and other common calf injuries, as well as how to prevent and treat them.  Soleus injuries are relatively  common  in runners. This type of injury is known as an overuse injury, which is why endurance and long-distance runners are at higher risk.  Injuries commonly occur as a result of  fatigue  or overtraining. They can also happen when the knee is flexed for a long time while running, such as during uphill running.  Other calf injuries, including gastrocnemius strains, are more common in athletes who sprint, including  tennis players .  It can be challenging to identify a soleus injury just from a physical examination. As a result, doctors will typically use an  MRI  or  ultrasound  to confirm this diagnosis.  Ultrasounds are  less good  at detecting this type of injury, but doctors may still use them in some instances.  A doctor will also ask a person about their symptoms. Anyone with a soleus strain will feel pain when:  As part of the diagnosis, the doctor will classify the soleus injury as a grade 1, 2, or 3 strain.  A person with a grade 1 strain may experience:  A person with a grade 2 soleus strain may have the following symptoms:  Symptoms of a grade 3 soleus strain include:  The calf muscle comprises three different muscles called the gastrocnemius, soleus, and plantaris. These muscles come together above the ankle to form the Achilles tendon.  Injuries that can affect these muscles include:  The gastrocnemius is the muscle in the calf that it is most common to strain. Also located behind the knee, the gastrocnemius is larger than the soleus.  While soleus injuries typically result from overuse, a gastrocnemius strain is  more likely  to be a sudden injury.  Commonly called tennis leg, this strain is often the result of a quick movement, such as sprinting or jumping.  Injuries to the plantaris are rare, as this muscle is well-protected by other muscles and does very little. In fact, the body does not require this muscle to function, and it may be absent in  7–20 percent  of the population. Doctors use an MRI to diagnose a plantaris strain.  Doctors frequently recommend the RICE method as the initial treatment for muscle strains and injuries. The RICE method refers to:  Despite being a standard treatment method for muscle injuries, there is  limited research  on the effectiveness of RICE. However, studies have shown that safely applying ice can reduce pain and swelling.  It is easier to avoid injuries than to treat them. Tips to avoid a soleus strain and other muscle injuries include:  Some stretches and exercises may help a person prevent or recover from a soleus strain. However, if the movements cause pain or discomfort, do not continue to do them.  Stretches to help soleus strains include:  To do a calf wall stretch:  A person can also do this stretch with both knees bent.  To do a bilateral calf stretch:  This stretch will also work with the knees bent.  To do ankle plantar flexion:  People can also do this exercise while standing if it does not cause pain.  To do ankle dorsiflexion:  Research indicates that up to  10 percent  of people who have symptoms of a soleus strain or a gastrocnemius strain could have  deep vein thrombosis  (DVT).  DVT is a blood clot in the leg that can cause severe complications if it moves to the lungs. It requires immediate medical attention.  A person should contact a doctor immediately if they experience the following symptoms in the calf as these could indicate DVT:  Getting a proper diagnosis and personalized treatment plan will help speed up recovery time and prevent reinjury. A doctor may also recommend  physiotherapy  for rehabilitation if the strain is severe.    
 Balius, R., Rodas, G., Pedret, C., Capdevila, L., Alomar, X., &amp; Bong, D. A. (2014, June). Soleus muscle injury: Sensitivity of ultrasound patterns.  Skeletal Radiology ,  43 (6). 805–812.  Balius, R., Rodas, G., Pedret, C., Capdevila, L., Alomar, X., &amp; Bong, D. A. (2014, June). Soleus muscle injury: Sensitivity of ultrasound patterns.  Skeletal Radiology ,  43 (6). 805–812.  Bright, J. M., Fields, K. B., &amp; Draper, R. (2017, July–August). Ultrasound diagnosis of calf injuries.  Sports Health ,  9 (4), 352–355.  Calf strain: Rehab exercises. (2017, March 21).  Cheatham, S. W., Kolber, M. J., Cain, M., &amp; Lee, M. (2015, November). The effects of self-myofascial release using a foam roll or roller massager on joint range of motion, muscle recovery, and performance: A systematic review.  International Journal of Sports Physical Therapy ,  10 (6), 827–838.  Delos, D., Maak, T. G., &amp; Rodeo, S. A. (2013, July). Muscle injuries in athletes: Enhancing recovery through scientific understanding and novel therapies.  Sports Health ,  5 (4), 346–352.  Fields, K. B., &amp; Rigby, M. D. (2016, September–October). Muscular calf injuries in runners.  Current Sports Medicine Reports ,  15 (5), 320–324.  Harwin, J. R., &amp; Richardson, M. L. (2017, March). "Tennis leg": Gastrocnemius injury is a far more common cause than  plantaris  rupture.  Radiology Case Reports ,  12 (1), 120–123.  Mueller-Wohlfahrt, H.-W., Haensel, L., Mithoefer, K., Ekstrand, J., English, B., McNally, S., ... Ueblacker, P. (2013). Terminology and classification of muscle injuries in sport: The Munich consensus statement.  British Journal of Sports Medicine ,  47 (6), 342–350.  Pedret, C., Rodas, G., Balius, R., Capdevila, L., Bossy, M., Vernooij, R. W. M., &amp; Alomar, X. (2015, July 22). Return to play after soleus muscle injuries.  Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine ,  3 (7).  Petruska, A. (n.d.). Calf strain.  Soleus muscle. (2018, June 20).  Young, J. D., Spence, A.-J., &amp; Behm, D. (2018, January). Roller massage decreases spinal excitability to the soleus [Abstract].  Journal of Applied Physiology .  124 (4).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Stinson, Adrienne. "Soleus strains and calf injuries: What to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322809.php&gt;    APA  Stinson, A. (2018, August 20). "Soleus strains and calf injuries: What to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  