 The primary symptom that  acid reflux  does cause is a burning pain in the chest and upper abdomen, which occurs due to stomach acid leaking back into the food pipe.  In this article, we look at heart palpitations in more detail, including the common causes of palpitations and how they might relate to acid reflux.  Palpitations are irregular heartbeats that can make a person feel as though their heart has skipped a beat. The heart may also feel like it is fluttering in the chest.  Other people with heart palpitations may feel that their heart is beating harder than usual or beating too fast in comparison to its regular rate.  Much of the time, heart palpitations are harmless, and people can think of them as a speed bump in the heart's natural rhythm.  Other times, heart palpitations may signal a problem with the heart or other organs.  Some people experience heart palpitations regularly while others may only have them on rare occasions.  While acid reflux will not usually be a direct cause of heart palpitations, it may lead to them indirectly.  For instance, if a person with  GERD  feels  stressed or anxious  about their symptoms, this may lead to palpitations.  Several factors may also trigger both acid reflux and heart palpitations. When this happens, it is easy to confuse the causes.  For example, alcohol consumption may cause palpitations in some people, and it can also trigger GERD symptoms.  Likewise, too much caffeine may sometimes trigger GERD symptoms, and the effects of caffeine can also cause skipped heartbeats or palpitations.  Eating too much, or eating a particularly heavy meal, may also cause both heart palpitations and acid reflux in some people.  Other possible causes of palpitations can include:  Some medical conditions may cause palpitations, including:  The symptoms of heart palpitations can vary from person-to-person, but may include:  These sensations are due to either premature atrial contractions (PACs) or premature ventricular contractions (PVCs). Both of these are extra beats in the heart that happen just before the regular heartbeat, causing the person to feel an odd sensation.  Severe symptoms are also possible alongside heart palpitations. These may include:  When they occur together with heart palpitations, these symptoms may signify a heart condition or medical emergency. Anyone experiencing these symptoms should seek emergency medical attention.  To diagnose heart palpitations, doctors will first perform a physical exam and ask about any symptoms. It may be beneficial for people with heart palpitations to keep a daily journal of their symptoms to discuss with the doctor at the appointment.  The doctor may do some physical checks, such as listening to the heart with a stethoscope or checking the thyroid gland for swelling. Much of the time, they will also order one or more tests to examine the heart in more detail. Possible tests include:  An ECG records impulses in the heart. Doctors may order an ECG to track the rhythm and beats of the heart and check for irregularities.  If a simple ECG does not capture any irregularities, doctors may have the person wear a Holter monitor.  A Holter monitor is a portable ECG that records the heart for an extended continuous period, potentially  24 hours  or more. This may be helpful for people who only have palpitations in specific situations, such as when lying down or after a meal.  If palpitations are less frequent, a doctor may ask the individual to wear an event recorder. An event recorder only records the heart when prompted. The user pushes a button when they feel the palpitation, and the recorder picks it up for the doctor to examine later.  People may wear event recorders for much longer than Holter monitors, sometimes keeping them on for up to several weeks.  Doctors will sometimes order an  ultrasound  of the chest, called an echocardiogram, to view the heart and see how it is looking and working.  Some blood tests may help diagnose underlying causes, such as anemia or thyroid problems.  Doctors usually only treat heart palpitations related to more severe heart conditions.  The treatment can vary in each case, and doctors will thoroughly discuss all of the person's options with them.  For common heart palpitations, a doctor may recommend lifestyle changes.  If palpitations seem to occur around the same time as GERD symptoms, it is likely to be because of the meal the person just ate.  They may be consuming meals that are too large, or their body may be sensitive to a specific food that they are eating.  People can often identify trigger foods by keeping a daily journal of what they eat and any symptoms that they experience. Treating palpitations can sometimes be as simple as removing these foods from the diet.  Avoiding the excessive consumption of tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana is also likely to help some people.  For stress-related palpitations, doctors may recommend that people relieve  stress  by incorporating some of the following activities into their weekly routines:  Doing at least one of these activities regularly may help reduce stress, which can cause palpitations in some people.  Palpitations may be a sign of an underlying condition, even in cases where stress triggers them.  Anyone experiencing heart palpitations along with other serious symptoms should seek emergency medical care. These symptoms include:  There are a couple of techniques that people can try to stop palpitations when they are occurring. These methods stimulate the vagus nerve, which may help control the heartbeat:  These techniques may work temporarily, but it is vital not to ignore the underlying cause of palpitations. Long-term treatment should be a top priority for people with this symptom.  While GERD or acid reflux is unlikely to cause heart palpitations directly, symptoms associated with GERD may trigger palpitations in some people.  Anyone who is unsure about their symptoms should talk to a doctor, and any severe symptoms indicate that emergency medical care is necessary.    
 Alijaniha, F., Noorbala, A., Afsharypuor, S., Naseri, M., Fallahi, F., Mosaddegh, M., ... &amp; Sadrai, S. (2016, March 1). Relationship between palpitation and mental health.  Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal ,  18 (3), e22615.  Alijaniha, F., Noorbala, A., Afsharypuor, S., Naseri, M., Fallahi, F., Mosaddegh, M., ... &amp; Sadrai, S. (2016, March 1). Relationship between palpitation and mental health.  Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal ,  18 (3), e22615.  Common tests for arrhythmia. (2016, September 30).  Gale, C. P., &amp; Camm, A. J. (2016, January 6). Assessment of palpitations [Abstract].  BMJ ,  352 .  Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).  Heart palpitations. (n.d.).  Larsson, S. C., Drca, N., &amp; Wolk, A. (2014, July). Alcohol consumption and risk of atrial fibrillation: A prospective study and dose-response meta-analysis.  Journal of the American College of Cardiology ,  64 (3), 281–289.  Raviele, A., Giada, F., Bergfeldt, L., Blanc, J. J., Blomstrom-Lundqvist, C., Mont, L., ... Shah, D. C. (2011, July 1). Management of patients with palpitations: A position paper from the European Heart Rhythm Association.  EP Europace ,  13 (7), 920–934.  Skipping a beat — the surprise of heart palpitations. (2018, August 13).  Stress. (2017, September 24).  Un, H., Dogan, M., Uz, O., Isilak, Z., &amp; Uzun, M. (2016, January). Novel vagal  maneuver  technique for termination of supraventricular tachycardias [Abstract].  The American Journal of Emergency Medicine ,  34 (1), 118.e5–7.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Is there a link between acid reflux and palpitations?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322924.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, August 30). "Is there a link between acid reflux and palpitations?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  