 Tracking the surge in luteinizing hormone levels can help people to plan intercourse and increase the chances of becoming pregnant.  Understanding what LH is, when levels of the hormone rise, and the relationship between this increase and fertility can be important for women trying to get pregnant.  There are several ways to track monthly LH surges. In this article, we describe methods of tracking, how long surges last, and how to use them to increase the odds of pregnancy.  The LH surge signals that  ovulation  is about to start. Ovulation is the medical term for an ovary releasing a mature egg.  A gland in the brain, called the anterior pituitary gland, produces LH.  Levels of LH are low for most of the monthly menstrual cycle. However, around the middle of the cycle, when the developing egg reaches a certain size, LH levels surge to become very high.  A woman is most fertile around this time. People refer to this interval as the fertile window or fertile period.  If there are no complications affecting fertility, having sex several times within the fertile period may be enough to conceive.  The LH surge begins around  36 hours  before ovulation. Once the egg is released, it survives for about 24 hours, after which time the fertile window is over.  Because the period of fertility is so short, it is important to keep track of it when trying to conceive, and noting the timing of the LH surge can help.  For people trying to conceive, the best time to have unprotected sex is during the LH surge.   Ovulation predictor kits (OPKs)  contain at-home tests that measure LH levels in the urine.  It is best to start testing levels when the fertile window is drawing near, or a handful of days before ovulation.  Most people ovulate between  7 and 19 days  before their next period begins.  Many people ovulate on day 14, but this can vary, depending on the length of a person's cycle. People with shorter cycles should test earlier in the range of likely days.  There are multiple markers of ovulation, including:  The best ways to test for the LH surge are:  A person can buy an OPK without a prescription, from drug stores or  online . Many brands are available.  A positive result means that a person has a high amount of LH in their system. LH levels drop after ovulation, so the tests only show positive results during fertile periods.  Because each kit is different, it is important to follow the instructions carefully. All tests are relatively simple to use.  However, there are a few disadvantages, and OPKs may not be the right choice for everyone.  For example:  If OPKs are unlikely to be effective, a person can ask their doctor for a blood test. It may take a few tests to identify the fertile period and to pinpoint the time of ovulation.  A doctor can also identify the fertile period by examining the ovaries on a transvaginal  ultrasound scan .  For women trying to get pregnant, it is important to track the window of fertility and the LH surge.  A person can figure out the timing of the LH surge with an OPK or by taking a blood test. A doctor can help to decide which method of tracking will be most effective.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Kumar, P., &amp; Sait, S. F. (2011, January–April). Luteinizing hormone and its dilemma in ovulation induction.  Journal of Human Reproductive Sciences ,  4 (1), 2–7.  Kumar, P., &amp; Sait, S. F. (2011, January–April). Luteinizing hormone and its dilemma in ovulation induction.  Journal of Human Reproductive Sciences ,  4 (1), 2–7.  Luteinizing hormone. (n. d.).  Ovulation (Urine test). (2018, February).  What happens during the typical 28-day menstrual cycle? (2018, March 16).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gal, Kat. "What does the LH surge mean for pregnancy?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322954.php&gt;    APA  Gal, K. (2018, August 31). "What does the LH surge mean for pregnancy?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  