 The  American Cancer Society  estimate that there will be around 60,300 new cases of  leukemia  in the United States in 2018, resulting in 24,370 deaths.  There are many different types of leukemia. Which type a person develops depends on which white blood cells are affected, as well as some other factors.  Leukemia can prevent white blood cells from fighting infections and cause them to multiply uncontrollably. This overgrowth can cause overcrowding of the healthy blood cells, leading to severe problems throughout the body.  Leukemia can either be:  Latest figures show that the 5-year survival rate for all subtypes of leukemia is  61.4 percent .  A 5-year survival rate looks at how many people are still alive 5 years after their diagnosis.  Leukemia is most common in people aged over 55, with the median age of diagnosis being 66.  It is also one of the most common  cancers  for people under age 20. The survival rate is higher for younger people.  According to the  National Cancer Institute , the percentage of deaths by age group are as follows:  A range of factors can affect a person's chance of surviving leukemia.  Factors include:  While there is currently no cure for leukemia, it is possible to treat the cancer to prevent it coming back.  Treatment success depends on a range of factors. Treatment can include:  Treatment can last several months or even years depending on the type and severity of the condition.  Receiving a leukemia diagnosis is life-changing and challenging for both an individual and their loved ones.  It is common to feel a mixture of emotions after a cancer diagnosis, but everybody reacts differently in these situations. Some may try to put on a brave face to protect their loved ones, while others will openly seek support.  It is essential to remember that support is available for everyone from a wide range of sources, including:   A doctor : Asking questions about leukemia, its symptoms, treatment options, stages, and survival rates can help a person understand their condition.   Friends and family : Friends and family can provide intimate and emotional support. They can also help a person with everyday tasks that may become too difficult due to leukemia symptoms or treatment.   Support groups : These groups are helpful for meeting other people who can offer advice and support from their own lived experience or expertise. Support groups exist for both people with leukemia and their loved ones.   Charities : Organizations, such as the  Leukemia and Lymphoma Society , are dedicated to providing support to people with a cancer diagnosis.  There may also be local charities and online resources that can help a person understand and manage their condition.    
 Cancer stat facts: Leukemia. (n.d.).  Cancer stat facts: Leukemia. (n.d.).  Key statistics for acute myeloid leukemia. (2018, January 4).  Leukemia. (n.d.).  Talking time: Support for people with cancer. (2014, May).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "What to know about leukemia survival rates."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Sep. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322990.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, September 5). "What to know about leukemia survival rates."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  