 Studies suggest that this oil may offer many health and cosmetic benefits, such as aiding weight loss, improving skin conditions, and even treating  cancer  and  diabetes .  In this article, we look at the science behind black seed oil's benefits and explore the possible side effects and risks.  Black seeds are also known as black caraway, black cumin, kalonji, and black  onion  seeds.  They come from  Nigella sativa , a small plant with pale purple, blue, or white flowers that grows in Eastern Europe, Western Asia, and the Middle East.  People have used the tiny black seeds of the fruits of  N. sativa  as a natural remedy for thousands of years. The seeds can also flavor curries, pickles, and bread in a similar way to cumin or oregano.  Black seed oil contains thymoquinone, which is an  antioxidant  and anti-inflammatory compound that may also have  tumor-reducing properties .  People can ingest black seed oil in the form of capsules or apply it topically to benefit the skin. It is also possible to add the oil to massage oils, shampoos, homemade skin-care products, and fragrances.  High-quality black seed oil is also suitable for use in cooking, baking, and beverages.  Scientists with a range of specialties have researched the possible benefits of black seed oil.  However, it is important to note that many studies to date have used cells or animals as models, and there is limited research available on the effects of black seed oil in humans.   Research  has shown that black seed supplementation can help lower people's body mass index ( BMI ). The study participants did not report any severe side effects from taking this supplement.  A  systematic review  published in the  Journal of Diabetes &amp; Metabolic Disorders  in 2013 found that black seed oil could be effective in tackling  obesity .  Black seed oil may be beneficial for people with the following skin conditions:  Black seed oil may also hydrate hair, soften skin, and act as a moisturizer, although there is a lack of scientific evidence to confirm these benefits.  Black seed oil may also be beneficial for some health conditions, including the following:   Cancer   Recent studies have shown that the thymoquinone in black seed oil can influence programmed cell death, or apoptosis, in several types of cancer cell. These include  brain cancer ,  leukemia , and  breast cancer  cells.  However, much of the research on the effects of black seed oil on cancer uses cells rather than live humans, so researchers do not yet know how effective the oil may be to treat people with cancer.   Liver and kidney function   According to a  2013 study  on rats, black seed oil may reduce liver and kidney disease complications and improve the organ structures. Researchers do not know if these effects would also occur in humans.   Diabetes   According to an  article  in the  Journal of Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism , black seed oil may have antidiabetic properties and improve blood sugar levels. Again, this study used animal models, so more research is necessary to confirm the effectiveness of the oil in humans.   Infertility   A  placebo-controlled clinical trial  on men with abnormal sperm and  infertility  has found that black seed oil can improve sperm movement and increase sperm count and semen volume.  Although black seed oil seems to offer certain health benefits, this supplement does not replace medication.  People taking medication should talk to their doctor before using herbal supplements, such as black seed oil.  The doctor can advise on possible interactions with the medication and also discuss the potential benefits and side effects of the supplement. It is essential never to stop taking medication without a doctor's advice.  As with any supplement, pregnant or breastfeeding women should talk to their doctor to see if black seed oil is right for them before using it.  With topical use, black seed oil can cause an allergic rash in some people. Therefore, it is vital to test it on a small patch of skin first to ensure that it does not trigger a reaction.  People must also take care to keep the oil away from the eyes, nostrils, and other sensitive body parts.  Swallowing black seed oil can sometimes lead to digestive problems, such as  stomach upset ,  constipation , and vomiting.  To get the safest and most beneficial black seed oil, always choose high-quality, organic black seed oil that is 100-percent pure, therapeutic grade, and USDA certified.  People have used black seed oil for its therapeutic benefits for thousands of years.  Many studies have shown that it may have health and cosmetic benefits for various medical and skin conditions, although these studies often use animal or cell models rather than humans.  More research into the effects of  N. sativa  in humans is necessary to confirm its benefits.  Always talk to a doctor before taking black seed oil, and choose 100-percent pure, therapeutic-grade, USDA-certified organic black seed oil. The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) do not monitor herbs and supplements for quality and purity, so it is vital to be selective when purchasing these products.  Many health stores sell black seed oil, and it is available in both  liquid  and  capsule  form online.   Article last updated by Phil Riches on Fri  9 November 2018.  Visit our  Complementary Medicine / Alternative Medicine  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Complementary Medicine / Alternative Medicine.   
 Ahmad, A., Husain, A., Mujeeb, M., Khan, S. A., Najmi, A. K., Siddique, N. A. … Anwar, F. (2013, May). A review on therapeutic potential of  Nigella sativa : A miracle herb.  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  3 (5), 337–352.  Ahmad, A., Husain, A., Mujeeb, M., Khan, S. A., Najmi, A. K., Siddique, N. A. … Anwar, F. (2013, May). A review on therapeutic potential of  Nigella sativa : A miracle herb.  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  3 (5), 337–352.  Aljabre, S. H. M., Alakloby, O. M., &amp; Randhawa, M. A. (2015, July). Dermatological effects of  Nigella sativa .  Journal of Dermatology &amp; Dermatologic Surgery ,  19 (2), 92–98.  Dwarampudi, L. P., Palaniswamy, D., Nithyanantham, M., &amp; Raghu, P. S. (2012, October–December). Antipsoriatic activity and cytotoxicity of ethanolic extract of  Nigella sativa  seeds.  Pharmacognosy Magazine ,  8 (32), 268–272.  Hamed, M. A., El-Rigal, N. S., &amp; Ali, S. A. (2013, March). Effects of black seed oil on resolution of hepato-renal toxicity induced bybromobenzene in rats.  European Review for Medical and Pharmacological Sciences ,  17 (5), 569–581.  Hasani-Ranjbar, S., Jouyandeh, Z., &amp; Abdollahi, M. (2013, June 19). A systematic review of anti-obesity medicinal plants — an update.  Journal of Diabetes &amp; Metabolic Disorders ,  12 (1), 28.  Kolahdooz, M., Nasri, S., Modarres, S. Z., Kianbakht, S., &amp; Huseini, H. F. (2014, May 15). Effects of Nigella sativa L. seed oil on abnormal semen quality in infertile men: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial.  Phytomedicine ,  21 (6), 901–905.  Mathur, M. L., Gaur, J., Sharma, R., &amp; Haldiya, K. R. (2011, April). Antidiabetic properties of a spice plant  Nigella sativa .  Journal of Endocrinology &amp; Metabolism ,  1 (1), 1–8.  Metformin. (2018, March 15).  Namazi, N., Larijani, B., Ayati, M. H., &amp; Abdollahi, M. (2018, June). The effects of Nigella sativa L. on obesity: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  Journal of Ethnopharmacology,   219 , 173–181.   Nigella Sativa . (2014, August 29).  Omar, N. M., &amp; Mohammed, M. A. (2017, June). The impact of black seed oil on tramadol-induced hepatotoxicity: Immunohistochemical and ultrastructural study.  Acta Histochemica ,  119 (5), 543–554.  Racoma, I. O., Meisen, W. H., Wang, Q.-E., Kaur, B., &amp; Wani, A. A. (2013, September 9). Thymoquinone inhibits autophagy and induces cathepsin-mediated, caspase-independent cell death in glioblastoma cells.  PLoS ONE ,  8 (9), e72882.  Rajput, S., Kumar, B. N., Dey, K. K., Pal, I., Parekh, A., &amp; Mandal, M. (2013, November 13). Molecular targeting of Akt by thymoquinone promotes G(1) arrest through translation inhibition of cyclin D1 and induces apoptosis in breast cancer cells.  Life Sciences ,  93 (21), 783–790.  Salim, L. Z. A., Mohan, S., Othman, R., Abdelwahab, S. I., Kamalidehghan, B., Sheikh, B. Y., &amp; Ibrahim, M. Y. (2013, September 12). Thymoquinone induces mitochondria-mediated apoptosis in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia  in vitro .  Molecules ,  18 (9), 11219–11240.  Yousefi, M., Barikbin, B., Kamalinejad, M., Abolhasani, E., Ebadi, A., Younespour, S., Manouchehrian, M., &amp; Hejazi, S. (2013, December). Comparison of therapeutic effect of topical Nigella with Betamethasone and Eucerin in hand eczema.  Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venerology ,  27 (12), 1498–1504.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gal, Kat. "Benefits of black seed oil."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Nov. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322948.php&gt;    APA  Gal, K. (2018, November 9). "Benefits of black seed oil."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  