 In this article, we look at what  vitamins  and other nutrients a woman needs at different stages in her life.  In the United States, the Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) provide guidance on  nutrition  and set the RDAs and adequate intakes (AIs) for vitamins.  The FNB set the RDA for a specific vitamin when there is enough scientific evidence to establish a daily dietary intake.  This happens when the vitamin is shown to meet the nutritional requirement of  97 to 98 percent  of healthy people within a particular group.  If the FNB do not have sufficient scientific evidence to establish an RDA, they usually recommend an AI instead.  The table below, adapted from the  FNB , lists the RDAs for the different vitamins for women aged between 9 and 50 years. AIs have an asterisk (*). Vitamin amounts are in milligrams (mg) and micrograms (mcg).  The table below, adapted from the  FNB , lists the RDAs for the different vitamins for females aged 51 or older, as well as for those who are pregnant or breastfeeding. Again, an asterisk (*) marks the AIs. Vitamin amounts are in milligrams (mg) and micrograms (mcg).  Everyone's nutritional needs are a bit different. However, there are some vitamins and minerals that women tend to need more of as they age.   Iodine   Iodine is crucial for the healthy development of a baby's brain during pregnancy.  According to a  2012 national survey  by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), women between the ages of 20 and 39 years had lower iodine levels than any other age group in the study.  Women in this age group are the most likely to become pregnant. The RDA for iodine for this group is  150 mcg .   Folate    Folic acid  is essential for women during the years that they can reproduce because it reduces the risk of birth abnormalities, especially those involving the spine and brain.  Folate  also helps create red blood cells and aids in protein digestion.  The  CDC recommend  that pregnant women, and those who may become pregnant, take folic acid supplements. Women 18 and older who are not pregnant need  400 mcg  per day.   Iron   Women who are in perimenopause are at a higher risk of developing iron deficiencies. Iron is a mineral that is essential for reproductive organs and functions. Iron is also important for:  The RDA for iron for women in this age group is  18 mg .   Calcium and vitamin D   As women age, they are at increased risk of developing  osteoporosis , which is a condition that weakens bones and increases the risk of  fractures .  Calcium  and  vitamin D  are essential for good bone health.  The RDA of vitamin D for adult women under 70 years of age is  15 mcg . The RDA for calcium is  1,000 mg  for women aged 19 to 50 years.   Vitamin B-6, B-12, and folic acid   Women aged over 50 years need more B vitamins than other women. B vitamins are crucial to overall health.  Vitamin B-6 is involved in over 100 known enzyme reactions and is essential to immune health. Vitamin B-6, B-12, and folic acid also help with:  Research also indicates B vitamins may lower the risk of many conditions that impact older women more frequently.  According to the FNB,  10 to 30 percent  of older people do not get enough Vitamin B-12 because they cannot absorb it properly. The FNB recommend that people over the age of 50 years should take supplements or consume more foods fortified with vitamin B-12 to meet their RDA.   Calcium and vitamin D   Due to changes in hormone levels, women who are in postmenopause are at even greater risk of developing osteoporosis.  In a  2013 study  that followed 36,282 postmenopausal women in the U.S. over 7 years, researchers concluded that the women who took calcium and vitamin D supplements might have reduced their risk of hip fracture.  The RDA of calcium is  1,200 mg  for women over the age of 50 years.   Vitamin D   Vitamin D is essential to bone health and helps maintain muscle mass. As people age, they naturally begin to lose bone and muscle mass. People over the age of 70 need more vitamin D than younger people.  Many women also have unique dietary requirements depending on their activity levels, medical conditions, or lifestyle choices.  Women who exercise a lot or have physically demanding jobs will generally need to consume more nutrients to stay healthy.   Research  suggests that female athletes and those with active military jobs are at a higher risk of becoming deficient in vitamin D and calcium, which can lead to weakened bones and increased risk of injury.  Very active women may also be a greater risk of iron deficiency.  Very physically active women should speak with a doctor or dietitian about tailoring diet and supplement intake to meet their specific needs.  Excessive blood loss from heavy periods can lead to iron deficiency and  anemia . Women who regularly experience heavy periods may benefit from eating more iron-rich foods or taking supplements.  Anyone who is concerned about their periods or heavy menstrual bleeding should speak to a doctor.  Diet and nutrition are important for pregnancy and breastfeeding. Generally, women who are pregnant or breastfeeding have higher requirements for most vitamins and minerals, including:  To fully meet their nutritional requirements, vegans and vegetarians need to consider a few things when planning meals.  For example, vitamin B-12 is generally only found naturally in animal products. So, to meet their RDA, vegans and vegetarians may need to take supplements or eat foods fortified with B-12, such as some breakfast cereals and milk alternatives.  Vegans and vegetarians may also need to ensure they are getting enough protein, calcium, iron, and zinc. The best way to do this to eat a balanced and varied diet that includes foods, such as:  A  2012 national survey  from the CDC found that Mexican-American and non-Hispanic Black-American women were twice as likely to have low levels of iron than non-Hispanic white women. Women from these groups may benefit from eating more iron-rich foods or taking supplements.  Important nutrients for women and good sources of them include:  A woman's nutritional needs can vary during different stages of her life and according to activity levels, medical conditions, and lifestyle choices.  Generally, the best way for a person to meet their nutritional needs is to eat a balanced and healthful diet.  Anyone who is concerned that they may not be getting enough vitamins and minerals should speak to a doctor or dietitian.    
 10 tips: Healthy eating for vegetarians. (2017, July 25).  10 tips: Healthy eating for vegetarians. (2017, July 25).  Are we getting enough vitamins and minerals? (2014, March 12).  Calcium. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2017, March 2).  CDC's second nutrition report: Infographic. (2012, March 27).  Dietary reference intakes (DRIs): Recommended dietary allowances and adequate intakes, vitamins. (2100).  Folate. Dietary supplement fact sheet. (2018, March 2).  Folic acid: Birth defects COUNT. (2018, February 1).  Iodine. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Iron. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  McClung, J. P., Gaffney-Stomberg, E., &amp; Lee, J. J. (2014, October). Female athletes: A population at risk of vitamin and mineral deficiencies affecting health and performance.  Journal of Trace Elements in Medicine and Biology ,  28 (4), 388–392.  Menopause basics. (2018, May 22).  Menopause treatment. (2018, May 22).  Okereke, O. I., Cook, N. R., Albert, C. M., Van Denburgh, M., Buring, J. E., &amp; Manson, J. E. (2015, April). Effect of long-term supplementation with folic acid and B-vitamins on risk of depression in older women.  The British Journal of Psychiatry ,  206 (4), 324–331.  Osteoporosis. (2017, June 26).  Prentice, R. L., Pettinger, M. B., Jackson, R. D., Wactawski-Wende, A. Z., LaCroix, G. L., Anderson, R. T., … Rossouw, J. E. (2013, February). Health risks and benefits from calcium and vitamin D supplementation: Women's health initiative clinical trial and cohort study. &gt;em&gt;Osteoporosis International,  24 (2), 567 – 580.  Vegetarian diets. (2016, September 26).  Vitamin B6. Dietary supplement fact sheet. (2018, March 2).  Vitamin D. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What vitamins and minerals does a woman need?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Sep. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322960.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2018, September 3). "What vitamins and minerals does a woman need?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  