 An estimated  23.3 percent  of women in the United States had an induced labor in 2012.  In this article, we discuss how a Foley bulb induction works, what to expect, and the possible risks of the procedure.  A Foley bulb induction is a method for inducing labor. It involves inserting a Foley catheter into the cervix to help it dilate so that the baby can pass through the birth canal.  A Foley catheter is a long, rubber tube with an inflatable balloon on one end that a doctor can fill with air or sterile water.  When the balloon inflates inside the cervix, it puts pressure on the cervical cells, helping it dilate and increasing the tissue's response to  oxytocin  and prostaglandins.  Oxytocin and prostaglandins are hormones that help to promote labor.  A Foley bulb induction is a safe procedure. There is  no evidence  of increased risks for infection. Serious complications for the woman and baby are also rare.  There are advantages and disadvantages to this approach, so people should thoroughly discuss the decision to have a Foley bulb induction with their doctor.  The benefits of using a Foley bulb induction include that it is:  The typical Foley bulb induction procedure includes the following steps:  The Foley balloon will usually fall out when the cervix has dilated  3 centimeters  (cm).  Delivery is usually possible once the cervix is  10 cm  dilated and the woman is experiencing frequent uterine contractions.  Doctors should consider a woman's medical history, the course of pregnancy, and the current health status of the fetus when recommending a Foley bulb induction.  According to a  2018 systematic review , the risks of using a Foley bulb to dilate the cervix are low. Looking at 26 studies and 8292 women, the researchers found that the most common adverse effect was pain or discomfort.  The Foley bulb placement may also stimulate contractions, which can be uncomfortable or painful.  Doctors may recommend a Foley bulb induction when a woman has signs of excess  amniotic fluid ,  high blood pressure , or gestational  diabetes .  Sometimes, a doctor may recommend a Foley bulb induction if a pregnant woman meets the following criteria:  Women can choose to have an induction — this is called an elective induction. Common reasons to have an elective induction include labor not starting naturally when the baby is due and living far away from the hospital.  Doctors may recommend other methods to induce labor, such as using a double balloon catheter, or Cook cervical ripening balloon. This device is similar to a Foley catheter but has two balloons instead of one.  They may also insert special medications into the cervix to help induce labor. These medications include:  A doctor may also give a woman oxytocin intravenously to promote uterine contractions.  A Foley bulb induction is one method of inducing labor. There are many reasons — both medical and elective — why a woman may have a Foley bulb induction.  Induced labor is common, occurring in almost a quarter of childbirths. Foley bulb induction is safe and does not have any negative side effects or risks for the woman or baby.    
 Amorosa, J. M. H., Stone, J., Factor, S. H., Booker, W., Newland, M., &amp; Bianco, A. (2017, September). A randomized trial of Foley bulb for labor induction in premature rupture of membranes in nulliparas (FLIP) [Abstract].  American Journal of Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  217 (3), 360.e1–360.e7.  Amorosa, J. M. H., Stone, J., Factor, S. H., Booker, W., Newland, M., &amp; Bianco, A. (2017, September). A randomized trial of Foley bulb for labor induction in premature rupture of membranes in nulliparas (FLIP) [Abstract].  American Journal of Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  217 (3), 360.e1–360.e7.  Bull, M., Hong, C., Roth, P., &amp; Washburn, M. (2018, May). Comparison of outpatient Foley bulb induction to traditional induction of labor [Abstract].  Obstetrics &amp; Gynecology ,  131 , 113S.  Diederen, M., Gommers, J. S. M., Wilkinson, C., Turnbull, D., &amp; Mol, B. W. J. (2018, August). Safety of the balloon catheter for cervical ripening in outpatient care: Complications during the period from insertion to expulsion of a balloon catheter in the process of labour induction: A systematic review.  BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics &amp; Gynaecology ,  125 (9), 1086–1095.  Foley catheter bulb/cook cervical ripening balloon induction. (2015, March 23).  Hutto, S. L. (n.d.). Induction of labor: Indications, methods, challenges and outcomes.  Levine, L. D. (2017, October 7). Induction of labor: An evidence based approach.  Osterman, M. J. K., &amp; Martin, J. A. (2015, November 6). Recent declines in induction of labor by gestational age.  Stages of labor. (2014, May).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What to know about Foley bulb induction."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322956.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2018, August 31). "What to know about Foley bulb induction."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  