 When thinking about the symptoms of  rheumatoid arthritis  (RA), swelling, stiffness, and joint pain often come to mind. However, RA can affect many of the body's organs and cause widespread  inflammation , which may lead to  fevers .  In this article, we explore the causes, symptoms, and treatments of RA fever.  RA is an autoimmune condition, which means that a person's immune system mistakenly attacks its own cells. This results in widespread inflammation in the joints, which causes the familiar stiffness, swelling, and joint pain.  A low-grade fever may also appear as part of the immune system's natural response to fighting off infection.  The exact cause of RA fever remains unclear, but many people assume it is a result of chronic inflammation, which is the hallmark symptom of RA.   Research  suggests that fever is a symptom of inflammation. Indeed, long-lasting, low-grade fever is a  common symptom  of some inflammatory and autoimmune conditions, including RA and  lupus .  During a typical fever, the body's temperature rises to  100–104°F . Doctors usually describe RA fever as a chronic, low-grade fever that lasts for a long time, as opposed to an acute infection, which results in a high fever.  In some cases, people with RA may experience fever as a result of their medication.  Doctors often prescribe medicines that suppress the immune system to treat RA. As a result, a person with RA may be more susceptible to viral or bacterial infections. This means they might be more likely to develop fevers. Anyone with RA who has a temperature of  100–104°F  should seek treatment immediately.  If someone with RA has a low-grade fever that lasts a long time, it may indicate RA fever.  Before diagnosing RA fever, doctors will need to rule out viral and bacterial infections. They will also have to eliminate other inflammatory or autoimmune conditions that can cause fever.  Although the symptoms of  rheumatic fever  are similar to those of RA, the two diseases are not related.  Rheumatic fever is a severe inflammatory disease that develops from complications of  strep throat . Rheumatic fever  mostly affects  children between the ages of 5 and 15. It is uncommon in people over 21.  Like RA, rheumatic fever affects the joints. But unlike RA, rheumatic fever is temporary, usually lasting only a few weeks. Severe cases of rheumatic fever can result in  long-term heart damage , known as rheumatic  heart disease .  People can treat mild symptoms of fever at home with the following methods:  People should always ask their doctor about the safe dosage before taking any medication.  Symptoms of RA may come and go. When RA symptoms are active, it is known as a flare, which can last days or months. The best way to prevent fevers caused by RA is to manage RA inflammation during a flare.  Doctors often prescribe medications, such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) and immunosuppressive drugs, including glucocorticoids and TNF-blocking agents, to treat inflammation caused by autoimmune diseases. These medications are also effective against fever and joint pain.  The role that diet plays in RA remains unclear. However, some  studies  suggest that making changes to the diet can help relieve the symptoms of RA and other autoimmune diseases.  The  Arthritis Foundation  reports that certain foods can help fight inflammation, strengthen the bones, and boost a person's immune system. An anti-inflammatory diet is high in fish, vegetables, and olive oil.  Certain foods, such as red meat, gluten, and sugar can make the symptoms of RA worse. Whereas, diets that focus on plant-based foods may help reduce inflammation.  Diets that may help reduce inflammation  include :  According to the  Centers for Disease Control (CDC) , people should seek medical attention for a fever if:  Additionally, people with RA should contact their doctors if they experience any of the following:  Fever is a common symptom of RA. Although many people with RA experience fevers, there is little research into the link between RA and fevers.  Two possible causes of RA fever include inflammation caused by the body's immune system response and viral or bacterial infections that can occur due to immunosuppressing medication.  Anyone with a temperature higher than 100.4°F should contact the doctor. Staying hydrated and taking over the counter NSAID's, such as ibuprofen, may help reduce fever.    
 Adult onset Still's disease. (2015).  Adult onset Still's disease. (2015).  Anti-inflammatory diet. (n.d.).  Arthritis diet. (n.d.).  Autoimmune diseases. (n.d.).  Badsha, H. (2018, February 8). Role of diet in influencing rheumatoid arthritis disease activity.  The Open Rheumatology Journal ,  12 , 19–28.  Cytokines. (n.d.).  Definitions of symptoms for reportable illness. (2017, March 21).  Evans, S. S., Repasky, E. A., &amp; Fisher, D. T. (2016, March 10). Fever and the thermal regulation of immunity: The immune system feels the heat.  Nature Reviews Immunology ,  15 (6), 335–349.  Garlanda, C., Dinarello, C. A., &amp; Mantovani, A. (2013, December 12). The interleukin-1 family: Back to the future.  Immunity ,  39 (6), 1003–1018.  He, V. Y. F., Condon, J. R., Ralph, A. P., Zhao, Y., Roberts, K., de Dassel, J. L., … Carapetis, J. R. (2016, July 19). Long-term outcomes from acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease: A data-linkage and survival analysis approach.  Circulation ,  134 (3), 222–232.  Inflammatory bowel disease. (2018, May 16).  Khanna, S., Jaiswal, K. S., &amp; Gupta, B. (2017, November 8). Managing rheumatoid arthritis with dietary interventions.  Frontiers in Nutrition ,  4 , 52.  Lubberts, E., &amp; van den Berg, W. B. (2013). Cytokines in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis and collagen-induced arthritis.  Manzel, A., Muller, D. N., Hafler, D. A., Erdman, S. E., Linker, R. A., &amp; Kleinewietfeld, M. (2014, January). Role of "Western diet" in inflammatory autoimmune diseases.  Current Allergy and Asthma Reports ,  14 (1), 404.  Rath, L. (2015, July). The connection between gluten and arthritis.  Sika-Paotonu, D., Beaton, A., Raghu, A., Steer, A., &amp; Carapetis, J. (2017, April 3). Acute rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease.  Thilagar, S., Theyagarajan, R., Sudhakar, U., Suresh, S., Saketharaman, P., &amp; Ahamed, N. (2018, March–April). Comparison of serum tumor necrosis factor-α levels in rheumatoid arthritis individuals with and without chronic periodontitis: A biochemical study.  Journal of Indian Society of Periodontology ,  22 (2), 116–121.  Tunkel, A. R. (2016, September). Fever in adults.  Weinberg, G. A. (2018, January). Rheumatic fever.  What is an inflammation? (2015, January 7).  Yoshida, Y. &amp; Tanaka, T. (2014, January 12). Interleukin 6 and rheumatoid arthritis.  BioMed Research International ,  2014 .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Eske, Jamie. "What is the link between rheumatoid arthritis and fevers?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322905.php&gt;    APA  Eske, J. (2018, August 29). "What is the link between rheumatoid arthritis and fevers?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  