 Not all  birth control  methods are equally effective, meaning that some have higher failure rates than others. In this article, learn about the effectiveness of each type of birth control, as well as what to do if you suspect that you are pregnant.  Different types of birth control have varying levels of effectiveness and fail for different reasons. Birth control options include:  Hormonal methods of birth control work by releasing either a synthetic form of  progesterone  called progestin or a mixture of progestin and synthetic  estrogen . Hormonal birth control prevents pregnancy by:  When hormonal birth control fails, this tends to be due to one of the following reasons:  According to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , the birth control injection tends to be the most effective form of hormonal birth control. Birth control pills, patches, and rings are about 91 percent effective with typical use.  An intrauterine device (IUD) is a T-shaped device that a doctor inserts into the base of the uterus.  Hormonal IUDs emit hormones to prevent pregnancy, while  copper  IUDs change the way that sperm swim. Both types of IUD also block sperm from entering the uterus.  According to the  Association of Reproductive Health Professionals (ARHP) , hormonal IUDs are more than 99 percent effective for up to 3 or 5 years, depending on the brand. The ARHP also state that the copper IUD is more than  99 percent  effective for up to 12 years.  Hormonal IUDs can take up to a week to begin releasing hormones, so they are more likely to fail during the first week after placement.  Additionally, both hormonal and copper IUDs can become displaced and fall out of the cervix, making pregnancy possible on rare occasions.  Barrier methods of birth control work by physically blocking sperm from reaching the egg. These methods include:  The effectiveness of barrier methods vary. According to the  CDC , barrier methods are 12–28 percent effective at preventing pregnancy. Diaphragms and male condoms are the most effective of these methods, while spermicide is the least likely to prevent pregnancy.  Barrier methods usually fail due to user error. In some cases, a person may not use a barrier method early enough, allowing sperm to enter the vagina.  Both types of condom may break or tear, and a diaphragm or sponge can sometimes slip out of place. Each of these incidents can allow sperm to get through and reach the egg.  Natural methods of birth control do not rely on a pill or device to prevent pregnancy. Most natural birth control methods require careful planning and the strict cooperation of both partners.  Natural methods of birth control include:  Natural methods of birth control have a very high failure rate. According to the  CDC , withdrawal has a 22 percent failure rate, while fertility awareness methods fail 24 percent of the time.  According to  Planned Parenthood , the lactational  amenorrhea  method (LAM) may be up to 98 percent effective if the following apply:  All natural methods of birth control rely heavily on body awareness. Some women may make errors in calculating when they are fertile or may not meet the criteria to make LAM an effective birth control method.  It is important to note that the withdrawal method often fails because the pre-ejaculatory fluid can contain sperm.  Women who get pregnant while using birth control may notice the following signs and symptoms:  Pregnancy is just one cause of the signs and symptoms above. Similar signs and symptoms can occur as a result of other conditions, including:  A home pregnancy test can help confirm whether or not a woman is pregnant. Taking a pregnancy test is a quick and painless method of verifying a pregnancy.  Pregnancy tests are available at drugstores, some grocery stores, and  online . It is essential to follow the instructions on the packaging.  Pregnancy tests look for the presence of a hormone called human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), which indicates that a woman is pregnant.  Women should speak to a doctor as soon as possible if they suspect that they are pregnant or have had a positive result on a pregnancy test while on birth control.  Conversely, if a woman misses a period and gets a negative pregnancy test result, she should also seek medical advice unless she is taking a form of birth control that prevents regular periods.  Although they are rare, false negatives are possible. There may be other underlying conditions causing missed periods or other pregnancy symptoms.  The only method of birth control that is 100 percent effective is abstaining from sexual intercourse.  Some methods of birth control are more reliable than others, so anyone who is concerned about their risk of pregnancy should speak with a doctor.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Barrier methods of birth control: Spermicide, condom, sponge, diaphragm, and cervical cap. (2018, March).  Barrier methods of birth control: Spermicide, condom, sponge, diaphragm, and cervical cap. (2018, March).  Breastfeeding. (n.d.).  Copper T IUD [Fact sheet]. (2009, December).  Effectiveness of family planning methods. (n.d.).  Hormonal IUD [Fact Sheet]. (2013, April).  Pregnancy symptoms — Early signs of pregnancy. (2018, June 29).  Pregnancy symptom alternatives. (2018, May 28).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Is it possible to get pregnant while on birth control?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322902.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, August 29). "Is it possible to get pregnant while on birth control?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  