 Lips bumps can vary in size, appearance, and associated symptoms. Treatment depends on the cause, but a person can often use over-the-counter (OTC) medications and home remedies. More serious causes of lip bumps may require medical treatment.  In this article, we look at possible causes of lip bumps, ways to treat them, and when to see a doctor.  There are many possible causes for lip bumps:  The  herpes  simplex virus (HSV) is a common viral infection that can cause  cold sores  on the lip and around the mouth. Cold sores are small fluid-filled blisters that can be painful and itchy.  HSV is contagious, and people can easily become infected through direct contact with the sores.  Cold sores usually clear up on their own within a week or so.  Another viral infection that can cause lip bumps is hand, foot, and mouth disease or HFMD. Symptoms of HFMD include:  HFMD is a common condition in  children under 5 years old . Although very contagious, HFMD is rarely severe. Most people recover without medical treatment within  7 to 10 days .   Syphilis  is a  sexually transmitted disease  that results from a bacterial infection. It often begins with red, painless sores that can appear on the genitals or around the anus but sometimes also on the lips or inside the mouth.  Symptoms can often be mild at first, and many people may not realize they have the disease. Doctors can usually treat syphilis with  antibiotics . However, it can cause severe complications if left untreated.   Oral thrush , or oral  candidiasis , is an infection that results from a type of yeast known as  Candida . This yeast is naturally present in the mouth, but it can sometimes cause problems if it grows too much.  Symptoms of oral thrush can include:  Anyone can get oral thrush, but people with weakened immunes systems are at greater risk than others. A person can often treat oral thrush with an OTC antifungal medication.  An allergic reaction to a specific substance known as an allergen may cause  inflammation  of the lip followed by a bump.  Allergens that can trigger a reaction on the lips include some foods, pet dander, and some lipstick products, such as those containing titanium and other harsh chemicals.  People with this type of reaction usually experience a sudden lip swelling that normally disappears after a while.   Fordyce spots  are clusters of small white or yellowish spots on or near the lips. They are not contagious or painful.  These spots are enlarged sebaceous glands that naturally exist on the lips and other moist tissues, such as the inner mouth cheeks or the genitals, and usually disappear over time.  Canker sores are small, flat ulcers that can form inside the lips or cheeks, on the tongue, or at the base of the gums. They typically develop in adolescents and young adults and can keep reoccurring throughout a person's life.  Canker sores are usually painful but are not contagious. Triggers can include  stress , injuries to the mouth, and certain foods, such as  coffee , chocolate, strawberries, peanuts, and tomatoes. The sores usually go away on their own within a week or so.  Mucoceles, or mucus retention  cysts , are harmless, fluid-filled swellings that form on the lower lip, gums, or the lining inside the mouth.  People usually experience mucoceles after an injury, such as accidentally biting the lip, or from blockage of the salivary gland, which is responsible for draining saliva into the mouth.  Most mucoceles go away on their own without treatment.  Milia are small, white cysts that can form on the skin. They are often seen in newborns and tend to develop on the face, particularly on the nose, chin, or cheeks, but sometimes also along the border of the lips.  Milia result from dead skin cells that become trapped inside small pockets on the skin's surface.  They are harmless, painless, and require no medical treatment, usually disappearing on their own within a month or two.  Perioral dermatitis is a common skin condition that resembles  acne  or  rosacea . People who have this condition develop a small, reddish, bumpy rash around the mouth and on the chin.  Doctors are unsure what causes perioral dermatitis, but the use of face creams containing corticosteroids, certain cosmetic creams, or skin contact with water or toothpaste containing fluoride may be potential triggers.  Rarely, lip bumps can be a symptom of  oral cancer . This type of  cancer  occurs when a  tumor  develops on the lips or lining of the mouth.  Risk factors for oral cancer  include :  Early symptoms of oral cancer include tiny sores or lumps appearing on the lips that do not heal. These sores can grow and spread to the inside of the mouth, gums, tongue, and jaw. Sometimes, they can also turn from white to red.  Anyone who thinks they may have symptoms that could suggest oral cancer should consult a doctor.  Other possible factors of lip bumps include:  Most lip bumps are not a cause for concern, and many types go away on their own without treatment. However, a person should see a doctor if they have:  To diagnose a lip bump, a doctor will likely start by taking the person's medical history and asking about their symptoms. They may ask about the person's smoking or drinking habits, sun exposure, and if they use any creams or medications.  The doctor may then carry out a physical examination of the lips, mouth, and throat to look for areas of tenderness or inflammation. They may also inspect the neck for swollen lymph nodes.  To help with their diagnosis, the doctor may order some tests, such as:  When a biopsy is performed, a doctor removes a small sample of cells from the lesion and sends it for analysis under a microscope  Treatment for bumps on the lips depends on the underlying cause.  For bumps resulting from an infection, the doctor may prescribe:  If an allergy or inflammation is causing the bump, the doctor may recommend antihistamines.  For canker sores, a doctor may prescribe or recommend:  For cold sores, the doctor may recommend:  For perioral dermatitis, the doctor may prescribe an oral or topical antibiotic if the condition is severe. Antibiotics may include tetracycline, doxycycline, minocycline, or erythromycin.  People with oral cancer may require more complex treatments, such as surgery,  radiation therapy , and  chemotherapy .  There are some home remedies and self-care measures that can speed up healing of a lip bump and relieve any discomfort or pain. These may include:  Lip bumps have many possible causes. They are often harmless and will go away on their own. However, some lip bumps may require treatment, and they can sometimes be a sign of a more serious condition, such as oral cancer.  People should see a doctor for any lip bumps that do not clear up within a couple of weeks or occur alongside other troublesome symptoms.    
  Candida  infections of the mouth, throat, and esophagus. (2017, August 4).   Candida  infections of the mouth, throat, and esophagus. (2017, August 4).  Cold sores. (2018, April 23).  Greenberg, S. A., Schlosser, B. J., &amp; Mirowski, G. W. (2017, September−October). Diseases of the lips [Abstract].  Clinics in Dermatology ,  35 (5), e1−e14.  Hand, foot, and mouth disease. (2018, June 28).  Keri, J. E. (2017, August). Perioral dermatitis.  Lip and oral cavity cancer treatment (Adult) (PDQ®) — patient version. (2018, June 28).  Murchison, D. F. (2015, June). Lip sores.  Murchison, D. F. (2016, November). Mouth growths.  Murchison, D. F. (2016, November). Mouth sores and inflammation.  Murchison, D. F. (2016, November). Recurrent aphthous stomatitis.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "What can cause a bump on the lip?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Sep. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322995.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, September 6). "What can cause a bump on the lip?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  