 Several  states in America  have recently allowed healthcare professionals to use cannabis as a treatment for various medical conditions. Others are also currently considering their position on the medical use of cannabis.  With the legislation around cannabis use rapidly changing, the question of whether it can help with sleep is becoming ever more critical.  Cannabis is known to induce a state of relaxation and drowsiness that could help to induce sleep.  Research on the possible sleep effects of cannabis date back to the 1970s, but high-quality studies are scarce because of the drug's legal status.  The ongoing changes in the legality of cannabis are being driven by changes in attitude and by a greater understanding of its potential medicinal use.  There are many different components found in cannabis. The two most commonly studied elements are:  Most medical research has focused on CBD, which has several proven health benefits.  A  study  in 147 participants with and without sleeping difficulties found that cannabis use reduced the time taken to get to sleep in both groups.  A further  2014 study  looked at the therapeutic effect of CBD in people whose sleep was disrupted by  anxiety , such as in the case of  post-traumatic stress disorder  (PTSD).  The research team noted that, at the time, PTSD was an acceptable condition for medicinal cannabis use in five states, and cannabis use for medical reasons was growing in the U.S.  The study concluded that many people with PTSD used cannabis to help them sleep. But the long-term consequence of the habit was not known, and more research in this area was needed.  But a  2017 review  of the scientific research into cannabis use for sleep and sleep disorders concludes that the overall picture is far from clear and more studies are needed.  A  study , using rodents only, found that CBD could induce a deeper sleep state in rats that researchers had subjected to anxiety.  But an earlier  study  in humans found that CBD produced a more alert state, while THC acted as a sedative.  A further 2016  study  found that daily cannabis use had a negative impact on sleep quality in young adults who had no reported sleeping difficulties.  Again, the researchers in this last study  concluded  that more large-scale research was needed to assess the true impact of cannabis on sleep.  To further cloud the picture, much of the current support for cannabis as an aid to sleep is anecdotal. So, further investigation is needed to find out if the benefits are real or not.  It may also be the case that cannabis is only helpful for people with sleep disturbances, such as  insomnia .  People sometimes smoke cannabis with tobacco, which is a known carcinogen.  It is also possible for cannabis use to become  addictive  and for it to have a negative impact on  mental wellbeing , particularly in people who may be susceptible to anxiety or other  mental health  problems.  Taking cannabis to sleep is not a natural method of inducing sleep, and it can lead to a dependency on the drug.  For more long-term solutions to problems falling asleep, people may want to try some of the following natural methods:  When taking cannabis medicinally for sleep, it is best to choose a method that is most comforting. This can vary from person-to-person.  People should consult their doctor for advice on how best to take cannabis if they are considering its medicinal use for a sleep problem.    
 Babson, K. A., Sottile, J., &amp; Morabito, D. (2017, April). Cannabis, cannabinoids, and sleep: A review of the literature.  Current Psychiatry Reports ,  19 (4), 23.  Babson, K. A., Sottile, J., &amp; Morabito, D. (2017, April). Cannabis, cannabinoids, and sleep: A review of the literature.  Current Psychiatry Reports ,  19 (4), 23.  Bonn-Miller, M. O., Babson, K. A., &amp; Vandrey, R. (2015, March 1). Using cannabis to help you sleep: Heightened frequency of medical cannabis use among those with PTSD.  Drug and Alcohol Dependence ,  136 , 162–165.  Conroy, D. A., Kurth, M. E., Strong, D. R., Brower, K. J., &amp; Stein, M. D. (2017, April 1). Marijuana use patterns and sleep among community-based young adults.  Journal of Addictive Diseases ,  35 (2), 135–143.  FDA and marijuana. (2018, June 25).  Hsiao, Y.-T., Yi, P.-L., Li, C.-L., &amp; Chang, F.-C. (2012). Effect of cannabidiol on sleep disruption induced by the repeated combination tests consisting of open field and elevated plus-maze in rats.  Neuropharmacology ,  62 (1), 373–384.  Marijuana and public health. (2018 February 26).  Nicholson, A. N., Turner, C., Stone, B. M., &amp; Robson, P. J. (2004). Effect of Δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol on nocturnal sleep and early-morning  behavior  in young adults.  Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology ,  24 (3), 305–313.  Tringale, R., &amp; Jensen, C. (2011). Cannabis and insomnia.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "Can cannabis be a sleep aid?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322945.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, August 31). "Can cannabis be a sleep aid?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  