 A  2011 study  of 117 breastfeeding women found that 4.5 percent experienced clogged ducts at some point during the first year of breastfeeding. A duct that remains clogged can cause mastitis, a painful infection in the breasts.  Although a clogged milk duct can be painful, it is often treatable with home remedies. In this article, we look at the symptoms and causes of clogged ducts, home remedies to try, and when to see a doctor.  The most common symptoms of a clogged duct include:  Occasionally, a clogged duct can cause a low  fever . As a fever  can also occur due  to a breast infection, people who experience fever alongside breast pain should see a doctor.  Clogged milk ducts are most common in women who are breastfeeding, have recently given birth and opted not to breastfeed, or have recently stopped breastfeeding.  Blocked ducts are more likely to occur if a breastfeeding woman does not thoroughly drain the breast as this can allow milk to accumulate and block the duct.  Women experiencing other breastfeeding difficulties, such as oversupply, a baby with a weak latch, or pain that impedes frequent nursing, are more vulnerable to clogged ducts.  However, anyone who is breastfeeding can experience a clogged duct. Some  risk factors  include:  Occasionally, people can get a clogged milk duct that is  unrelated to breastfeeding .  It is usually possible to treat the symptoms of a clogged duct at home. Most clogged ducts resolve within  1–2 days , with or without treatment.  Regular, consistent breastfeeding is the fastest way to resolve a clogged duct. It is essential to empty the breast with the clogged duct completely during each breastfeeding session. A fully drained breast feels lighter and produces little or no milk on squeezing.  Using a breast pump to express milk after each breastfeeding session can help if the baby has a weak latch or cannot drain the breast entirely.  Some other strategies that can clear the clogged duct and relieve pain include:  Sometimes a clogged duct is intensely painful or does not go away with home remedies. A clogged duct that does not resolve can lead to mastitis, which is  inflammation  of the breasts due to infection. Although mastitis can be painful, a doctor can usually treat it with  antibiotics .  People should not try to treat mastitis or suspected mastitis at home. Seeing a doctor as soon as possible for treatment will reduce the risk of complications.  The most important strategy for preventing clogged ducts is allowing the baby to drain each breast completely during a breastfeeding session.  A newborn can take 15–30 minutes to empty the breast, so patience is key.  Some signs that the baby has drained the breast include:  Some other steps that can reduce the risk of a clogged duct include:  Women who have an oversupply of breast milk, which is more milk than the baby needs, have a higher risk of developing a clogged duct. A lactation consultant can offer advice on reducing this excessive supply.  A clogged duct can be painful, but it is not a medical emergency. However, it is best to see a doctor if the following symptoms occur:  A clogged duct can often signify an unsuitable breastfeeding position or a problem with the baby's latch. These issues are common when the woman or baby is new to breastfeeding and still mastering this skill.  Working with a lactation consultant can help breastfeeding women reduce the risk of a clogged duct.  La Leche League  meetings may also be helpful.  These meetings offer women the chance to try a variety of suitable breastfeeding positions and seek advice from people with lots of breastfeeding experience.    
 Blocked ducts. (n.d.).  Blocked ducts. (n.d.).  Blocked ducts and mastitis. (2017, June).  Duct ectasia. (2017, September 20).  La Leche League USA. (n.d.).  Moldenhauer, J. S. (2018, June). Mastitis.  Strong, G. D. (2011, November–December). Provider management and support for breastfeeding pain [Abstract].  Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic &amp; Neonatal Nursing ,  40 (6), 753–764.  White spot on the nipple. (2015, March).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What to do about clogged milk ducts."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Sep. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322965.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, September 3). "What to do about clogged milk ducts."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  