 Eating certain foods may help increase a person's platelet count naturally.  Foods to eat to increase platelet count include:  Supplements of these nutrients are available and may help raise a person's platelet count.  Avoiding specific products, such as alcohol and the artificial sweetener aspartame, can also help to increase platelet count.  Several vitamins and minerals can encourage a higher platelet count, including:   Folate  is an essential B vitamin for healthy blood cells.  Folic acid  is the synthetic form of folate.  According to the  National Institutes of Health (NIH) , adults require at least 400 micrograms (mcg) of folate daily, and pregnant women need 600 mcg.  Foods containing folate or folic acid include:  People should be careful not to consume excessive amounts of folic acid from supplements or fortified foods because high levels can interfere with vitamin B-12 function.  Eating lots of folate-rich foods does not cause problems.  Vitamin B-12 is necessary for the formation of red blood cells.  Low levels of B-12 in the body may also contribute to low platelet counts.  According to the  NIH , people aged 14 and over require 2.4 mcg of vitamin B-12 daily. Pregnant and breastfeeding women require up to 2.8 mcg.  Vitamin B-12 is present in animal-based products, including:  Dairy products also contain vitamin B-12, but some  research  suggests that cow's milk can affect the production of platelets.  Vegetarians and vegans can get vitamin B-12 from:  Vitamin C plays a vital role in the immune function. Vitamin C also helps the platelets work correctly and enhances the body's ability to absorb iron, which is another essential nutrient for platelets.  Many fruits and vegetables contain vitamin C, including:  Note that heat destroys vitamin C, so it may be best to eat vitamin C-rich foods raw when possible.   Vitamin D  contributes to the proper functioning of the bones, muscles, nerves, and immune system.  According to the  Platelet Disorder Support Association (PDSA) , vitamin D also plays an essential role in the function of the  bone marrow  cells that produce platelets and other blood cells.  The body can produce vitamin D from sun exposure, but not everybody receives enough sunlight each day, especially if they live in colder climates or northern regions. Adults aged 19 to 70 require  15 mcg  of vitamin D daily.  Food sources of vitamin D include:  Strict vegetarians and vegans can get vitamin D from:  Vitamin K is essential for blood clotting and bone health.  According to an informal PDSA survey,  26.98 percent  of people who took vitamin K reported an improvement in their platelet counts and bleeding symptoms.  Adequate intake of vitamin K for adults, aged 19 and over is  120 mcg  for males and 90 mcg for females.  Foods rich in vitamin K include:  Iron is essential for healthy levels of red blood cells and platelets.  Research  carried out on toddlers and teenagers with iron deficiency  anemia  suggests that iron might increase platelet count in those with this condition.  According to the  NIH , males over 18 and females over 50 require 8 milligrams (mg) of iron daily, while females aged 19 to 50 need 18 mg. Women need 27 mg per day during pregnancy.  Iron-rich foods include:  Eat vegetarian sources of iron, such as beans, lentils, and tofu, with a source of vitamin C to increase absorption rates. Avoid eating calcium-rich foods and taking  calcium  supplements at the same time as sources of iron.  Certain foods and drinks can reduce platelet counts including:  Some research reports that certain supplements can increase platelet counts:  Supplements include:  Chlorophyll is a green pigment found in plants. Taking chlorophyll may alleviate some of the symptoms of a low platelet count, although research on its effectiveness is limited.  Algae-based supplements, such as chlorella, are rich in chlorophyll. The  PDSA  mentions chlorella as a potential supplement for those with low platelet count.  19 percent of people in their survey reported increased platelet counts, and 33 percent reported improvements in their bleeding symptoms after taking chlorella.  In  research  on mice,  papaya  leaf extract significantly increased platelet and red blood cell counts when compared to other mice. However, more research is needed, especially on human subjects.  Papaya leaf extract is available in health stores in pill form.  Melatonin is a hormone produced by the body that helps regulate the body's internal clock.  Some  animal research  reports a link between melatonin and increased platelet levels. However, more research is necessary to determine how useful it is for people with low platelet counts.  Melatonin is available in liquid, tablet, or topical form in health stores.  The symptoms of a low platelet count only occur when levels are particularly low. Mildly low levels often do not produce any symptoms.  When symptoms occur they include:  People who experience symptoms should contact their doctor immediately. Low platelet count can cause severe complications without treatment.  People with a low platelet count may be able to improve their condition by eating specific foods and taking supplements. It can also be helpful to avoid alcohol, aspartame, and other foods that decrease platelet levels.  However, always seek medical advice first as diet alone may not be enough to restore normal platelet counts.    
 Folate. Dietary supplement fact sheet. (2018, March 2).  Folate. Dietary supplement fact sheet. (2018, March 2).  Iron. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Lekamlage, S., Dharmarathna, S. L. C. A., Wickramasinghe, S., Waduge, R. N., Rajapakse, R. P. V. J., &amp; Kularatne, S. A. M. (2013, September). Does  Carica papaya  leaf-extract increase the platelet count? An experimental study in a murine model.  Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine ,  3 (9), 720–724.  Morris, V. K., Spraker, H. L., Howard, S. C., Ware, R. E., &amp; Reiss, U. M. (2010, August). Severe thrombocytopenia with iron deficiency anemia.  Pediatric Hematology and Oncology ,  27 (5), 413–419.  Result 4 - acupressure, acupuncture, Vitamin C, Vitamin K. (n.d.).  Royer, D. J., George, J. N., &amp; Terrell, D. R. (2010, January 3). Thrombocytopenia as an adverse effect of complementary and alternative medicines, herbal remedies, nutritional supplements, foods, and beverages.  European Journal of Haematology ,  84 (5), 421–429.  Vitamin B12. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, August 22).  Vitamin D. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Vitamin K. Fact sheet for health professionals. (2018, March 2).  Vitamins and other supplements. (n.d.).  Yang, M., Zhou, M., Ye, J. Y., Cheung, Y. F., Chan, S., Ha, S. Y., &amp; Chan, G. C. (2008). The effect and underlying mechanism of melatonin on platelet formation and survival in a thrombocytopenic model [Abstract].  Blood ,  112 (11), 1241.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "How can I increase my platelet count naturally?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322937.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, August 31). "How can I increase my platelet count naturally?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  