 This article explores possible reasons for an absence of menstruation. It also covers when to see a doctor and the treatment options.  A period, or menstrual bleeding, is the womb lining exiting the body.  Amenorrhea  is the absence of menstrual bleeding.  During the menstrual cycle, hormones cause an ovary to produce and release an egg. The ovary also releases the hormones  estrogen  and  progesterone .  Estrogen primarily causes the womb lining to thicken, while progesterone prepares the womb for the implantation of an egg.  If no sperm fertilizes the egg, pregnancy does not occur, and the egg dissolves. The levels of estrogen and progesterone decline, and the womb lining falls away. It leaves the body through the vagina, giving the person a period.  If a female reaches the  age of 16  without any periods, this is called primary amenorrhea.  Sometimes a person will have no menstrual bleeding for more than three cycles despite having had regular periods until then. If there is no natural cause for this, such as pregnancy, they have secondary amenorrhea. Secondary amenorrhea occurs in approximately  3–5 percent  of adult women.  Natural causes of amenorrhea include pregnancy, breastfeeding, and  menopause . In these cases, there is no need to see a doctor.  When a person has regular menstrual bleeding, this means that the ovaries, uterus, hypothalamus, and pituitary gland are working well.  The absence of menstruation can indicate a problem with one of these parts of the body, or there may be an abnormality of the genital tract. Lifestyle factors, an underlying health condition, and some medications can also cause amenorrhea.  Possible causes of an absence of menstruation include:   1. Birth control   Some  birth control  pills may cause missed periods or the complete absence of menstruation.  This can occur in the first few months of taking a new pill or if a person does not take any  placebo  pills or have a pill-free week each month.  Some of the other birth control methods, such as the hormonal intrauterine device (IUD), implant, and injection can also result in amenorrhea.   2. Nutritional deficiencies    Malnutrition  may affect how the hypothalamus and pituitary gland function, which can lead to amenorrhea.   3. Low body weight   Having a low  body weight  can also prevent the hypothalamus and pituitary gland from functioning correctly. This can lead to a type of amenorrhea known as  functional hypothalamic amenorrhea .   4. Stress    Stress  can affect hormone levels in the body, and it is another cause of functional hypothalamic amenorrhea. People with this type of amenorrhea also have  higher rates  of  depression  and  anxiety .   5. Excessive exercise   Excessive exercise is the third cause of functional hypothalamic amenorrhea. Some  research  estimates that half of the women who exercise regularly experience minor menstrual disorders.   6. Eating disorders   Having an eating disorder, such as  anorexia  or  bulimia , may cause a person's periods to stop. This absence of menstruation is usually due to a nutritional deficiency or very low body weight.   7. Excessive weight gain   Rapidly gaining weight can cause a hormonal imbalance, which can lead to temporary amenorrhea.   8. Mental health medications   Some  antidepressants  and mood stabilizers may affect how the hypothalamus and pituitary gland work. If they are not producing the right levels of hormones, a person's periods may stop.   9. Polycystic ovary syndrome   Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a hormonal disorder that affects  6–8 percent  of women worldwide.  PCOS causes a range of symptoms including:  PCOS may also lead to hyperandrogenemia, which is when a female has high levels of male hormones. A  2017 study  of 266 women with PCOS found that over 78 percent of them had hyperandrogenemia.  Hyperandrogenemia may affect menstrual cycles and lead to amenorrhea.   10. Premature ovarian failure   Premature ovarian failure is when the ovaries stop working correctly before the  age of 40 .  This condition may lead to missed periods. However, it is not the same as early menopause, which is when menstruation stops completely.   11. Turner syndrome   Turner syndrome is a genetic disorder. People with this condition may have underdeveloped ovaries and an absence of menstruation.   12. Genital tract defects   Genital tract defects are structural problems that can cause an absence of menstruation or make it difficult for the menstrual blood to exit the vagina.  The  most common  female genital tract defect is an imperforate hymen, which is a hymen with no opening that closes off the vagina and does not allow blood to leave it during a period.   13. Pituitary gland problems   The pituitary gland releases the hormones that control the menstrual cycle. Issues with the pituitary gland, including those below, may lead to amenorrhea:   Radiation therapy  may also affect cells in the pituitary gland and cause amenorrhea.  People who miss three periods in a row but are not pregnant or likely to be entering menopause should see a doctor. This is especially important if they are experiencing additional symptoms.  People who have not started menstruating by the age of 16 should also speak to a doctor.  A doctor will recommend the best course of treatment for amenorrhea after diagnosing its underlying cause.  Primary amenorrhea is often due to late  puberty , which usually resolves over time. However, a doctor can help determine if there is another underlying cause for periods not beginning. If a hormonal imbalance is responsible, the doctor may prescribe hormonal therapy.  The causes of functional hypothalamic amenorrhea may require lifestyle changes:  If a person has amenorrhea due to rapid weight gain, the doctor is likely to recommend a calorie-controlled diet and exercise.  In cases where amenorrhea develops due to a structural problem, surgery and an individualized treatment plan may be necessary.  Most causes of absence of menstruation are treatable. Following the treatment plan that a doctor recommends can help many people with amenorrhea regain a regular menstrual cycle.    
 Alexiou, E., Hatziagelaki, E., Pergialiotis, V., Chrelias, C., Kassanos, D., Siristatidis, C. ... Trakakis, E. (2017, March 1). Hyperandrogenemia in women with polycystic ovary syndrome: Prevalence, characteristics and association with body mass index [Abstract].  Hormone Molecular Biology and Clinical Investigation ,  29 (3), 105–111.  Alexiou, E., Hatziagelaki, E., Pergialiotis, V., Chrelias, C., Kassanos, D., Siristatidis, C. ... Trakakis, E. (2017, March 1). Hyperandrogenemia in women with polycystic ovary syndrome: Prevalence, characteristics and association with body mass index [Abstract].  Hormone Molecular Biology and Clinical Investigation ,  29 (3), 105–111.  Craniopharyngioma. (2018, February).  Meczekalski, B., Katulski, K., Czyzyk, A., Podfigurna-Stopa, A., &amp; Maciejewska-Jeske, M. (2014, September 9). Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea and its influence on women's health.  Journal of Endocrinological Investigation ,  37 (11), 1049–1056.  Mwenda, A. S. (2013, May 21). Imperforate hymen — a rare cause of acute abdominal pain and tenesmus: Case report and review of the literature.  The Pan African Medical Journal ,  15 , 28.  Pinkerton, J. V. (2017, September). Amenorrhea.  Sharif, E., Rahman, S., Zia, Y., &amp; Rizk, N. M. (2017). The frequency of polycystic ovary syndrome in young reproductive females in Qatar.  International Journal of Women's Health ,  9   , 1–10.  Sheikhansari, G., Aghebati-Maleki, L., Nouri, M., Jadidi-Niaragh, F., &amp; Yousefi, M. (2018, June). Current approaches for the treatment of premature ovarian failure with stem cell therapy.  Biomedicine &amp; Pharmacotherapy ,  102 , 254–262.  Turner syndrome. (2018, August 28).  What causes amenorrhea? (2017, January 31).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "What causes an absence of menstruation?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Sep. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322961.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2018, September 3). "What causes an absence of menstruation?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  