 In this article, we look at the different types of ear infections and what makes them chronic. We also discuss the ways to treat and prevent a chronic ear infection.  Viruses cause most ear infections, although sometimes bacteria are the culprit. There are  three main types  of ear infections that affect the middle ear:  Another form of chronic ear infection is called chronic suppurative  otitis media  (CSOM). People with CSOM have recurring and persistent ear discharge. The condition  usually develops  as a complication of AOM with perforation of the eardrum in childhood.  People with untreated or chronic ear infections can develop several complications. Repeated ear  inflammation  can cause the following conditions:  A person's symptoms will differ depending on the type of ear infection they have. The symptoms may be present in one or both ears and may come and go.  A chronic ear infection usually develops when a person has:  The symptoms of an acute ear infection include:  Children may also show signs of irritability. They may also cry more frequently and tug at the affected ear.  Someone with a chronic ear infection does not usually have any visible symptoms. However, long-term OME can cause hearing problems and other difficulties, particularly in children. These include:  Doctors consider OME to be chronic if it lasts for  3 months  or more.  According to a  2016 guideline , OME usually disappears by itself within 3 months.  They also report that 30–40 percent of children experience OME more than once, and 5–10 percent of episodes last for 1 year or longer.  When someone has CSOM, they have a hole in their eardrum. When the eardrum bursts, it releases tension, so not everyone with CSOM will feel  pain . However, people with AOM or recurrent AOM will likely experience pain.  The symptoms of CSOM include:  People with CSOM are unlikely to have a fever.  Chronic ear infections develop from a long-lasting or recurrent acute ear infection. Preventing acute ear infections can help prevent chronic ear infection.  Acute ear infections happen when the eustachian tube, a tube that runs from the middle ear to the back of the throat, becomes clogged.  Children are more likely to be affected by ear infections because these tubes are shorter and narrower, so they become clogged more easily.  Fluid build-up in the middle ear can become infected, which will cause pain and other symptoms.  Causes of ear infections  include :  Risk factors for chronic ear infections  include :  Busy day-care centers can also increase the risk of children developing ear infections, as they come into more contact with viruses and bacteria.  Some ear infections resolve on their own, while others may need further treatment. Anyone who still has an ear infection after several days should seek medical attention to find out the type of ear infection they have.  Generally, OME goes away  on its own . The American Academy of Otolaryngology  recommend against  using  antibiotics , antihistamines, and decongestants for treatment of OME. However, antibiotics may benefit people with acute ear infections.  Treatments for chronic ear infections include the following:  Dry mopping, also called an aural toilet, is when a doctor flushes and cleans the ear of wax and discharge.  Doctors think this  speeds up recovery  from some types of chronic ear infections, such as CSOM, as it keeps the ear canal free of debris and discharge.  People who have an ear infection may find relief in taking over-the-counter pain and fever reduction medication, such as acetaminophen or non-steroidal anti-inflammatories ( NSAIDs ). Children should not take  aspirin .  Antibiotics only work if bacteria are the cause of the infection, and may not be helpful for people with chronic ear infections.  Many professionals  recommend  "watchful waiting" to allow the infection to clear up by itself. Some doctors may prescribe antibiotics for a  bacterial infection  if there is drainage from the ear, or if the infection is in both ears of a child under 2 years old.  People with infections that have resulted in a punctured eardrum or a hole in the middle ear, such as CSOM, may benefit from prescribed antibiotic ear drops, such as  ciprofloxacin .  However, antibiotics can have side effects, so taking them unnecessarily can make a person feel worse, rather than better. Also, over time, the bacteria that cause some ear infections can become more resistant to antibiotics.  Doctors may recommend antifungal ear drops or ointments if a fungal infection causes a person's symptoms.  Also known as tympanocentesis, an ear tap involves removing fluid from behind the eardrum and testing the  fluid to identify  what is causing the ear infections.  In situations where a person has a recurring ear infection or one that does not respond to treatment, a doctor might perform a surgical procedure to insert a pressure equalization (PE) tube into the eardrum.  This allows fluid to move out of the middle ear and relieves pressure in the eardrum. Sometimes, these tubes fall out on their own, other times a doctor will need to remove them.  An adenoidectomy is a procedure to remove the adenoids. The adenoids are glands at the back of the nose that help fight infections.  However, if they become enlarged due to an infection, they can cause an earache and a build-up of fluid.  If this happens regularly, a doctor may perform an adenoidectomy to help reduce chronic ear infections.  According to a  2014 study , children under the age of 2 with recurrent AOM and those who are over the age of 4 with persistent OME are most likely to benefit from adenoidectomy.  The following tips may help prevent relapses of chronic ear infections:  Different types of chronic ear infections require different treatments. Many resolve without treatment.  The American Academy of Otolaryngology recommend watchful waiting to delay prescribing antibiotics for chronic ear infections that are caused by bacteria. However, doctors may prescribe them for some acute ear infections  Always consult a doctor when experiencing symptoms of an ear infection. Be sure to make another visit if an ear infection gets worse, lasts more than 3 days, or symptoms change.    
 Bhatia, K., Vaid, L., &amp; Taneja, H. C. (2016, December). Effect of type 1 tympanoplasty on the quality of life of CSOM patients.  Indian Journal of Otolaryngology and Head &amp; Neck Surgery, 68 (4), 468–474.  Bhatia, K., Vaid, L., &amp; Taneja, H. C. (2016, December). Effect of type 1 tympanoplasty on the quality of life of CSOM patients.  Indian Journal of Otolaryngology and Head &amp; Neck Surgery, 68 (4), 468–474.  Boonacker, C. W. B., Rovers, M. M., Browning, G. G., Hoes, A. W., Schilder, A. G. M., &amp; Burton, M. J. (2014, January). Adenoidectomy with or without grommets for children with otitis media: An individual patient data meta-analysis.  Health Technology Assessment . Southampton (UK): NHIR Journals Library.  Cholesteatoma. (n.d.).  Chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM). (n.d.).  Earaches and otitis media. (n.d.)  Ear infections in children. (2015, February).  Middle ear infection: Overview. (2016, December 1).  Middle ear infection: Will antibiotics help relieve symptoms in babies and toddlers? (2016, December 1).  Morris, P. (2012, August 6). Chronic suppurative otitis media.  BMJ Clinical Evidence .  Oladeji, S. M., Babatunde, O. T., Babatunde, L. B, &amp; Sogebi, O. A. (2015, April–June). Knowledge of cerumen and effect of ear self-cleaning among health workers in a tertiary hospital.  Journal of the West African College of Surgeons ,  5 (2), 117–133.  Rosenfeld, R. M., Shin, J. J., Schwartz, S. R., Coggins, R., Gagnon, L., Hackell, J. M., ... Corrigan, M. D. (2016, February 1). Clinical practice guideline: Otitis media with effusion (update).  Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery ,  154 (1), S1-S41.  Secondhand smoke and children. (n.d.).  Shamweel, A. (2013, November). Antibiotics in chronic suppurative otitis media: A bacteriologic study.  Egyptian Journal of Ear, Nose, Throat and Allied Sciences,   14 (3), 191–194.  Treatment for acute middle ear infections. (2016, December 1).  Tympanocentesis for ear infections. (2017, May 4).  Venekamp R. P., Sanders S. L., Glasziou P. P., Del Mar C. B., &amp; Rovers M. M. (2015, April 26). Antibiotics for acute otitis media in children.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ,  6 .  Walker, R. E., Bartley, J., Flint, D., Thompson, J. M. D., &amp; Mitchell, E. A. (2017, January 6). Determinants of chronic otitis media with effusion in preschool children: A case–control study.  BMC Pediatrics ,  17 (4).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Stinson, Adrienne. "What to know about chronic ear infections."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322913.php&gt;    APA  Stinson, A. (2018, August 29). "What to know about chronic ear infections."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  