  RSV  can have serious consequences in  certain groups , however, including:  RSV is a virus that is present in droplets from a person's coughs and sneezes. These germs can spread directly from person to person, or when someone comes into contact with a contaminated item, like a doorknob or toy.  It is more prevalent in the winter and spring months than at other times of the year.  In this article, we examine RSV in babies, including the symptoms they may experience and what caregivers can do to help treat them. We also take a look at when to see a doctor and how to prevent the virus from spreading.  The symptoms of RSV are similar to a bad cold and can include:  RSV is also the  most common cause  of bronchiolitis and  pneumonia  in babies younger than 1 year. These conditions cause swelling in the lungs, which can lead to the airways filling up with mucus. This combination of mucus and swelling can make breathing difficult.  Every infant experiences RSV a little differently. Some have very mild symptoms while others can have life-threatening issues.  RSV is a virus, and there are few specific treatments to help cure it.   Antibiotics  do not work on viruses, and there is no vaccine to prevent the disease. Instead, RSV treatment generally aims to manage the symptoms and prevent complications.  Most cases of RSV in babies go away without treatment after  1 to 2 weeks.  Sometimes, caregivers can treat babies at home until the virus passes.  Some simple home remedies can help, including:  Always speak to a doctor before giving cold or cough medications to children and babies. Some medicines contain substances that are not suitable for children under 6 years old. People should avoid giving most cold and cough medicines to infants under 2 years old.  If a baby experiences severe symptoms of RSV, treatment options that can provide relief include:   Oxygen   If a baby is having difficulty breathing, their blood oxygen level will drop, which can be very dangerous if not treated.  When a baby is struggling to breathe, they will need to use a lot more energy. Eventually, the baby can go into respiratory failure and stop breathing, which is an emergency situation.  Giving extra oxygen can increase blood oxygen levels and reduce the effort needed to breathe.   Fluids   Babies that struggle with breathing may not have the energy to eat or find it difficult to drink enough fluids. Very young babies, especially sick ones, can become dehydrated very quickly.  If the baby is not drinking enough, they may need intravenous hydration or a feeding tube to help them stay hydrated.   Medication   In some situations, doctors can give medications to open the baby's airways to help them breathe.  Very sick or high-risk babies may need antiviral medications to help the immune system attack or clear the virus from their system.  It is essential to call the doctor immediately or seek emergency care if the baby is showing any signs of breathing difficulty, such as:  Other reasons to see a doctor include if the baby:  RSV is highly contagious, meaning that it spreads between people very easily.  Some straightforward measures can help people avoid contracting the disease or spreading it to others. A few of these measures include:  In most cases, RSV causes a mild, cold-like illness in babies or young children who will experience a full recovery.  However, RSV can cause life-threatening complications in some babies, particularly those at risk for respiratory disease or premature infants.  Caregivers who suspect their children may have RSV should watch them closely for breathing difficulties and dehydration and speak to their doctor if they have any concerns.    
 About bronchiolitis. (2015, October).  About bronchiolitis. (2015, October).  Managing and preventing RSV. (n.d.).  Respiratory syncytial virus. (2018, June 26).  Respiratory syncytial virus infection (RSV): Symptoms and care. (2018, June 26).  RSV in infants and young children. (2018, June 26).  RSV: When it's more than just a cold. (2015, November 21).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "How to spot and treat RSV in babies."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322915.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2018, August 30). "How to spot and treat RSV in babies."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  