 Drool rash can be uncomfortable for a baby, but parents and caregivers can help them get relief with some simple home remedies.  In this article, we look at what drool rash is, as well as how to treat and prevent it. We also cover when to see a doctor.  Drooling, also known as sialorrhea, is common in healthy infants. It often stops when they are around  15 to 18 months  old.  Excessive saliva around the baby's mouth, cheeks, chin, and beyond can irritate the skin and cause drool rash.  Drool rash is not contagious and is not linked to any underlying medical conditions. However, it can result in red, itchy, bumpy patches on the skin, which babies may find painful and uncomfortable. These patches may be moist or dry.  Drooling is a natural process and may also be a side effect of teething, which is when a baby's teeth start to break through their gums. Drooling may begin long before the teeth come in and persist long after, however.  Besides teething, babies may also naturally drool due to their:  Parents and caregivers can take simple measures to reduce the impact of drool rash. The best way to treat drool rash is to keep the baby's skin dry throughout the day and prevent new rashes from developing.  Simple measures that can help manage drool rash include:  A variety of teething toys are available to  purchase online .  Drool rash can be difficult to prevent, particularly as many infants and toddlers drool naturally. However, there are some things a person can do to help prevent or minimize drool rash, including:  Drooling is natural in babies and young children. While drool rash may be uncomfortable, it is not usually a cause for concern. However, a person should speak to a doctor if the baby:  It is also best to seek medical advice if the rash is severe, getting worse, or seems unusually itchy or painful.  It is normal for infants to drool, often starting when they are around  3–6 months old . However, salvia that remains in contact with the skin can cause irritation and lead to a rash.  Babies may find drool rash upsetting and uncomfortable, but it is usually harmless. Caregivers can treat and help prevent drool rash with simple home measures, such as regularly wiping up any drool and keeping the baby's skin dry.  It is best to see a doctor if the rash looks severe or occurs alongside other symptoms.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Drooling and your baby. (2016, February 26).  Drooling and your baby. (2016, February 26).  Hockstein, N. G., Samadi, D. S., Gendron, K., &amp; Handler, S. D. (2004, June 1). Sialorrhea: A management challenge.  American Family Physician ,  69 (11), 2628−2634.  Teething. (n.d.).  What are some of the basics of infant health? (2016, January 12).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Silva, Joana Cavaco. "How to treat and prevent drool rash."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322949.php&gt;    APA  Silva, J. (2018, August 31). "How to treat and prevent drool rash."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  