 Approximately  54.4 million people  in the United States receive an  arthritis  diagnosis every year.  Arthritis causes flares of  inflammation  in the joints, leading to pain and stiffness. These symptoms can have a significant impact on how much mobility people have in the affected joints.  As a result, arthritis tends to make it more challenging to exercise. However, keeping the joints active can have a powerful effect on the severity of arthritis symptoms.  The types of arthritis that commonly affect the shoulder include  rheumatoid arthritis  (RA) and osteoarthritis.  In this article, we look at exercises that may reduce the damage that arthritis does to the shoulder joints and help people manage pain.  The most beneficial types of exercise for arthritis include:  The following exercises should stretch and strengthen the muscles around the shoulder joint:  This exercise improves the range of motion in the shoulder joints and stretches the muscles. Doing this exercise regularly should facilitate daily activities, such as reaching for items on shelves. To do this exercise:  You should feel a gentle stretch in the shoulders, back, and chest as the arms move overhead.  This exercise also requires a broom handle or walking stick. It improves the flexibility in the shoulder joints. Follow the steps below:  This rotation stretches the shoulders to promote increased range of movement. To do this exercise:  The pendulum exercise helps relieve pain and relax the shoulder muscles. It involves the following series of movements:  The door lean can help stretch the muscles in the shoulders and improve resistance in the joints. Perform the exercise as follows:  Door press exercises can help build strength in the shoulder joints. To do these exercises:  Strengthening the postural muscles will improve overall posture, allowing the shoulders to move more easily in all directions. These exercises require an exercise band, which it is possible to buy in a sporting goods store or  online .  To do these exercises:  Arthritis can make exercising more challenging, so be sure to exercise with care to avoid injury. Follow these tips to stay safe when exercising with arthritis.  Warm up before doing any exercise to stimulate blood flow around the body. A warmup might include a brisk 10-minute walk or another light aerobic activity.  It should be possible to feel a stretch in the shoulders when doing these exercises, but they should not be painful. If a particular motion hurts, stop doing it right away. If the pain persists for several hours after the exercise, it may be necessary to see a doctor.  If the exercises cause any swelling in the shoulders, use an ice pack to reduce inflammation. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) can also be beneficial.  It is crucial to avoid doing exercises that strain the shoulder muscles or put excessive pressure on them, as this can result in injury.  Certain stretches may be painful or uncomfortable for some people and not others, so it is vital to always listen to your body during exercise.  For some people, shoulder exercises such as pushups or lifting heavy weights can be too intense for the shoulder joints. However, light exercise is necessary to build up the shoulder muscles.  Aerobic exercise is also essential for physical health and mental well-being. People with severe symptoms could try gentle alternatives to regular forms of exercise, for example, replacing swimming with water therapy. This form of exercise offers many of the same benefits as swimming but places less pressure on the shoulders.  Some people with milder symptoms may be able to continue with traditional forms of aerobic exercise.  The most appropriate type or frequency of exercise will vary from person to person. It depends on the severity of the person's arthritis symptoms and other factors, such as the amount of muscle surrounding the affected joints.  A physical therapist should be able to work with an individual to create a tailored exercise plan for them and explain any specific types of exercise that they should avoid.  The outlook for arthritis in the shoulder joints is variable. In the early stages of the condition, symptoms are generally mild and do not have a significant impact on the range of motion.  When arthritis is more advanced, people may experience severe pain and reduced movement in the affected shoulder joints.  Regular exercise will keep the shoulder joints active, which can have a noticeable impact on reducing pain and improving the range of motion in this area of the body. People should exercise with care to avoid further damaging the joints or surrounding tissues.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Arthritis &amp; diseases that affect the shoulder. (n.d.).  Arthritis &amp; diseases that affect the shoulder. (n.d.).  Arthritis of the shoulder. (2013, January).  Arthritis-related statistics. (2018, August 1).  Best exercises for rheumatoid arthritis. (n.d.).  Exercises and arthritis. (2018, June).  Exercises to manage shoulder pain. (n.d.).  Konstantellis, L. (2010, March 11). Best bet exercises for osteoarthritis of the shoulder.  Osteoarthritis (OA). (2018, April 3).  Rheumatoid arthritis. (2017, April 30).  Rheumatoid arthritis (RA). (2018, April 3).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Kandola, Aaron. "Seven exercises for shoulder arthritis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Sep. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322998.php&gt;    APA  Kandola, A. (2018, September 10). "Seven exercises for shoulder arthritis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  