  MRSA , or methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus , is a potentially severe or fatal bacterial infection.  Years ago, MRSA mainly caused problems in hospitals and healthcare centers, but it has since spread into the community. Children, toddlers, and babies can pick up the bacteria from contact with other kids.  MRSA can be difficult to treat because it is resistant to some common  antibiotics . This means that the medication can no longer kill the bacteria.  In this article, we describe how to recognize MRSA in children, and what parents and caregivers should do next.  MRSA spreads mainly through skin-to-skin contact.  About  one in three  people carry  Staphylococcus aureus  in their nose without becoming ill, while only about two people in 100 carry the resistant strain that causes MRSA.  However, if MRSA bacteria get further into the body, it can cause problems. The bacteria can enter through any skin that is broken, such as a cut or scrape.  MRSA usually starts as a skin infection that can appear anywhere on a child's body.  Early symptoms of MRSA in a child can include:  In some cases, the child may also have a  fever .  A parent or caregiver should never try to treat MRSA at home.  Anyone who suspects MRSA should contact a doctor for advice right away because the bacteria can spread very quickly and make the child seriously ill.  If the infection is mild, a doctor may:  If the infection is more severe, the child may have to be admitted to the hospital. The doctors there may use:  After a doctor has provided treatment, parents and caregivers should take the following steps to prevent the bacteria from spreading to others or reinfecting the child:  It is important to remember that, if the doctor has prescribed antibiotics, the child must take every dose, even if they seem to have recovered.  If a child receives treatment early, MRSA usually remains a mild skin infection. But if left untreated, it can make the child seriously ill, and may even lead to death.  In  2017 , researchers published the results of a study concerning 232 cases of MRSA in people aged 18 years or younger who were admitted to one of three hospitals in the United States.  The authors found that each day that the infection went untreated, the risk of complications grew, the infection became harder to treat, and it was more likely to spread to other parts of the body.  It is essential that a doctor checks a child right away if they show any of the above symptoms.  Also, seek urgent medical attention if a child has an infected sore and:  MRSA infection still occurs within hospitals and healthcare centers.  If a child does not receive treatment, the infection can spread through the body quickly and lead to serious complications, such as:  Under certain conditions, untreated MRSA can be fatal.  Results of the  study  from 2017 indicate that children may be less likely than adults to die from a MRSA infection. However, their risk of complications was comparatively higher, and children may be more likely than adults to have to return to the hospital within 30 days of leaving it.  In 2013, researchers published  findings  concerning U.S. trends in invasive MRSA, which is MRSA that has spread to other parts of the body.  The authors concluded that this type of infection is more common in infants younger than 90 days, compared to older infants. They also found that invasive MRSA was more common in African-American children, compared to those of other races.  According to the findings of a  study  published in June 2018, MRSA is a predominant cause of bone and joint infections in children. These types of infections are responsible for a significant proportion of hospital admissions among children.  One of the best ways to prevent the spread of MRSA is to teach children to wash their hands regularly with soap and warm water, especially after using the restroom and before eating.  It can be challenging to teach children the importance of washing their hands. The charity  MRSA action UK  has some helpful tips to make  hand-washing fun , including:  Parents and caregivers can also help by:  The authors of the  study  from June 2018 concluded that MRSA continues to be a major cause of pediatric illness, and sometimes death, in the U.S. and throughout the world.  A child can contract MRSA in hospitals and healthcare centers, but the infection can also pass through skin-to-skin contact, during play, at school, or at daycare, for example.  If a doctor treats it in time, MRSA can occur as a mild skin infection. However, if it spreads unchecked throughout the body, the infection can make the child seriously ill and be very difficult to treat.  The best way to prevent MRSA from spreading among children is to teach good hygiene practices and to show any skin infections or sores to a doctor.    
 General information about MRSA in healthcare settings. (2018, May 23).  General information about MRSA in healthcare settings. (2018, May 23).  Hamdy, R. F., Hsu, A. J., Stockmann, C., Olson, J. A., Bryan, M., Hersh, A. L., … Gerber, J. S. (2017, June). Epidemiology of methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus  bacteremia in children.  Pediatrics ,  139 (6).  Iwamoto, M., Mu, Y., Lynfield, R., Bulens, S. N., Nadle, J., Aragon, D., … Lessa, F. C. (2013, October). Trends in invasive methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus  infections.  Pediatrics ,  132 (4), 817–824.  Kaushik, A., &amp; Kest, H. (2018, June). Pediatric methicillin-resistant  Staphylococcus aureus  osteoarticular infections.  Microorganisms ,  6 (2), 40.  MRSA. (2015, November 21).  MRSA and children: What you should know. (n.d.).  MRSA fact sheet for early childhood care and education professionals. (n.d.).  MRSA skin infection signs and symptoms. (n.d.).  Resources for parents &amp; children. (2015, March 23).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What to know about MRSA in children."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322903.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2018, August 29). "What to know about MRSA in children."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  