 The prostate is the size of a walnut. It sits just under the bladder and produces a component in semen. The urethra, a tube connecting the bladder to the penis, passes through the prostate and carries urine.  Read on to learn more about the types, causes, and symptoms of a prostate infection.  When the cause is an infection, there are two main types of prostatitis:  If a person has an acute, or short-term, prostate infection, symptoms are severe, and they develop suddenly.  Prostatitis is the term for  inflammation  of the prostate. Acute prostatitis is uncommon, and the cause is always an infection.  The infection requires immediate treatment, as the condition can cause serious complications.  Chronic, or long-term, bacterial prostatitis causes symptoms that tend to come and go over several months.  If an infection is responsible for the inflammation, the medical community calls this condition chronic bacterial prostatitis.  If there is a different cause, the condition is called either chronic prostatitis or chronic pelvic pain syndrome, and it affects  10–15 percent  of males in the United States.  Acute prostatitis results from a bacterial infection. Often, bacteria from the urine spread to the prostate gland.  If  antibiotics  do not kill the bacteria, prostatitis may recur and become chronic.  If a person does not have a bacterial infection, prostatitis can result from:  Some people are more likely to get prostate infections. Risk factors include:  The signs and symptoms of bacterial prostatitis depend on whether it is acute or chronic.  Symptoms appear suddenly and are severe. They can include:  Acute bacterial prostatitis requires prompt medical attention.  These symptoms may be mild to moderate and either develop gradually or come and go over several months.  The medical community considers bacterial prostatitis to be chronic if symptoms are present for at least 3 months and include:  To diagnose a prostate infection, a doctor may:  The doctor may also order one or more of the following:  These tests can confirm a diagnosis of prostatitis and rule out other conditions, such as  cancer .  The results can also help to determine the best course of treatment.  Both medical and natural treatments can help people with prostatitis.  Medications for prostatitis include:  To relieve pain and inflammation, some people take nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. These are available over-the-counter (OTC) or by prescription.  Surgery may be necessary, though this is uncommon.  Surgeons can remove blockages or scar tissue from the bladder, which can improve the flow of urine and reduce symptoms of prostatitis.  Home remedies can help to relieve symptoms, but they typically cannot eliminate bacteria from the prostate. Medical treatment is usually necessary.  Home remedies include:  Some people find relief from the following alternative therapies:  Anyone with symptoms of a bacterial prostate infection should see a doctor immediately.  If a person does not receive treatment, the condition can cause complications, such as:  To avoid complications and ease symptoms, seek prompt medical attention and follow the doctor's treatment plan.  A person may have to switch to a different antibiotic before seeing results. Also, in some cases, a chronic bacterial prostate infection may only clear completely after months of antibiotic treatment.    
 Holt, J. D., Garrett, W. A., McCurry, T. K., &amp; Teichman, J. M. H. (2016, February 15). Common questions about chronic prostatitis.  American Family Physician ,  93 (4), 290–296.  Holt, J. D., Garrett, W. A., McCurry, T. K., &amp; Teichman, J. M. H. (2016, February 15). Common questions about chronic prostatitis.  American Family Physician ,  93 (4), 290–296.  Murphy, A. B., Macejko, A., Taylor, A., &amp; Nadler, R. B. (2009, January). Chronic prostatitis.  Drugs ,  69 (1), 71–84.  Prostatitis: Inflammation of the prostate. (2014, July).  Sandhu, J., &amp; Tu, H. Y. V. (2017, September 25). Recent advances in managing chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome.  F1000Research ,  6 .  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What are the signs of prostate infection?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322936.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2018, August 30). "What are the signs of prostate infection?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  