 A vaginal suppository provides targeted relief from conditions affecting the vagina. They also tend to be fast acting due to their rapid absorption.  This article provides a step-by-step guide on how to use vaginal suppositories. It also takes a look at when people may use vaginal suppositories, with information on what to expect in each case.  The following step-by-step guide shows the correct way to prepare and use vaginal suppositories.   Step 1   Wash the hands and vaginal area with mild soap and warm water before patting dry with a clean towel. This will prevent any spread of bacteria.   Step 2   Fill the applicator, unless it is pre-filled.   Solid suppositories:  Unwrap the suppository and applicator. Hold the base of the applicator in one hand and place the suppository inside the applicator with the other hand. Dipping the end of the suppository in water may make it easier to insert.   Cream suppositories : Connect the opening of the tube of cream to the open end of the applicator. Fill the applicator until it reaches the correct dosage.  Vaginal suppositories can be applied when lying down or standing, whichever feels most comfortable. The lying position may be the best method for people requiring assistance from a caregiver.    To begin, lie on your back with knees bent. Alternatively, stand with legs shoulder-width apart and one foot raised on a stool or other elevated platform.   Step 1   Place the applicator at the vaginal opening. Gently insert the applicator into the vagina, as far as it will go, without causing discomfort.   Step 2   Gently push the plunger of the applicator until it goes no further. This forces the suppository deep into the vagina.   Step 3   Remove the applicator slowly and gently.   Step 4   If the applicator is reusable, wash it with some gentle soap and warm water. Discard a nonreusable applicator along with the household waste.   Preventing leakage    Ensuring the correct dose   If a person misses a dose, they should wait until the time of their next scheduled dose before inserting the suppository again.  Vaginal suppositories can help with the treatment of fungal infections and vaginal dryness.  Contraceptive suppositories are another type of vaginal suppository that some people used as a form of  birth control .  Suppositories will take varying lengths of time to work, depending on their purpose. The size and chemical makeup of a suppository will also determine the rate at which it dissolves.  Contraceptive suppositories contain a spermicide that acts to prevent pregnancy in two ways:  People should insert the suppository into the vagina at least  10 minutes  before sex. Doing so allows enough time for the medication to melt, enabling the spermicide to disperse.  According to  Planned Parenthood , 18 percent of women using contraceptive suppositories will become pregnant each year despite using them correctly. With imperfect use, this figure can be as high as 28 percent.  A vaginal yeast infection, which is also known as vaginal  candidiasis , is a  common condition . The infection is due to the organism  Candida albicans .  People can treat vaginal yeast infections with both over-the-counter (OTC) suppositories and natural suppositories.   OTC suppositories   Some antifungal drugs are available as both creams and suppositories, such as clotrimazole and miconazole. These come in different strengths and are available for purchase over the counter.  Depending on the strength, the medication can often take between  3 and 7 days  to clear an existing infection. Suppositories usually require fewer dosages than creams and tend to provide symptom relief sooner.  A doctor can prescribe a 14-day course of suppositories for more severe or complicated yeast infections.  When using vaginal suppositories for a yeast infection, it is essential to complete the recommended course even if symptoms disappear before finishing all the medication.   Natural suppositories   For many decades, people have used boric acid suppositories as an alternative treatment for recurrent vaginal yeast infections. These are also available over the counter in most health stores and  online .  A  2011 review paper  investigated the efficacy of boric acid in treating recurrent vaginal candidiasis. Across 14 studies, the number of women cured of infection ranged from 40 to 100 percent.  A more  recent 2018 laboratory study  found that boric acid works by restricting the growth of  Candida albicans  and  Candida glabrata  strains that have become resistant to conventional drug treatment.  Boric acid suppositories may be particularly useful for people whose vaginal candidiasis symptoms do not improve after an extended course of conventional treatment.  Vaginal dryness can affect people of any age but is more common among those transitioning to  menopause . Certain suppositories can help to maintain vaginal moisture and healthy pH levels.   Hormone suppositories   A  recent clinical trial  suggested that hormonal suppositories might be an effective treatment for vaginal dryness, particularly among women who are unable to take Hormone Replacement Therapy ( HRT ).  Over 12 weeks, 325 women took a hormonal suppository called Prasterone, and 157 women took a  placebo .  At the end of the 12 weeks, the women who took the drug showed significant improvements in vaginal dryness compared with those who received the placebo.  Prasterone also appeared to work locally within the vaginal cells, thereby causing few side effects.   Vitamin E suppositories   Another  recent study  found that a 12-week course of  vitamin  E suppositories might be beneficial for treating vaginal dryness and other symptoms of  vaginal atrophy .  The small study compared the efficacy of vitamin E suppositories and a vaginal cream, containing the hormone  estrogen , among 52 women.  Both treatments offered significant improvement in symptoms after 4 weeks, although the estrogen cream was the most effective.  But the vitamin E may be slower to work than estrogen cream since there were no significant differences between the two treatments at 8 and 12 weeks.  For women who are sensitive to hormone therapy, vitamin E suppositories could potentially be a suitable and safer alternative.  Vaginal suppositories for contraception tend to be less effective than more common methods of birth control.  However, vaginal suppositories for treating yeast infections and vaginal dryness are generally considered both safe and effective. In many cases, they may also provide faster and more targeted relief than oral medications, along with fewer side effects.  Use of vaginal suppositories is fairly simple and should cause only minimal discomfort. When applying them, people may want to try the different postures to determine which works best for them.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Emamverdikhan, A. P., Golmakani, N., Tabassi, S. A., Hassanzadeh, M., Sharifi, N., &amp; Shakeri, M. T. (2016, September–October). A survey of the therapeutic effects of vitamin E suppositories on vaginal atrophy in postmenopausal women.  Iranian Journal of Nursing and Midwifery Research ,  21 (5), 475–481.  Emamverdikhan, A. P., Golmakani, N., Tabassi, S. A., Hassanzadeh, M., Sharifi, N., &amp; Shakeri, M. T. (2016, September–October). A survey of the therapeutic effects of vitamin E suppositories on vaginal atrophy in postmenopausal women.  Iranian Journal of Nursing and Midwifery Research ,  21 (5), 475–481.  How do I use spermicide? (n.d.).  How effective is spermicide? (n.d.).  Iavazzo, C., Gkegkes, I. D., Zarkada, I. M., &amp; Falagas, M. E. (2011, August). Boric acid for recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis: The clinical evidence [Abstract].  Journal of Women's Health ,  20 (8), 1245–1255.  Labrie, F., Archer, D. F., Koltun, W., Vachon, A., Young, D., Frenette, L., … Moyneur, É. (2016, March). Efficacy of intravaginal dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) on moderate to severe dyspareunia and vaginal dryness, symptoms of vulvovaginal atrophy, and of the genitourinary syndrome of menopause [Abstract].  Menopause ,  23 (3), 243–256.  Larsen, B., Petrovic, M., &amp; De Seta, F. (2018, April). Boric acid and commercial organoboron products as inhibitors of drug-resistant  Candida albicans  [Abstract].  Mycopathologia ,  183 (2), 349–357.  Vaginal candidiasis. (2017, August 4).  Vulvovaginal candidiasis. (2015, June 4).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lillis, Charlotte. "How do you use vaginal suppositories?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322908.php&gt;    APA  Lillis, C. (2018, August 29). "How do you use vaginal suppositories?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  