  Rheumatoid arthritis  (RA) is an autoimmune condition that attacks the joints, causing  inflammation , pain, and stiffness, including morning stiffness.  Morning stiffness is a widespread problem among those with RA. According to a  2014 review  of two studies, between 79 and 89 percent of people with active RA experienced morning stiffness.  The report also noted that morning stiffness affected between 44 and 80 percent of people who were not experiencing an active RA flare.  Morning stiffness makes moving the joints feel slow and difficult. Some people may have trouble getting out of bed. This stiffness usually involves both sides of the body and gets better with movement.  One of the most beneficial things that people with RA can do to ease their morning symptoms is to develop a morning routine.  Planning ahead to deal with morning stiffness can help people act as soon as they wake up. This might help reduce the  stress  and frustration of stiff joints.  Include some or all of the following methods in a routine to increase mobility and help manage morning stiffness and other RA symptoms:   1. Start the day with gentle and slow movements   Upon waking, before standing up, move the stiff joints slowly and gently without pulling or stretching. Making gentle circular motions, bending and extending the joints is helpful.  To improve mobility all over the body, move all the joints, including the wrists, neck, shoulders, elbows, knees, and fingers.   2. Do targeted stretches   People can do targeted stretches while still in bed:  People may benefit from working with a physical therapist to create a personalized exercise and stretching program for relieving their pain and preventing symptoms.   3. Use heat therapy in bed   Using a heated blanket or having a warm bath first thing in the morning can help to ease the stiffness and loosen the joints.   4. Exercise   As little as 5 minutes of exercise can ease symptoms. Try some range-of-motion exercises, which involve moving the joints as far as possible in different directions.  Gently pedaling on a stationary bike can also help to loosen stiff joints in the morning. A physical therapist can provide personalized ideas as well.   5. Taking medication   Medication can help people control the symptoms of morning stiffness. In some cases, over-the-counter (OTC) nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) can help.  In other cases, people may need to take prescription medication. Talk to a doctor to find the appropriate remedy for the best results.   6. Keep medication by your bed   Keeping medicines near the bed, such as on a nightstand, is helpful. This means a person can take their medication as soon as they wake up, allowing symptoms time to ease before it is time to get up.   7. Use a joint cream   Apply joint creams, such as diclofenac gel, first thing in the morning. This can help relieve morning stiffness by easing inflammation and should help get the joints moving.   8. Eat a healthful breakfast    Nutrition  is essential for a healthy body. Eating a light and nutritious breakfast can give the body the energy it needs to get going.  An anti-inflammatory diet can help reduce inflammation and pain. Make sure to eat well throughout the day.   9. Work with an occupational therapist   Sometimes, joints are put under pressure overnight. If a person closes their fingers into a fist while they are sleeping, the joints can be really tight by the morning.  An occupational therapist can provide a splint that will keep the fingers in a resting position overnight. This should reduce the chance of morning stiffness.   10. Make arrangements with work   Sometimes, morning stiffness lasts longer than just early morning; sometimes it can last for hours or days.  When symptoms are particularly severe, ask for special accommodations, a flexible work schedule, or an opportunity to work from home. Taking breaks to move around can also be helpful.  The following strategies can help to prevent morning stiffness:  Doctors do not fully understand the exact cause of morning stiffness in RA.  However, it is possible that the body's natural rhythms contribute to morning stiffness. During the night, the body increases production of  certain hormones , which can trigger swelling that leads to morning stiffness.  For some, joint stiffness only lasts for the early hours of the morning. For others, it is an all-day problem.  According to a small 2014  study  published in the journal  Rheumatology , some people with RA experienced morning stiffness that lasted long beyond the early morning hours.  Joint stiffness can last for part of the day or throughout the entire day. Prolonged stiffness can adversely affect a person's activity levels, psychological well-being, and quality of life.  Morning stiffness is common among those with RA. With proper planning and strategies, people can effectively manage and reduce their symptoms.  It is essential to work with a doctor to find the right medication, while physical therapists can assist with personalized exercise and stretching plans.    
 Da Silva, J. A., Phillips, S., &amp; Buttgereit, F. (2011). Impact of impaired morning function on the lives and well-being of patients with rheumatoid arthritis [Abstract].  Scandinavian Journal of Rheumatology, Supplement ,  2011 (125), 6–11.  Da Silva, J. A., Phillips, S., &amp; Buttgereit, F. (2011). Impact of impaired morning function on the lives and well-being of patients with rheumatoid arthritis [Abstract].  Scandinavian Journal of Rheumatology, Supplement ,  2011 (125), 6–11.  Freeman, G. (n.d.). Arthritis and stiffness: The hallmarks of arthritis.  Halls, S., Dures, E., Kirwan, J., Pollock, J., Baker, G., Edmunds, A., &amp; Hewlett, S. (2015, April 1). Stiffness is more than just duration and severity: A qualitative exploration in people with rheumatoid arthritis.  Rheumatology ,  54 (4), 615–622.  Ruderman, E., &amp; Tambar, S. (2017, March). Rheumatoid arthritis.  Van Tuyl, L. H. D., Lems, W. F. &amp; Boers, M. (2014, January 29). Measurement of stiffness in patients with rheumatoid arthritis in low disease activity or remission: A systematic review.  BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders ,  15 (28).  Yoshida, K., Hashimoto, T., Sakai, Y., &amp; Hashiramoto, A. (2015). Circadian rhythm and joint stiffness/destruction in rheumatoid arthritis.  International Journal of Clinical Rheumatology ,  10 (5), 335–344.  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Gal, Kat. "How to manage morning stiffness with rheumatoid arthritis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Aug. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322922.php&gt;    APA  Gal, K. (2018, August 30). "How to manage morning stiffness with rheumatoid arthritis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  