 When choosing a pre-workout meal, it is important to aim for a balance of macronutrients. Macronutrients are dietary compounds that the body needs in large quantities to function correctly.  The three macronutrients are:  Macronutrients are all key sources of energy, but each can contribute differently to a pre-workout meal.  Protein supplies amino acids, and both are essential for a range of bodily functions, including the building, maintenance, and repair of muscle fibers.  Eating a meal that contains a significant amount of lean protein before exercising can help to improve performance.  Protein can increase the amount of muscle mass gained from a resistance workout.  Intense bouts of resistance exercise damage the muscles, but consuming protein increases the number of amino acids in the body. These work to reduce deterioration, synthesize muscle proteins, and stimulate growth.  Consuming 20–30 grams of protein before a workout can result in an increased rate of muscle protein synthesis that lasts for several hours.  The following are some examples of healthful foods that are rich in protein:  Anyone interested in gaining muscle should ensure that they receive an adequate overall daily protein intake.  Research has consistently shown that consuming between  1.6 and 1.8 grams  of protein for every pound of bodyweight is sufficient for building muscle.  Many sources recommend consuming more, but any additional protein is unlikely to make a significant impact on muscle mass.  Carbohydrates are an essential energy source.  Consuming the right amount of carbohydrates before a workout will ensure that the body has enough energy to perform well.  This is true for people engaging in cardiovascular and resistance exercises, among other kinds.  However, different types of carbohydrates will have a different impact:  Complex carbohydrates have a number of advantages, for example:  The body digests complex carbohydrates more slowly than simple carbohydrates.  To increase energy ahead of a workout, a person should consume complex carbohydrates 2–3 hours in advance, and any simple carbohydrates 30–60 minutes in advance.  Below are some examples of healthful foods that contain complex carbohydrates:  Fruits provide the best source of simple carbohydrates before a workout.  Bananas  are a popular choice, as they contain  potassium  as well as simple carbohydrates.  Fats are an essential energy source.  Traditionally, medical professionals have advised against consuming high-fat meals before exercise because the body digests fats more slowly than carbohydrates. This means that the body may not be able to break down and absorb fats before a workout begins.  Before a workout, it may be better to eat a meal that focuses more on protein and carbohydrates than fats.  However, it is important to incorporate healthful fats elsewhere in a balanced diet.  It is also worth noting that not all fats are healthful.  Certain types, most notably saturated and trans fats, can negatively impact overall health.  Other types of fats are, however, highly nutritious. Unsaturated fats, for example, provide a range of health benefits.  Below are some foods rich in unsaturated fats:  Ideally, a person should eat a meal rich in complex carbohydrates and protein around 2–3 hours before exercising.  Waiting a few hours after eating allows the body enough time to digest the meal.  Alternately, a person may prefer a smaller meal that is mostly made up of simple carbohydrates. In this case, they need only wait for 30–60 minutes before working out.    
 Atherton, P. J., &amp; Smith, K. (2012, March 1). Muscle protein synthesis in response to nutrition and exercise.  The Journal of Physiology ,  590 (5), 1049–1057.  Atherton, P. J., &amp; Smith, K. (2012, March 1). Muscle protein synthesis in response to nutrition and exercise.  The Journal of Physiology ,  590 (5), 1049–1057.  Aragon, A. A., &amp; Schoenfeld, B. J. (2013, January 29). Nutrient timing revisited: Is there a post-exercise anabolic window?  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  10 (5).  Burke, L. M., Hawley, J. A., Wong, S. H. S., &amp; Jeukendrup, A. E. (2011, June 9). Carbohydrates for training and competition.  Journal of Sports Sciences ,  29 (1), 17–27.  Carbohydrates. (2018, April 16).  Hoffman, J. R., Ratamess, N. A., Kang, J., Falvo, M. J., &amp; Faigenbaum, A. D. (2006 December 13). Effect of protein intake on strength, body composition and endocrine changes in strength/power athletes.  Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition ,  3 (2), 12–18.  Kumar, V., Atherton, P., Smith, K., &amp; Rennie, M. J. (2009, January 22). Human muscle protein synthesis and breakdown during and after exercise.  Journal of Applied Physiology ,  106 (6), 2026–2039.  Macronutrients. (n.d.).  Protein. (n.d.).  Tang, J. E., Moore, D. R., Kujbida, G. W., Tarnopolsky, M. A., &amp; Phillips, S. M. (2009, September 1). Ingestion of whey hydrolysate, casein, or soy protein isolate: Effects on mixed muscle protein synthesis at rest and following resistance exercise in young men.  Journal of Applied Physiology ,  107 (3), 987–992.  Types of carbohydrates. (2015, March 9).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "What to eat before a workout to lose weight and build muscle."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Sep. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322963.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2018, September 3). "What to eat before a workout to lose weight and build muscle."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  