 The best breastfeeding positions enable a baby to latch on to the breast well and comfortably, do not strain the muscles, and reduce the risk of nipple injuries and pain.  The best breastfeeding position can also change as a baby grows and a woman gains confidence. No single position works for everyone.  Instead, try out a variety of positions to find the ones that work well in different situations.  While not every woman will find the same positions comfortable or effective, some of the best breastfeeding positions include:  The cradle hold is the classic breastfeeding position. In this position, the baby feeds with its stomach against the woman's body.  To do the cradle hold:  However, some women find this position difficult to master with a newborn. Also, as babies grow, they may become too large to support in this position.  The cross-cradle is usually the best latch for newborns. The hold is similar to the cradle hold, but the woman supports the baby with the arm opposite to the breast the baby is feeding from.  To breastfeed in the cross-cradle position:  This hold can be tricky to master at first but allows the woman more control over the baby's latch. This position can be helpful for babies who struggle with getting a deep latch.  This position is sometimes called biological nursing because it stimulates a baby's instinctive feeding reflexes, and allows the woman to feed from a comfortable, supported position.  It may require some shifts in positioning, but the reclining position can also be very comfortable for women struggling with muscle pain or recovering from surgery or childbirth.  To master this approach to breastfeeding:  Some women put the baby in an upright position, with toes pointing down. Other women find it more comfortable with the baby slightly reclining against their bent arm.  Experiment with different options to find one that works.  When a baby is old enough to support their head, they can breastfeed in a sitting position. This position works well for breastfeeding on the go. Babies who squirm when they feel restrained may also like this position.  To feed a baby in an upright position:  Side-lying is an ideal breastfeeding position for women recovering from surgery, and for exhausted women feeding at night. Women who co-sleep with the baby tend to use this position.  Some women find that it is difficult to get into the right position at first. Very small newborns may struggle with side-lying.  To breastfeed in a side-lying position:  Some babies find it easier to breastfeed from the top breast, while others can more easily reach the breast that is closest to the bed.  Women who try this position should note that while co-sleeping is popular, most organizations do not recommend it. This is especially true for newborns who have a high risk of suffocation and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).  The safest way to breastfeed in a side-lying position is to remove all pillows and blankets near the baby. Avoid falling asleep before returning the baby to its crib.  The clutch hold is ideal for women recovering from abdominal surgery or dealing with pain after childbirth. It is also an excellent option for women who want to nurse two babies simultaneously.  Many women find this helps babies get a deeper latch, and that it reduces frustration associated with a forceful let-down reflex.  This hold is sometimes called the football hold because a woman holds the baby like a football.  To use the clutch hold position:  Positioning is just one aspect of comfortable breastfeeding. These other strategies can make breastfeeding more comfortable and effective:  The right position for breastfeeding can change with time as the woman and baby develop a routine and relationship. Be open to experimenting with different positions. While some positions may feel awkward at first, practice can make them easier and more comfortable.  Women who experience trouble with breastfeeding should seek help early. It is possible to resolve most breastfeeding problems, but waiting too long can be challenging and trigger frustration in the woman and baby.  For help, a breastfeeding woman can attend a La Leche League meeting, or speak to a lactation consultant or a doctor.    
 Boskabadi, H., Ramazanzadeh, M., Zakerihamidi, M., &amp; Omran, F. R. (2014, June 5). Risk factors of breast problems in mothers and its effect on newborns.  Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal ,  16 (6).  Boskabadi, H., Ramazanzadeh, M., Zakerihamidi, M., &amp; Omran, F. R. (2014, June 5). Risk factors of breast problems in mothers and its effect on newborns.  Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal ,  16 (6).  Goyal, R. C., Banginwar, A. S., Ziyo, F., &amp; Toweir, A. A. (2011, May–August). Breastfeeding practices: positioning, attachment (latch-on) and effective suckling — a hospital-based study in Libya.  Journal of Family &amp; Community Medicine ,  18 (2), 74–79.  How do I position my baby to breastfeed? (2014, November 16).  Positions for breastfeeding (2011, September 28).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "What are the best positions for breastfeeding?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Sep. 2018. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/322984.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2018, September 4). "What are the best positions for breastfeeding?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  