 A broken nose, or nasal  fracture , is when a bone in the nose becomes cracked or broken. There may also be damage to the connective tissue, or cartilage, inside the nose.  A broken nose can result from an impact to the face, potentially from a fall, violence, contact sport, or accident. Being able to recognize a broken nose can help ensure that a person or child receives appropriate treatment.  In this article, we explain how to recognize a broken nose and when to see a doctor. We also cover diagnosis, self-care, medical treatments, recovery, causes, risk factors, and prevention tips.  The signs and symptoms of a broken nose are similar in adults and children.  They typically include pain, swelling, redness, and bruising around the nose. A person may also have cuts or scrapes on the face and bruising around the eyes.  Other symptoms that can help people identify a broken nose include:  An adult or child with a suspected broken nose should see a doctor if:  It is important to call 911 or go to the nearest emergency department if:  Immediate medical attention is necessary if an adult or child has signs of a head injury, such as:  A doctor can usually diagnose a broken nose by carrying out a visual inspection and a physical examination of the person's face. They may:  The doctor may apply an anesthetic to numb the affected area if a person is experiencing pain or discomfort during the examination.  Further investigations might sometimes be necessary. A doctor may order a  CT scan  or an X-ray to check for other injuries or complications.  People can often treat a broken nose at home if the injury is not serious or causing other problems. However, a person should not attempt to realign their nose themselves if it is misshapen or crooked.  To manage a broken nose at home:  People with large cuts or gashes on their face should see a healthcare professional, as stitches or a medical dressing may be necessary to close and protect the wound while it heals.  For people with more severe pain and swelling, a doctor can prescribe stronger pain relievers if OTC medications are not effective.  People with severe injuries or damage to the nose may require manual realignment or surgery. We discuss these medical treatments below:  A person with a misshapen or crooked nose may require a doctor to realign the bones manually. This procedure should restore the appearance of the nose and resolve any difficulties in breathing through it.  When performing a manual realignment on a person with a broken nose, a doctor may:  If it has been more than  2 weeks  since the injury occurred, manual realignment is usually no longer an option, and a doctor may recommend surgery to repair the nose instead.  A doctor may recommend surgery to individuals with a broken nose if the injury:  For some people with a misshapen or crooked nose, a doctor may be able to realign the bones manually without surgery. However, manual realignment is usually only an option if the injury occurred less than 2 weeks ago.  It may sometimes be necessary for a person to wait for  2 to 3 months  following the injury before undergoing surgery. This period of waiting allows the swelling to go down and the bones to heal before a surgeon attempts to restore the original appearance of the nose.  Nasal fractures typically begin to heal within a few days, but it may take a week or so for the pain and swelling to go away completely. While recovering from a broken nose, it is advisable to avoid activities that could further damage it, such as playing contact sports.  If there are complications, recovery may take longer. Complications arising from a broken nose can include:  Nasal deformities that arise from a broken nose are usually permanent if a person does not receive corrective treatment.  Forceful impacts to a person's face can result in a broken nose. According to a  small study from 2013 , common causes of a broken nose include:  A broken nose can happen to anyone, but certain activities and factors can increase a person's risk. These include:  Broken noses are also more common in children and older adults, as these individuals often have a lower bone mass and are more at risk of falls.  It is not always possible to prevent a broken nose. However, a person can take certain steps to reduce their risk. These include:  Parents and caregivers may wish to take extra precautions to safeguard children against falls and other accidents. These precautions can include:  Broken noses are a common injury that can result from any forceful impact to the face. While it can be painful and distressing, a person can often treat a broken nose with simple home care, such as ice packs and OTC pain relievers.  People should seek medical treatment for a misshapen nose or if their symptoms are severe or do not improve after a few days.  It is important to seek immediate medical attention if a broken nose leads to breathing difficulties or heavy bleeding or if there are signs of a head injury.  Reconstructive surgery is an option for people who are not happy with the appearance of their nose following the break or for those who continue to experience breathing difficulties after it heals.    
 Çil, Y., &amp; Kahraman, E. (2013). An analysis of 45 patients with pure nasal fractures [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23599200  
 Ferguson, G.,  et al.  (2014). What becomes of the broken nose?  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3992096/  
 Nasal fractures. (2019).  https://www.enthealth.org/conditions/nasal-fractures/     Çil, Y., &amp; Kahraman, E. (2013). An analysis of 45 patients with pure nasal fractures [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23599200   Ferguson, G.,  et al.  (2014). What becomes of the broken nose?  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3992096/   Nasal fractures. (2019).  https://www.enthealth.org/conditions/nasal-fractures/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to know about a broken nose."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Apr. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325075.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2019, April 30). "What to know about a broken nose."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  