 An enema can be effective in treating certain medical conditions, but regular enema use can cause serious health problems.  Because of the risks involved, a person should only use an enema for medical reasons.  In this article, we find out more about enemas and how to use them safely.  A medical professional may give an enema, or a person can use one at home.  Many pharmacies sell enema kits, and these are also  available online . Choose one that a healthcare provider has recommended.  A kit usually includes a bag or another type of container attached to a tube or nozzle. This container holds a liquid, which may contain an oil or laxative.  Anyone with sufficient flexibility in their arms and shoulders to reach behind them should be able to use an enema at home.  There are some risks when using an enema:  Use the recommended amount of room temperature liquid, and do not use an enema too frequently.  Each enema kit is slightly different and should come with clear instructions. Reading these instructions carefully can help make sure enema use is safe and effective.  Make sure to plan enough time for the enema to work and to take a rest afterward, if needed. Doctors generally recommend having access to a bathroom for 1 hour after using an enema.  An enema can be uncomfortable, but it should not be painful. If there is a pain, stop and seek medical advice. Using petroleum jelly can ease discomfort during insertion.  Instructions for every enema kit are different, but most follow these general steps:  An enema is an invasive procedure, and a person should only use one for medical reasons. Buy an enema kit from a reputable pharmacy — avoid homemade kits.  Using an enema as a regular treatment for  constipation  can cause health problems. The body can become reliant on enemas to pass stool, and the muscles in the gut may weaken over time. It may become difficult to pass stool naturally, and in some cases, enema overuse could cause  incontinence .  Frequent constipation can indicate a medical condition. If a person has concerns about constipation, a doctor can advise about possible causes and recommend diet and lifestyle changes.  Anyone with a compromised immune system — because of a disease such as  leukemia , for example — should not use an enema, because of the risk that bacteria may enter the body. A person with a weakened immune system may not be fully able to fight an infection.  Anyone with  rectal prolapse , in which the very end of the lower intestine comes out of the body, should avoid using an enema. If a person has  hemorrhoids , they should take extra care to avoid further discomfort.  If a person has had a bowel obstruction or colon surgery, they have an increased risk of bowel perforation and should avoid using an enema.  The use of an enema before giving birth is no longer  the standard recommendation . The procedure is invasive and does not benefit a woman in labor.  Enemas can help treat some medical conditions. They can also prepare a person for certain medical procedures.  There is no scientific evidence that an enema benefits general health, and using an enema to detox can be harmful. Inserting substances such as  coffee  or oil into the body can also introduce harmful bacteria.  Some common uses of an enema include:  It is usually necessary to have an empty bowel before surgery on the rectum, colon, or gut. A person may need to use an enema at home before surgery, or a medical professional may give an enema in the hospital.  A  colonoscopy  is the use of a small camera to check the health of the rectum or bowel. The bowel will need to be empty before this procedure.  A person may need to limit their diet for  a few days  before the procedure. The doctor may also prescribe an enema to ensure that the bowel is empty.  A  barium enema  can help check for bowel or  colon cancer . One enema empties the bowel, and another puts liquid barium into the rectum. This shows up on an X-ray to give clear images of the bowels. After the procedure, the barium passes from the body in a bowel movement.  An enema can help treat severe  constipation .  There are two main types of enema for constipation. The first lubricates the bowels to help stool pass quickly. The second is a retention enema, which stays in the body for longer. A retention enema is usually oil-based, and it soaks the stool to ease its passage from the body.  Regular use of enemas to treat constipation can cause health problems. A more lasting way to resolve constipation is with diet and lifestyle changes. Drinking enough water and including plenty of fiber in the diet can keep bowel movements healthy and regular.  People can administer medication using an enema. This can especially help with treating health problems affecting the colon, such as inflammatory bowel disease.  In some cases, an enema can deliver other types of medication. This is because the network of blood vessels in the rectum can transport medicine quickly to other parts of the body.  An enema can help treat certain health issues and they are a necessary step for some medical procedures. However, regular use can cause long-term problems, and a person should always follow professional advice when using an enema.  The bowel is delicate, and a person should take care when using an enema. Bacteria can upset the balance of the gut and cause infection, and it is possible to injure the rectum. Follow the instructions carefully, and make sure to be gentle.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Colonoscopy. (2017).  https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diagnostic-tests/colonoscopy  
 Jones, M. W., &amp; Zabbo, C. P. (2019). Bowel perforation.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537224/  
 WHO recommendation on administration of enema on admission. (2018).  Colonoscopy. (2017).  https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diagnostic-tests/colonoscopy   Jones, M. W., &amp; Zabbo, C. P. (2019). Bowel perforation.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK537224/   WHO recommendation on administration of enema on admission. (2018).  X-rays and other radiographic tests for cancer. (2015).  https://www.cancer.org/treatment/understanding-your-diagnosis/tests/x-rays-and-other-radiographic-tests.html   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "What to know about enemas."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 1 May. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325086.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2019, May 1). "What to know about enemas."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  