 A person may be able to treat minor wound infections at home. However, people with more severe or persistent wound infections should seek medical attention.  In this article, we describe how to prevent, recognize, and treat an infected wound. We also cover risk factors, complications, when to see a doctor, and medical treatment.  People can usually safely treat small wounds, such as minor cuts and scratches, at home. With proper care, most small wounds will gradually get better until they fully heal.  If a wound becomes infected, however, it can get worse instead of better. Any pain, redness, and swelling will typically increase in intensity.  Wound infections can also lead to other symptoms, such as:  People with a mild infection of a small wound may be able to treat the wound at home. However, more severe wound infections require prompt medical attention, particularly those that occur along with other symptoms, such as fever, feeling unwell, or discharge and red streaks coming from the wound.  To treat an infected wound at home, follow these steps:  Other tips for treating wounds at home include:  Cleaning and protecting a wound can reduce the risk of infection. After sustaining a minor cut or scratch, a person should:  People with larger wounds or excessive bleeding will require medical treatment. A healthcare professional can treat the injury to prevent infection and other complications.  People with animal bites or wounds from dirty or rusty objects may be at risk of  tetanus  and should also seek medical attention. A healthcare professional can clean the wound and give the person a shot to protect against tetanus infection if necessary.  Tetanus is a potentially fatal condition that occurs when certain bacteria enter the body and release toxins that affect the nerves. The symptoms of tetanus can include painful muscle spasms, lockjaw, and fever.  Cuts, grazes, and other breaks in the skin can become infected when bacteria enter the wound and begin to multiply. The bacteria may come from the surrounding skin, the external environment, or the object that caused the injury.  It is important to clean and protect the wound properly to reduce the risk of infection.  The risk of wound infection is higher if:  Certain health conditions and environmental factors can also increase the risk of infection. These  include :  Rarely, incision wounds from surgical procedures can also become infected. According to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , between 2006 and 2008, about 1.9 percent of surgical wounds became infected in people having operations in the United States.  If a person does not receive treatment for a wound infection, it can spread to other parts of the body, which may lead to serious complications, including:  A person with a wound should seek medical attention if:  Seek urgent medical attention if blood is spurting from the wound or if applying pressure to the wound does not stop the bleeding.  Doctors can treat a bacterial infection with  antibiotics . It is important for a person to complete the course of antibiotics to treat the infection fully and to prevent the bacteria from becoming resistant to the drug.  In addition to cleaning, some wounds may require further treatment. If the cut is large or deep, for example, a doctor or nurse may have to use stitches to close it. They can often close smaller cuts with medical glue or strips of tape instead.  If the wound contains dead or contaminated tissue, a doctor may remove this tissue in a procedure called debridement. Debridement should promote healing and prevent the infection from spreading.  A person might require a tetanus shot if the cause of the wound was a bite or an injury from a dirty or rusty object.  The  CDC  recommend that adults get a tetanus booster shot every 10 years to protect them against tetanus infection. However, for certain types of wound, a doctor may still prescribe a tetanus shot for people who have not had one in the past  5 years .  A wound infection can occur if bacteria enter and multiply inside the wound. Immediately cleaning and dressing cuts, grazes, and other small wounds is the best way to prevent infections. However, people with larger, deeper, or more serious wounds should have a trained healthcare professional treat the injury.  The signs and symptoms of wound infection can include increasing pain, swelling, and redness around the affected area. A person may be able to treat a mild infection of a small wound at home by recleaning and redressing the wound.  However, more severe wound infections require prompt medical attention, particularly those that occur along with fever, feeling unwell, or discharge and red streaks coming from the wound.    
 Sepsis: Data &amp; reports. (2016).  https://www.cdc.gov/sepsis/datareports/index.html  
 Surgical site infection (SSI) event. (2019).  https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/pdfs/pscmanual/9pscssicurrent.pdf  
 Tetanus: Protect your family with vaccines. (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/features/tetanus/index.html  
 Wound and skin infections. (2018).  https://labtestsonline.org/conditions/wound-and-skin-infections  
 Wound care. (2015).  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2015/0115/p86-s1.pdf     Sepsis: Data &amp; reports. (2016).  https://www.cdc.gov/sepsis/datareports/index.html   Surgical site infection (SSI) event. (2019).  https://www.cdc.gov/nhsn/pdfs/pscmanual/9pscssicurrent.pdf   Tetanus: Protect your family with vaccines. (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/features/tetanus/index.html   Wound and skin infections. (2018).  https://labtestsonline.org/conditions/wound-and-skin-infections   Wound care. (2015).  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2015/0115/p86-s1.pdf   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "How to recognize and treat an infected wound."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 25 Apr. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325040.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2019, April 25). "How to recognize and treat an infected wound."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  