 Benadryl (diphenhydramine) is a brand-name, over-the-counter medication that's classified as an antihistamine. It's used to help relieve symptoms of  hay fever  (seasonal allergies), other allergies, and the  common cold , as well as itchy skin due to  insect bites ,  hives , and other causes.  Benadryl is effective for decreasing itchy skin from hives. It's often considered a first-choice treatment for hives. But although it's effective for decreasing symptoms of seasonal allergies, Benadryl isn't often used for this purpose. This is due to side effects such as sleepiness.  Benadryl comes in many different forms. Some are oral (taken by mouth), and some are topical (applied to the skin). Examples include:  Benadryl is available in generic forms, which are often store-brand products. The generic name of Benadryl is diphenhydramine.  There are many different Benadryl-branded products. Some of these products contain just one ingredient, while others contain two ingredients.  Examples of different Benadryl products and their ingredients include:  When people say the name "Benadryl," they usually mean the products that contain diphenhydramine. Because ingredients vary from one Benadryl product another, be sure to read the label closely before buying or using a Benadryl product. That way you'll know what ingredients it contains.  If you're not sure which product is right for you, ask your doctor or pharmacist.  Your Benadryl dosage will depend on several factors. These include:  Typically, you should use the smallest dosage that provides the desired effect.  The following information describes dosages that are commonly used or recommended. If you're unsure what dosage to take, ask your doctor or pharmacist.  Over-the-counter oral Benadryl products aren't approved for use in children under 6 years. Benadryl products that are applied to the skin aren't approved for use in children under 2 years.  Before giving Benadryl to a baby, talk with your doctor. Your doctor may want to evaluate your baby's symptoms. Your doctor can also recommend the most appropriate dosage of Benadryl if treatment with the drug is needed. (See warning below in "Benadryl side effects" section.)  Oral Benadryl products shouldn't be taken more than 6 times each day. For adults and children over 12 years of age, the maximum is 300 mg each day. For children ages 6 to 12 years, the maximum is 150 mg each day.  For adults or children, Benadryl products such as the cream, gel, and spray shouldn't be applied to the skin more than 4 times per day.  Your body can develop a tolerance to some of the effects of Benadryl. This means your body's response to the drug may decrease over time.  For instance, one study found that Benadryl caused sleepiness on the first day it was taken. But after the person took Benadryl for four days, this side effect no longer occurred. This was due to tolerance.  Although tolerance to sleepiness caused by Benadryl can happen, tolerance doesn't seem to occur with other effects of Benadryl. For instance, it doesn't seem to affect the drug's effectiveness. When used over time, Benadryl continues to work to relieve symptoms of hay fever or allergies, runny nose, hives, and other conditions.  However, if you're taking Benadryl frequently (on more than about four days per week), talk with your doctor. They may suggest other treatment options that may be more effective for you.  Benadryl can cause mild or serious side effects. The following list contains some of the key side effects that may occur while taking Benadryl. This list doesn't include all possible side effects.  For more information on the possible side effects of Benadryl or tips on how to deal with a troubling side effect, talk with your doctor or pharmacist.  The more common side effects of Benadryl include:  Some of these side effects may go away within a few days or a couple of weeks. If they're more severe or don't go away, talk to your doctor or pharmacist.  Call your doctor right away if you have serious side effects. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency. Serious side effects and their symptoms can include the following:  Over-the-counter Benadryl is approved for temporary or short-term use and isn't intended for long-term use. There is very little scientific research about the long-term effects of Benadryl.  Some side effects that may occur with long-term use include:  Talk to your doctor about how often you have allergy symptoms. If you have symptoms frequently (more often than about four days per week), there may be a safer, more effective medication for you than Benadryl.  Benadryl and some other antihistamine drugs can sometimes cause decreased memory, confusion, and trouble thinking. These side effects are more common in seniors.  In addition, taking Benadryl long term might increase the risk of dementia such as  Alzheimer's disease , especially in seniors. In one  study , people over the age of 65 years who took medications such as Benadryl daily for three years or longer had an increased risk of dementia or Alzheimer's disease.  To prevent this possible side effect, Benadryl should be used in the lowest effective dose for the shortest time possible. If you need to take an antihistamine long term, talk with your doctor or pharmacist about other options.   Hallucinations  aren't a typical side effect of Benadryl. However, they can occur in people who take very high doses of Benadryl. If you experience hallucinations while taking Benadryl, don't take any more of the medication. If you think you need medical treatment, call your doctor or 911.  Some antihistamines, including Benadryl, can worsen symptoms of  restless legs syndrome . If you have restless legs syndrome, talk with your doctor or pharmacist about other medication options.   Depression  isn't a side effect that typically happens in people who take Benadryl.  If you have symptoms of depression while taking Benadryl, talk with your doctor. Your doctor may want to evaluate your symptoms. They may also recommend different medication options.  Weight gain can happen in some people who take diphenhydramine. If you have weight gain while taking Benadryl, talk with your doctor or pharmacist about other medication options.  Benadryl can cause constipation, especially when used regularly. If you have constipation, talk with your doctor or pharmacist about other medication options instead of Benadryl.  Because it can make you very sleepy, Benadryl can impair your ability to drive. If you feel sleepy after taking it, don't drive. Also, don't use dangerous equipment if you feel sleepy after taking Benadryl.  In children, oral Benadryl can sometimes cause unexpected side effects such as:  In newborns, oral Benadryl can cause:  Because of the risk of dangerous side effects in children, over-the-counter oral Benadryl products are only approved for use in children 6 years of age and older.  The  Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  recommends that cough and cold products not be used in children under 2 years of age due to the risk of dangerous side effects, including  sudden infant death . These products often contain diphenhydramine (generic Benadryl) or other antihistamines, combined with other ingredients.  Before giving oral Benadryl to children under 6 years, or cough and cold products to children under 2 years, talk with your doctor. Your doctor may want to evaluate your child's symptoms. They can also recommend the most appropriate medication and dosage if treatment is needed.  Benadryl products aren't approved for use in babies (see warning above).  Over-the-counter oral Benadryl products are only approved for use in children ages 6 years and older. Benadryl products that are applied to the skin (such as the cream, gel, or spray) are only approved for use in children 2 years of age and older.  Using Benadryl in babies can increase the risk of serious side effects such as:  Before giving Benadryl to your baby, talk with your doctor. Your doctor may want to evaluate your baby's symptoms. If they decide that treatment with Benadryl is needed, your doctor can also recommend the most appropriate dosage of the drug.  Taking too much Benadryl can increase your risk of side effects.  Symptoms of an overdose in adults and children can include:  If you think you've taken too much of this drug, call your doctor or seek guidance from the American Association of Poison Control Centers at 800-222-1222 or through their  online tool .  But if your symptoms are severe, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room right away.   Over-the-counter Benadryl is available in many different forms. Some are oral (taken by mouth), and others are topical (applied to the skin). Forms include:  Store brands that contain diphenhydramine, the same ingredient in Benadryl, are available in other forms. These forms include:  Prescription diphenhydramine, the ingredient in Benadryl, is also available as a solution that's used for injections. No Benadryl or diphenhydramine product is available as a topical lotion or as eye drops.  Benadryl is an over-the-counter antihistamine that's used to help relieve symptoms of hay fever, other allergies, and the common cold, as well as itchy skin caused by insect bites, hives, and other causes.  Some of Benadryl's common uses are described below. Not all of these uses are recommended by the FDA or by medical experts.  Benadryl is an approved over-the-counter treatment of symptoms of hay fever and other respiratory allergies such as:  Benadryl is effective for reducing symptoms of allergies. However, it's not usually a first-choice treatment for treating hay fever or other respiratory allergies. This is because of the risk of side effects such as sleepiness.  Newer, "second-generation" antihistamines are usually preferred over Benadryl for treating these conditions. These medications include:  Over-the-counter Benadryl products aren't approved for helping to improve sleep. However, diphenhydramine, the main ingredient contained in most Benadryl products, is contained in other products that are used to help improve sleep. These products include:  These products are approved for occasional use to help relieve sleeplessness. According to the  American Academy of Sleep Medicine , these products aren't recommended to treat ongoing or long-term  insomnia  (trouble sleeping).  Some topical, over-the-counter Benadryl products are approved for treating hives, itchy skin, and rash. These products include:  Oral over-the-counter Benadryl products aren't approved to treat hives, itchy skin, and rash. However, these products are sometimes used for these purposes. They're effective for this use, but they're not usually a first-choice treatment because of side effects such as sleepiness.  Newer, "second-generation" antihistamines are usually preferred over oral Benadryl for treating these symptoms. These newer medications include:  Benadryl isn't meant to be used for treating anxiety. It can make you feel sleepy, which might temporarily make you feel less anxious. However, this effect will wear off after a few days of using the product.  If you have symptoms of anxiety, talk with your doctor about medications that are a better choice for treating your symptoms.  Some topical, over-the-counter Benadryl products are approved for treating pain and itchy skin caused by poison ivy. These products include:  Over-the-counter Benadryl products aren't approved to treat symptoms of motion sickness. However, Benadryl is often used to treat these symptoms.  Benadryl is often effective for reducing symptoms of motion sickness, but it can cause sleepiness. Other medications are considered a first-choice treatment for people who need to relieve motion sickness but want to stay awake while traveling.  If you get symptoms of motion sickness, talk with your doctor about treatment options before you travel.  Some topical, over-the-counter Benadryl products are approved for treating pain and itchy skin caused by insect bites and stings. These products include:  Oral, over-the-counter Benadryl products are approved to treat some symptoms of the common cold. These symptoms include sneezing and runny nose, but they don't include  cough .  Although some people take Benadryl to treat cough, an  analysis  of clinical studies shows that antihistamines such as Benadryl don't improve symptoms of cough.  Over-the-counter Benadryl isn't approved to treat  migraine  headaches. Diphenhydramine, the drug contained in Benadryl, is sometimes used with other medications for treating migraine headaches. However, it may not help improve symptoms.  The  American Headache Society  recommends against using diphenhydramine for treating migraine headaches.  Oral over-the-counter Benadryl products are approved to treat some symptoms of the common cold, including sneezing and runny nose.  An  analysis  of clinical research found that antihistamines such as Benadryl can slightly decrease these symptoms in adults. But there isn't enough research to know if Benadryl reduces these symptoms in children.  Over-the-counter Benadryl products aren't approved to treat symptoms of  eczema .  The  American Academy of Dermatology  recommends not using Benadryl products to treat eczema. This includes Benadryl products that are oral (taken by mouth) and topical (applied to the skin).  Over-the-counter Benadryl products aren't approved and don't work to treat  heat rash . Heat rash usually goes away on its own without treatment. If you have symptoms that don't go away, call your doctor. They may recommend treatments such as calamine lotion.  Over-the-counter Benadryl products aren't approved to treat sinus pain. However, some oral Benadryl products contain diphenhydramine, an antihistamine, and a decongestant called phenylephrine. These products can help reduce nasal congestion and stuffiness and may also help reduce sinus pressure or pain.  These products include:  The swelling that often occurs along with hives is called  angioedema . It usually occurs on the hands or feet, or around the lips and face.  Diphenhydramine (the drug contained in Benadryl) may be used for more severe cases of swelling. As an example, painful swelling could be considered severe.  Because Benadryl can cause sleepiness, it's not typically recommended for less severe swelling. For this symptom, newer "second-generation" antihistamines are usually preferred over oral Benadryl. These medications include:  Note: In rare cases, swelling from hives may cause a swollen tongue or throat and cause trouble breathing. If you have these symptoms, call 911 or go to an emergency room for treatment.  Some topical over-the-counter Benadryl products are approved for treating pain and itchy skin caused by  sunburn . These products include:  Benadryl may be safe for short-term use during pregnancy in some situations. For treatment of severe allergic reactions during pregnancy, injected diphenhydramine is often considered the first-choice treatment. Diphenhydramine is the ingredient contained in Benadryl.  Benadryl shouldn't be used during the last two weeks of pregnancy. This is due to a risk of eye disease in the newborn.  If you're pregnant, talk with your doctor before taking Benadryl. Your doctor may want to evaluate your symptoms to determine the safest treatment.  Taking Benadryl occasionally during breastfeeding is likely safe. However, taking Benadryl regularly or in large doses may cause side effects in a child who is breastfed. It may also reduce your milk supply.  Antihistamines that cause less sleepiness are usually preferred over oral Benadryl while breastfeeding. These medications include:  Benadryl is an antihistamine. There are several other antihistamines that can be used as alternatives.  Antihistamines are typically classified as either first generation or second generation.  The first-generation antihistamines usually cause more sleepiness and other side effects than the second-generation antihistamines. Benadryl contains diphenhydramine, a first-generation antihistamine. Examples of the other medications in these groups are listed below.  First-generation antihistamines include:  Second-generation antihistamines include:  You may wonder how Benadryl compares to other medications that are prescribed for similar uses. Below are comparisons between Benadryl and several medications.  Benadryl is a first-generation antihistamine. Claritin (loratadine) is a newer, second-generation antihistamine. The second-generation antihistamines are often called nonsedating antihistamines because they're less likely to cause sleepiness compared to first-generation antihistamines.  Both Benadryl and Claritin are over-the-counter medications.   Uses   Oral Benadryl products are approved for decreasing symptoms of hay fever and other respiratory allergies, and symptoms of the common cold such as sneezing and runny nose. Benadryl products that are topical (applied to the skin) are approved for decreasing pain and itchy skin caused by things such as hives and insect bites.  Claritin is approved for decreasing symptoms of hay fever and other respiratory allergies.   Drug forms   Benadryl comes in many different forms, including:  Oral Benadryl products are usually taken every 4 to 6 hours. Topical products are typically used up to 4 times daily.  Claritin is also available in many different forms, including:  Claritin tablets, liquid-filled capsules, and syrup are taken once daily. The orally disintegrating tablets are used either once daily or twice daily.   Side effects and risks   Benadryl and Claritin have some similar side effects, and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.  * Both Benadryl and Claritin can cause sleepiness, but it's much more common in people who take Benadryl.   Effectiveness   Benadryl and Claritin are both effective for reducing symptoms of hay fever and other allergies, and for treating hives or itchy skin. However, Benadryl isn't usually a first-choice treatment for these conditions due to its risk of side effects such as sleepiness.  Claritin and other second-generation antihistamines are usually preferred.   Costs   Benadryl and Claritin are both brand-name, over-the-counter products. Claritin usually costs more than Benadryl.  Both of these products have store-brand versions. Store brands are usually cheaper than the brand-name versions.  Benadryl is a first-generation antihistamine. Zyrtec (cetirizine) is a newer, second-generation antihistamine. The second-generation antihistamines are often called nonsedating antihistamines because they're less likely to cause sleepiness compared to first-generation antihistamines.  Both Benadryl and Zyrtec are over-the-counter medications.   Uses   Oral Benadryl products are approved for decreasing symptoms of hay fever and other respiratory allergies, and symptoms of the common cold such as sneezing and runny nose. Benadryl products that are topical (applied to the skin) are approved for decreasing pain and itchy skin due to hives, insect bites, and other causes.  Zyrtec is approved for decreasing symptoms of hay fever and other respiratory allergies.   Drug forms   Benadryl is available in many different forms, including:  Oral Benadryl products are usually taken every 4 to 6 hours. Topical Benadryl products are typically used up to 4 times daily.  Zyrtec is also available in many different forms, including:  Zyrtec products are usually taken once daily.   Side effects and risks   Benadryl and Zyrtec have some similar side effects, and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.  * Both Benadryl and Zyrtec can cause sleepiness, but it's more common in people who take Benadryl.   Effectiveness   Benadryl and Zyrtec are both effective for reducing symptoms of hay fever and other allergies, and for treating hives or itchy skin. However, Benadryl isn't usually a first-choice for these conditions because of its risk of side effects such as sleepiness. Zyrtec and other second-generation antihistamines are usually preferred.   Costs   Benadryl and Zyrtec are both brand-name over-the-counter products. Zyrtec usually costs more than Benadryl.  Both of these products have store-brand versions. Store brands are usually cheaper than the brand-name versions.  Benadryl is a first-generation antihistamine. Allegra (fexofenadine) is a newer, second-generation antihistamine. The second-generation antihistamines are often called nonsedating antihistamines because they're less likely to cause sleepiness compared to first-generation antihistamines.  Both Benadryl and Allegra are over-the-counter medications.   Uses   Oral Benadryl products are approved for decreasing symptoms of hay fever and other respiratory allergies, and symptoms of the common cold such as sneezing and runny nose. Benadryl products that are topical (applied to the skin) are approved for decreasing pain and itchy skin due to hives, insect bites, and other causes.  Allegra is approved for decreasing symptoms of hay fever and other respiratory allergies, and itchy skin caused by hives, insect bites, and other causes.   Drug forms   Benadryl is available in many different forms, including:  Oral Benadryl products are usually taken every 4 to 6 hours. Topical Benadryl products are typically used up to 4 times daily.  Allegra is also available in many different forms, including:  Allegra products are taken once or twice daily.   Side effects and risks   Benadryl and Allegra have some similar side effects, and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.   Effectiveness   Benadryl and Allegra are both effective for reducing symptoms of hay fever and other allergies and for treating hives or itchy skin. However, Benadryl isn't usually a first-choice for these conditions because of the risk of side effects such as sleepiness. Allegra and other second-generation antihistamines are usually preferred.   Costs   Benadryl and Allegra are both brand-name, over-the-counter products. Allegra usually costs more than Benadryl.  Both of these products have store-brand versions. Store brands are usually cheaper than the brand-name versions.  Benadryl contains the ingredient diphenhydramine, a first-generation antihistamine.  There are different forms of Unisom. Most of these also contain the ingredient diphenhydramine. However, one Unisom product contains a similar drug, doxylamine.   Uses   Oral Benadryl products are approved for decreasing symptoms of hay fever and other respiratory allergies, and symptoms of the common cold such as sneezing and runny nose. Benadryl products that are topical (applied to the skin) are approved for decreasing pain and itchy skin due to hives, insect bites, and other causes.  Although it's not approved for this purpose, some people take Benadryl to help improve their sleep.  Unisom is approved for helping relieve occasional sleeplessness. It's not intended to be used to treat ongoing or long-term insomnia (trouble sleeping).   Drug forms   Benadryl is available in many different forms, including:  Oral Benadryl products are usually taken every 4 to 6 hours. Topical Benadryl products are typically used up to 4 times daily. Oral Benadryl products aren't approved for sleeplessness, but some people take oral Benadryl once before bedtime for that purpose.  There are also several forms of Unisom products. These include:  These products are usually taken once daily just before bedtime or at bedtime.   Side effects and risks   Benadryl and most Unisom products contain the same ingredient, diphenhydramine. One form of Unisom contains a different ingredient, doxylamine. Doxylamine is very similar to diphenhydramine and causes very similar common and serious side effects.  The most common side effects of Benadryl and Unisom include:  Some serious side effects can include:   Effectiveness   Benadryl and most forms of Unisom contain the same active ingredient, diphenhydramine. Both products can help with falling asleep in people with occasional sleeplessness. This effect may decrease or wear off with continued use.  According to the  American Academy of Sleep Medicine , these products aren't recommended to treat ongoing or long-term insomnia (trouble sleeping).   Costs   Benadryl and Unisom are both brand-name over-the-counter products. These products usually cost about the same.  Both of these products have store-brand versions. Store brands are usually cheaper than the brand-name versions.  Benadryl contains the ingredient diphenhydramine, a first-generation antihistamine.  Melatonin is a hormone that naturally occurs in the body. It's involved in regulating the wake-sleep cycle of the body. It's available as a dietary supplement.   Uses   Oral Benadryl products are approved for decreasing symptoms of hay fever and other respiratory allergies, and symptoms of the common cold such as sneezing and runny nose. Benadryl products that are topical (applied to the skin) are approved for decreasing pain and itchy skin due to hives, insect bites, and other causes.  Although it's not approved, some people take oral Benadryl to help improve their sleep.  Melatonin is most commonly used to help relieve sleeplessness.   Drug forms   Benadryl is available in many different forms, including:  Oral Benadryl products are usually taken every 4 to 6 hours. Topical Benadryl products are typically used up to 4 times daily. Oral Benadryl products aren't approved for sleeplessness, but some people take oral Benadryl once before bedtime for that purpose.  Melatonin is also available in different forms, including:  Melatonin is usually taken once daily at bedtime.   Side effects and risks   Benadryl and melatonin have some similar side effects, and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.   Effectiveness   Benadryl can help with falling asleep in people with occasional sleeplessness. However, this effect may decrease or wear off with continued use of the product.  In an  analysis  of clinical studies, melatonin slightly decreases the time it takes to fall asleep and increases total sleep time. These effects don't decrease with continued use of the product.  According to the  American Academy of Sleep Medicine , neither Benadryl nor melatonin are recommended to treat ongoing or long-term insomnia (trouble sleeping).   Costs   Melatonin usually costs more than Benadryl.  Both of these products have store-brand versions. Store brands are usually cheaper than the brand-name versions.  You shouldn't consume alcohol while taking Benadryl. Drinking alcohol with Benadryl can increase the effects of alcohol and cause excess sleepiness that can impair your abilities. For instance, you may have trouble driving.  Benadryl can interact with several other medications. It can also interact with certain supplements.  Below is a list of medications that can interact with Benadryl. This list doesn't contain all drugs that may interact with Benadryl.  Different drug interactions can cause different effects. For instance, some can interfere with how well a drug works, while others can cause increased side effects.  If you take other medications, talk with your pharmacist before taking Benadryl. Your pharmacist can help you avoid potential interactions.   Anticholinergic drugs   Anticholinergic drugs block the action of acetylcholine, a chemical that relays messages between cells in your body. Benadryl also blocks acetylcholine. Because anticholinergic drugs and Benadryl work in the same way, taking them together can increase the risk of side effects. Examples of these drugs include:   Medications that cause sleepiness   Many medications can cause sleepiness. Taking these drugs with Benadryl can increase the risk of excessive sleepiness. Examples of these medications include:  Antihistamines, such as:   Antidepressant  drugs, such as:  Antipsychotic drugs, such as:  Benzodiazepines, such as:  Opioids, such as:  Sedative-hypnotic drugs, such as:   Benadryl and Xanax   Xanax (alprazolam) is a type of drug called a benzodiazepine, which can cause sleepiness. Taking Xanax with Benadryl can increase your risk of excessive sleepiness. This can make you too sleepy to drive or prevent you from doing other potentially dangerous activities safely.  If you take Xanax, talk with your doctor before taking Benadryl. They may recommend other treatment options.   Benadryl and Zoloft   Zoloft (sertraline) is an antidepressant that can cause sleepiness in some people who take it. Taking Zoloft with Benadryl may increase the risk of excessive sleepiness. This can make you too sleepy to drive or prevent you from doing other potentially dangerous activities safely.  If you take Zoloft, talk with your doctor before taking Benadryl. They may recommend other treatment options.   Benadryl and Zyrtec   Zyrtec (cetirizine) is an antihistamine. Benadryl is also an antihistamine. Taking Benadryl with Zyrtec may increase the risk of certain side effects such as sleepiness, dry mouth, fatigue, and headache.  If you take Zyrtec, talk with your doctor before taking Benadryl. They may recommend other treatment options.   Benadryl and Motrin   There are no known interactions between Benadryl and Motrin (ibuprofen).   Benadryl and acetaminophen   There are no known interactions between Benadryl and acetaminophen (Tylenol).  Some herbs and supplements can cause sleepiness. Taking these with Benadryl can increase the risk of excessive sleepiness. Examples of these supplements include:  Take Benadryl according to the instructions on the package or according to the directions you've received from your doctor.  For hay fever or other respiratory allergies, oral Benadryl is typically taken every 4 to 6 hours. If topical Benadryl is used to treat itchy skin, it should be applied up to 4 times daily. Each application should be separated by 4 to 6 hours.  Benadryl can be taken with or without food.  Benadryl tablets can be crushed. If you have trouble swallowing whole tablets, Benadryl liquid solution and chewable tablets are available.  Benadryl is an antihistamine. If you have allergies or have a cold, your body releases a chemical messenger called histamine. This messenger causes symptoms such as inflammation,  edema  (swelling), itchiness, and runny nose.  Benadryl blocks some of the effects of histamine and decreases some of the symptoms caused by it.  When taken by mouth, Benadryl begins to work within 15 to 30 minutes. When applied to the skin, it works right away.  Here are answers to some frequently asked questions about Benadryl.  Yes, Benadryl causes most people who take it to feel sleepy. This side effect may go away after three to four days of daily use.  Benadryl isn't an effective treatment for anxiety. Since Benadryl can make you feel sleepy, some people may feel that it causes them to relax. However, this effect often goes away after using the product for a few days.  No, Benadryl isn't an  NSAID  (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug). Benadryl is an antihistamine.  No, Benadryl doesn't work as an expectorant. An expectorant is a product that loosens mucus in your respiratory tract so you can cough it up.  Before taking Benadryl, talk with your doctor about any medical conditions you have. Benadryl may not be a good choice for you if you have certain medical conditions. Examples of these conditions include:  Other warnings apply to certain groups:  Each Benadryl package is given an expiration date by the manufacturer of the product. This date is printed on the package. The purpose of the expiration date is to guarantee the effectiveness of the medication during this time.  The  current stance  of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is to avoid using expired medications. However, an FDA  study  showed that many medications may still be good beyond the expiration date listed on the bottle.  How long a medication remains good can depend on many factors, including how and where the medication is stored. Benadryl should be stored at room temperature in its original container. Excessive humidity should be avoided.  If you have unused medication that has gone past the expiration date, talk to your pharmacist about whether you might still be able to use it.  The following information is provided for clinicians and other healthcare professionals.  Benadryl is an H1-receptor antagonist. It competes with free histamine at the H1-receptor binding sites. Benadryl antiemetic effects are likely due to central anticholinergic effects. Benadryl also has  central nervous system  depressant effects and has a direct suppressive effect on the cough center.  After oral administration, the onset of action is approximately 15 to 30 minutes. Peak concentrations occur in 2 to 4 hours.  Benadryl is metabolized hepatically. The plasma half-life is 2 to 8 hours with a duration of action of about 4 to 6 hours.  Benadryl is contraindicated in patients with a known hypersensitivity to Benadryl or any of its components.  Benadryl should be stored at room temperature in its original container. Excessive humidity should be avoided.   Disclaimer : MedicalNewsToday has made every effort to make certain that all information is factually correct, comprehensive, and up-to-date. However, this article should not be used as a substitute for the knowledge and expertise of a licensed healthcare professional. You should always consult your doctor or other healthcare professional before taking any medication. The drug information contained herein is subject to change and is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. The absence of warnings or other information for a given drug does not indicate that the drug or drug combination is safe, effective, or appropriate for all patients or all specific uses.    
 Allegra. (n.d.).  https://www.allegra.com/  
 Bayard, M., et al. (2008). Restless legs syndrome.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2008/0715/p235.html  
 Benadryl. (n.d.).  https://www.benadryl.com/products  
 Benadryl - diphenhydramine hydrochloride tablet, film coated. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=702f9786-7ce9-43e4-921d-e1db09612127  
 Benadryl overdose treatment. (2017).  http://missouripoisoncenter.org/benadryl-overdose/  
 Bernstein, J. A.,  et al . (2014). The diagnosis and management of acute and chronic urticaria: 2014 update.  https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20Documents/Practice%20and%20Parameters/Urticaria-2014.pdf  
 Brainard, A.,  et al . (2014). Prevention and treatment of motion sickness.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2014/0701/p41.html  
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2007). Infant deaths associated with cough and cold medications - two states, 2005 [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17218934  
 Claritin. (n.d.).  https://www.claritin.com/  
 Clinical pharmacology. (2018). Tampa, FL: Elsevier.  https://www.clinicalpharmacology-ip.com/  
 De Sutter, A. I.,  et al . (2015). Antihistamines for the common cold.  https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD009345.pub2/full  
 Gray, S. L.,  et al . (2015). Cumulative use of strong anticholinergic medications and incident dementia.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4358759/  
 Hasnain, M.,  et al . (2015). Weight considerations in psychotropic drug prescribing and switching.  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.3810/pgm.2013.09.2706  
 Hives (urticaria). (n.d.).  https://acaai.org/allergies/types/skin-allergies/hives-urticaria  
 Jones, J.,  et al  (1986). Diphenhydramine-induced toxic psychosis [Abstract].  https://www.ajemjournal.com/article/0735-6757(86)90312-8/fulltext  
 Lieberman, P. (n.d.). Tolerance to the therapeutic effects of antihistamines.  https://www.aaaai.org/ask-the-expert/therapeutic-antihistamine  
 Orr, S. L.,  et al . (2016). Management of adults with acute migraine in the emergency department: The American Headache Society evidence assessment of parenteral pharmacotherapies [Abstract].  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/head.12835  
 Richardson, G. S.,  et al . (2002). Tolerance to daytime sedative effects of H1 antihistamines.  https://journals.lww.com/psychopharmacology/pages/articleviewer.aspx?year=2002&amp;issue=10000&amp;article=00012&amp;type=abstract  
 Saran, J. S.,  et al . (2017). Chronic diphenhydramine abuse and withdrawal [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5874453/  
 Schutte-Rodin, S.,  et al . (2008). Clinical guideline for the evaluation and management of chronic insomnia in adults.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2576317/  
 Seidman, M. D.,  et al . (2015). Clinical practice guideline: Allergic rhinitis executive summary.  https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0194599814562166?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&amp;rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org&amp;rfr_dat=cr_pub%3Dpubmed  
 Smith, S. M.,  et al . (2014). Over-the-counter (OTC) medications for acute cough in children and adults in community settings [Abstract].  https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD001831.pub5/epdf/full  
 Sur, D. K.,  et al . (2010). Treatment of allergic rhinitis.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2010/0615/p1440.html  
 Unisom. (n.d.).  https://www.unisom.com/  
 Use caution when giving cough and cold products to kids. (2018).  https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou/SpecialFeatures/ucm263948.htm  
 Wallace D.V.,  et al . (2008). The diagnosis and management of rhinitis: An updated practice parameter.  https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20Documents/Practice%20and%20Parameters/rhinitis2008-diagnosis-management.pdf  
 Wigle, P. R.,  et al . (2006). Pregnancy and OTC cough, cold, and analgesic preparations.  https://www.uspharmacist.com/article/pregnancy-and-otc-cough-cold-and-analgesic-preparations  
 Wong, H. C. G. (2015). Long-term use of diphenhydramine.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4592307/  
 Zyrtec. (n.d.).  https://www.zyrtec.com/     Allegra. (n.d.).  https://www.allegra.com/   Bayard, M., et al. (2008). Restless legs syndrome.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2008/0715/p235.html   Benadryl. (n.d.).  https://www.benadryl.com/products   Benadryl - diphenhydramine hydrochloride tablet, film coated. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=702f9786-7ce9-43e4-921d-e1db09612127   Benadryl overdose treatment. (2017).  http://missouripoisoncenter.org/benadryl-overdose/   Bernstein, J. A.,  et al . (2014). The diagnosis and management of acute and chronic urticaria: 2014 update.  https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20Documents/Practice%20and%20Parameters/Urticaria-2014.pdf   Brainard, A.,  et al . (2014). Prevention and treatment of motion sickness.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2014/0701/p41.html   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2007). Infant deaths associated with cough and cold medications - two states, 2005 [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17218934   Claritin. (n.d.).  https://www.claritin.com/   Clinical pharmacology. (2018). Tampa, FL: Elsevier.  https://www.clinicalpharmacology-ip.com/   De Sutter, A. I.,  et al . (2015). Antihistamines for the common cold.  https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD009345.pub2/full   Gray, S. L.,  et al . (2015). Cumulative use of strong anticholinergic medications and incident dementia.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4358759/   Hasnain, M.,  et al . (2015). Weight considerations in psychotropic drug prescribing and switching.  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.3810/pgm.2013.09.2706   Hives (urticaria). (n.d.).  https://acaai.org/allergies/types/skin-allergies/hives-urticaria   Jones, J.,  et al  (1986). Diphenhydramine-induced toxic psychosis [Abstract].  https://www.ajemjournal.com/article/0735-6757(86)90312-8/fulltext   Lieberman, P. (n.d.). Tolerance to the therapeutic effects of antihistamines.  https://www.aaaai.org/ask-the-expert/therapeutic-antihistamine   Orr, S. L.,  et al . (2016). Management of adults with acute migraine in the emergency department: The American Headache Society evidence assessment of parenteral pharmacotherapies [Abstract].  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/head.12835   Richardson, G. S.,  et al . (2002). Tolerance to daytime sedative effects of H1 antihistamines.  https://journals.lww.com/psychopharmacology/pages/articleviewer.aspx?year=2002&amp;issue=10000&amp;article=00012&amp;type=abstract   Saran, J. S.,  et al . (2017). Chronic diphenhydramine abuse and withdrawal [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5874453/   Schutte-Rodin, S.,  et al . (2008). Clinical guideline for the evaluation and management of chronic insomnia in adults.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2576317/   Seidman, M. D.,  et al . (2015). Clinical practice guideline: Allergic rhinitis executive summary.  https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0194599814562166?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&amp;rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org&amp;rfr_dat=cr_pub%3Dpubmed   Smith, S. M.,  et al . (2014). Over-the-counter (OTC) medications for acute cough in children and adults in community settings [Abstract].  https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD001831.pub5/epdf/full   Sur, D. K.,  et al . (2010). Treatment of allergic rhinitis.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2010/0615/p1440.html   Unisom. (n.d.).  https://www.unisom.com/   Use caution when giving cough and cold products to kids. (2018).  https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou/SpecialFeatures/ucm263948.htm   Wallace D.V.,  et al . (2008). The diagnosis and management of rhinitis: An updated practice parameter.  https://www.aaaai.org/Aaaai/media/MediaLibrary/PDF%20Documents/Practice%20and%20Parameters/rhinitis2008-diagnosis-management.pdf   Wigle, P. R.,  et al . (2006). Pregnancy and OTC cough, cold, and analgesic preparations.  https://www.uspharmacist.com/article/pregnancy-and-otc-cough-cold-and-analgesic-preparations   Wong, H. C. G. (2015). Long-term use of diphenhydramine.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4592307/   Zyrtec. (n.d.).  https://www.zyrtec.com/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  MNT's Medical Network. "Benadryl (diphenhydramine)."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 May. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325169.php&gt;    APA  MNT's Medical Network. (2019, May 17). "Benadryl (diphenhydramine)."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  