 Recurring dizziness or severe dizzy spells can significantly interfere with a person's life. It rarely indicates a medical emergency, however. People can experience dizziness after:  Usually, people will be able to identify the cause of their dizziness. However, this symptom may occur unexpectedly or without any clear reason.  The causes of dizziness can range from temporary physical changes to more serious underlying medical conditions, some of which we will detail below.  Many people use the terms " vertigo " and "dizziness" interchangeably.  Although these conditions create similar sensations, they are slightly different.  When someone feels dizzy, they can feel woozy or disoriented. Vertigo, on the other hand, refers to the artificial sensation of movement. Vertigo can cause people to feel as though the environment around them is spinning or tilting.  Vertigo occurs due to the development of problems in the inner ear. Causes of vertigo can include:  Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo develops when  calcium  carbonate particles collect in the inner ear canals.  These canals send information about the body's position and movements to the brain, but the presence of the calcium particles causes the brain to misread the information.  This inner ear condition has no known cause, but some scientists believe that it can occur when fluid builds up in the ear canals.  Ménière's disease can develop suddenly and without any apparent cause. It can give rise to vertigo, a ringing or roaring sound in the ears, and  hearing loss .  Infections can cause  inflammation  in the inner ear, or labyrinth. Labyrinthitis tends to develop after a viral infection, such as a cold or  flu .  Antiviral and antihistamine medications can effectively treat labyrinthitis. However, parts of the inner ear may sustain permanent damage as a result of this condition.  Repetitive motion from being in a vehicle, such as a car, airplane, or boat, can disrupt the structures of the inner ear, causing dizziness, nausea, and vomiting. People call this "motion sickness" or "seasickness."  Being pregnant or taking certain medications can increase a person's sensitivity to motion and increase their risk of experiencing motion sickness. The symptoms of motion sickness usually subside away once the person sets foot on solid ground.  A  migraine  is a type of recurring  headache  that can cause a throbbing or pulsing pain on one side of the head. The American Migraine Foundation estimate that  30–50%  of people will experience dizziness during a migraine episode.  Sometimes, people experience dizziness before the onset of a migraine episode. Other neurologic symptoms, or auras, can precede the pain of a migraine headache. Auras can affect a person's vision, speech, and motor control.  A sharp drop in  blood pressure  can cause a brief sensation of lightheadedness. Blood pressure changes can occur after sitting or standing up too quickly.  Other conditions that can cause blood pressure changes include:  Taking certain medications, such as diuretics,  beta-blockers , or  antidepressants , can also cause changes in blood pressure.  Conditions that affect the cardiovascular system, such as the buildup of plaque in the arteries and congestive  heart failure , can cause dizziness. People may experience dizziness or feel lightheaded before or after a  heart attack  or  stroke .  If a person has cardiovascular disease, they will likely experience other signs and symptoms, including:  Iron deficiency can result in a condition called  anemia , in which the body does not have enough oxygen-rich blood.  Anemia can cause the following symptoms:  Making appropriate dietary changes and taking iron supplements can help treat mild forms of iron-deficiency anemia. People who have a severe iron deficiency may require a blood transfusion.   Hypoglycemia  occurs when blood glucose, or blood sugar, falls below the normal levels. Causes of hypoglycemia include:  Symptoms of hypoglycemia can appear suddenly and vary in severity. A few of these symptoms include:  Autoimmune inner ear disease (AIED) refers to any condition wherein the immune system mistakenly attacks the inner ear. AIED can cause hearing loss in one or both ears.  Other symptoms of AIED include:  AIED causes nonspecific symptoms that are similar to those of an ear infection. For doctors to accurately diagnose AIED, they need to take a full medical history, perform a physical examination, and track any additional symptoms.  People who have AIED may develop another autoimmune disease that affects the entire body.  Long-term or chronic  stress  may contribute to the development of significant health problems, such as  depression ,  anxiety ,  heart disease ,  diabetes , or immune dysfunction.  During the stress response, the brain releases hormones that affect the respiratory and cardiovascular systems.  These hormones narrow the blood vessels, raise the heart rate, and cause rapid, shallow breathing. These responses can lead to dizziness or lightheadedness.  Other symptoms of stress include:  Dizziness is a  common symptom of anxiety . However, the exact relationship between the two varies among people.  Some people may experience anxiety attacks that trigger dizziness, while others might have a sudden onset of dizziness that triggers an anxiety attack.  Stressful events, such as an exam or a challenging emotional situation, can trigger anxiety attacks. People may feel dizzy, disoriented, and nauseous during an anxiety attack.  Other symptoms of anxiety include:  Dizziness may indicate a more serious underlying medical condition when it occurs alongside symptoms such as:  Experiencing an episode of sudden or severe dizziness can be alarming. However, the dizziness usually resolves on its own and does not require emergency medical attention.  Dizziness is a nonspecific symptom that can indicate an underlying medical condition, such as anxiety, stress, or low blood sugar.  People should speak with their healthcare provider if they experience severe or recurring dizziness.    
 5 things everyone should know about stress. (n.d.).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/stress/5thingsshldknowaboutstress-508-03132017_142898.pdf  
 Anemia. (n.d.).  https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/anemia  
 Anxiety disorders. (2018).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/anxiety-disorders/index.shtml  
 Roh, K. J.,  et al.  (2018). Role of emotional distress in prolongation of dizziness: A cross-sectional study. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5784367/Tepper, D. (n.d.). Migraine associated vertigo.  https://americanmigrainefoundation.org/resource-library/migraine-associated-vertigo/     5 things everyone should know about stress. (n.d.).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/stress/5thingsshldknowaboutstress-508-03132017_142898.pdf   Anemia. (n.d.).  https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/anemia   Anxiety disorders. (2018).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/anxiety-disorders/index.shtml   Roh, K. J.,  et al.  (2018). Role of emotional distress in prolongation of dizziness: A cross-sectional study. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5784367/Tepper, D. (n.d.). Migraine associated vertigo.  https://americanmigrainefoundation.org/resource-library/migraine-associated-vertigo/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Eske, Jamie. "What causes dizziness?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 May. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325251.php&gt;    APA  Eske, J. (2019, May 22). "What causes dizziness?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  