 However, regularly waking up in the middle of the night can become problematic, as it interrupts sleep.  Sleep is a necessary function that helps restore the body. Not getting enough sleep can give rise to significant health problems and impair cognitive function.  The following are some common causes and potential remedies for a person waking in the middle of the night.   Sleep apnea  is a  common cause  of waking in the middle of the night. It causes shallow breathing, which may cause a person to wake up several times per night. In many cases, a person will not even realize that their sleep is interrupted.  A person with sleep apnea may notice symptoms such as:  If sleep apnea is the cause or likely cause of frequently waking up in the middle of the night, a healthcare provider will probably refer the person to a sleep center. They may also recommend a treatment plan to address the sleep apnea.  Treatment options may include undergoing surgery, using airway pressure devices, or trying oral appliances that help open the airways.   Anxiety  and  depression  can cause  insomnia . The opposite is also true; insomnia can cause either of these conditions.  Both anxiety and depression make it difficult for a person to quiet their mind or shut down their thinking processes. This can make it hard to fall asleep and stay asleep.  A person should speak to their healthcare provider if they feel anxious or depressed. There are several therapeutic options they can try, including:  Home remedies for anxiety and depression often involve relaxation techniques. These include:   Insomnia  is a condition wherein a person finds it difficult or impossible to fall or stay asleep. It causes daytime tiredness and therefore makes getting through the day very difficult.  Insomnia is linked with depression and anxiety, and it can be both the cause and symptom of these conditions.  There are many potential remedies a person can try to reduce the severity of their insomnia. Some techniques include:  The urge to urinate can wake a person in the night. Though some people may be able to prevent this feeling by reducing liquid intake at night, others have this issue due to an underlying condition.  Some factors that can cause  nighttime urination  include:  Treatment depends on what causes the need to urinate at night. Some potential solutions to these problems include:  If pregnancy is behind the need to urinate during the night, this symptom should subside at the end of the pregnancy.  A person who experiences  night terrors  may not actually wake up. Instead, they may scream, thrash around, cry, or appear fearful. Sometimes, the person does not remember what occurs to cause the terror.  Though children are  most likely  to experience night terrors, they do affect adults as well.  Children typically outgrow night terrors as they age. However, caregivers should contact a pediatrician if:  A person sleeps best when their body temperature is cool.  At times, a person's body temperature may rise too much. For many people, this is because their bedroom is too warm. For others, it may be due to  night sweats .  People who sleep in a warm environment should take steps to cool the room down. For example, they may use air conditioning or a fan or remove a blanket from the bed.  Night sweats can occur due to medications a person is taking, autoimmune disorders, infection, or anxiety. If night sweats occur, a person should speak to their doctor about ways to treat the underlying condition.  According to the  National Sleep Foundation , screen time before bed can cause problems such as a reduction in melatonin and a disrupted body clock. This can make sleeping difficult and may cause a person to wake in the middle of the night.  In addition, noises coming from a TV, cell phone, or other electronic device can cause a person to wake up from sleep.  To help prevent these issues, the  National Sleep Foundation  recommend stopping the use of electronic devices 30 minutes to 2 hours before bed. This will allow the brain to start to settle and may promote staying asleep.  Eating too much food or spicy food too close to bedtime can cause sleep issues.   Indigestion  causes uncomfortable bloating and gas that can make it hard to fall asleep, and it may wake someone up in the middle of the night.  To prevent  indigestion  at night, a person should eat heavier meals earlier in the day. For people who are hungry before bed, a light snack is the best choice.  A person should see their healthcare provider if they:  Specifically, a person should investigate any unexplained fatigue. It is possible that the fatigue is due to an undiagnosed medical condition.  There are several steps a person can take to improve their sleep hygiene. Sleep hygiene refers to setting up the environment and changing some personal habits in a way that aims to make sleeping easier.  Some steps to take to improve sleep hygiene include:  Occasionally waking in the middle of the night is not necessarily an issue. However, if a person frequently wakes up at night, they should try to address this.  There are steps a person can take to stop waking up in the middle of the night, such as making appropriate lifestyle changes, seeking medication changes, and treating any underlying conditions.  Getting enough good quality sleep is a vital part of a living a healthy life.    
 Markov, D.,  et al.  (2006). Update on parasomnias: A review for psychiatric practice.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2958868/  
 Scary ways technology affects your sleep. (n.d.).  https://www.sleep.org/articles/ways-technology-affects-sleep/  
 Sleep apnea. (n.d.).  https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/sleep-apnea  
 Sleep disorders. (n.d.).  https://adaa.org/understanding-anxiety/related-illnesses/sleep-disorders  
 What is sleep hygiene. (n.d.).  https://www.sleep.org/articles/sleep-hygiene/  
 Why electronics may stimulate you before bed. (n.d.).  https://www.sleepfoundation.org/articles/why-electronics-may-stimulate-you-bed     Markov, D.,  et al.  (2006). Update on parasomnias: A review for psychiatric practice.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2958868/   Scary ways technology affects your sleep. (n.d.).  https://www.sleep.org/articles/ways-technology-affects-sleep/   Sleep apnea. (n.d.).  https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/sleep-apnea   Sleep disorders. (n.d.).  https://adaa.org/understanding-anxiety/related-illnesses/sleep-disorders   What is sleep hygiene. (n.d.).  https://www.sleep.org/articles/sleep-hygiene/   Why electronics may stimulate you before bed. (n.d.).  https://www.sleepfoundation.org/articles/why-electronics-may-stimulate-you-bed   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Why do I keep waking up at night?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 May. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325294.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2019, May 28). "Why do I keep waking up at night?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  