 Although nosebleeds can be a common occurrence, there are cases when the bleeding may require a visit to a doctor. Most people can stop nosebleeds at home, however.  Read on for tips on how to stop a nosebleed. We also cover when to see a doctor.  When treating a nosebleed, remain calm and do not panic. It may feel like a lot of blood, but a nosebleed is not usually a cause for concern.  To stop a nosebleed, follow these steps:  After a person's nosebleed has subsided, they should avoid activities that could make it come back, such as picking or blowing the nose.  Children are prone to nosebleeds because they may pick their nose and damage the fragile tissue inside.  Steps that a parent or caregiver can follow when a child has a nosebleed include:  A caregiver should seek medical treatment for the child if the nosebleed does not stop after 20 minutes.  If a person has chronic nosebleeds, they may require more significant treatment methods to reduce the bleeding.  Products a person can use to stop a nosebleed include:  A person should always talk to their doctor about the safety of these approaches before trying them at home.  If a person cannot stop their nosebleed with at-home treatments, a variety of medical approaches can help. These include:  In rare and severe cases, a person may need a blood transfusion or a procedure to destroy or suture the blood vessels in the nose that are bleeding.  One of the most common approaches a person may take to stop a nosebleed is trying to put something up the nose.  Although stuffing the nose with tissue or gauze may seem to be a good idea, this approach may worsen the nosebleed by further irritating the nasal tissues.  Also, when they remove the object, it can dislodge the clot that has formed, and the bleeding may start again.  Some people may also try to lean their head back to avoid letting the blood drain out of their nose. However, this can allow the blood to trickle down the back of their throat, which may eventually irritate the stomach. This can cause coughing or choking, particularly in children.  The blood that has trickled down into the stomach can make a person feel nauseated, and they may vomit.  Instead, it is best to sit up straight or lean forward for a little while pinching the nose.  According to the  American Academy of Family Physicians , the most common nosebleed causes are exposure to dry or cold air and nose picking.  Other potential nosebleed causes include:  In some instances, a nosebleed can be a symptom of  high blood pressure .  Since high blood pressure does not always cause other symptoms, it is important to check  blood pressure  regularly and see a doctor if a nosebleed continues for a long time.  If a nosebleed does not stop after about 20 minutes of home care, a person should seek medical attention. A nosebleed that continues for this long will likely not stop without medical treatment.  Other signs a person should seek medical treatment include:  About 10% of nosebleeds require medical intervention. Children and older adults are more likely to need to see a doctor.  If a person starts having frequent nosebleeds, it is best to see a doctor. Chronic nosebleeds can sometimes signal the presence of an underlying medical condition.  Nosebleeds can be concerning, but people can usually treat them at home. If a nosebleed does not stop after 20 minutes of home care, see a doctor.  People should also speak to a doctor if they experience several nosebleeds in a month, as this may be a sign of an underlying issue.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 How to stop a nosebleed. (2015).  https://www.healthychildren.org/English/health-issues/injuries-emergencies/Pages/How-to-Stop-a-Nosebleed.aspx  
 Nosebleed treatment with a bleeding disorder. (2015).  https://www.childrensmn.org/educationmaterials/childrensmn/article/15582/nosebleed-treatment-with-a-bleeding-disorder/  
 Tabassom, A., &amp; Cho, J. J. (2019). Epistaxis (nose bleed).  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK435997/     How to stop a nosebleed. (2015).  https://www.healthychildren.org/English/health-issues/injuries-emergencies/Pages/How-to-Stop-a-Nosebleed.aspx   Nosebleed treatment with a bleeding disorder. (2015).  https://www.childrensmn.org/educationmaterials/childrensmn/article/15582/nosebleed-treatment-with-a-bleeding-disorder/   Tabassom, A., &amp; Cho, J. J. (2019). Epistaxis (nose bleed).  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK435997/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "How to stop a nosebleed."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 May. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325205.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2019, May 17). "How to stop a nosebleed."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  