 In this article, we explore the function of B  vitamins  in the body and some key dietary sources of each.  We also look at the symptoms of each B vitamin deficiency.  B vitamins are important for making sure the body's cells are functioning properly. They help the body convert food into energy (metabolism), create new blood cells, and maintain healthy skin cells, brain cells, and other body tissues.  There are eight types of B vitamin, each with their own function:  Together, they are called the vitamin B complex.  B vitamins often occur together in the same foods. Many people can get enough B vitamins by eating a variety of nutrient-dense foods.  However, those who struggle to meet their daily needs can use supplements.  People may develop B vitamin deficiencies if they do not get enough of the vitamins from their diet or supplements. They may also have a deficiency if their body cannot absorb nutrients properly, or if their body eliminates too much of them due to certain health conditions or medications.  Healthcare professionals recommend that people get a certain amount of each vitamin per day to maintain good health.  The following table provides the  daily values (DVs) of each B vitamin  according to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in milligrams (mg) or micrograms (mcg):  Below, we look at each B vitamin in more detail.  The heart, liver, kidney, and brain all contain high amounts of thiamin. The body needs thiamin for:  Thiamin is present in:  Thiamin deficiency is not common in the United States. However, certain groups of people may not get enough thiamin, including:  A person with a thiamin deficiency may experience:  Alcohol dependence can cause a person to develop a thiamin deficiency. This can cause  Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome (WKS) , which may result in tingling and numbness in the hands and feet, memory loss, and confusion.  WKS can lead Wernicke's encephalopathy (WE), which can be life threatening.  A review  from 2017 found that people with WE may benefit from high doses of thiamin.  Riboflavin is essential for:  Foods rich in riboflavin include:  Riboflavin deficiency is rare but may occur when a person has an endocrine disorder, such as thyroid problems, or certain other conditions.  A person who is deficient in riboflavin may experience:  Having a severe riboflavin deficiency can lead to  anemia  and  cataracts . Being riboflavin deficient during pregnancy can create a higher risk certain birth defects.  People at highest risk of riboflavin deficiency include:  The body converts niacin into a coenzyme called nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD). NAD is a necessary part of more than 400 different enzyme reactions in the body, the highest of all vitamin-derived coenzymes. These enzymes help with:  Animal-based foods such as meat, poultry, and fish are high in NAD, which the body can easily use.  Plant-based foods including nuts, legumes, and grains contain a natural form of niacin that the body cannot use as easily. However, manufacturers add niacin to foods such as cereals, and the body can easily use this form.  Getting too little niacin can cause a  niacin deficiency . Severe niacin deficiency leads to pellagra, which may cause:  If pellagra goes untreated, it can lead to severe memory problems, behavioral changes, and suicidal behavior. It may also lead to an extreme loss of appetite or death.  People at risk of niacin deficiency include those who have:  Pantothenic acid is necessary for the body to create new coenzymes, proteins, and fats.  Red blood cells carry pantothenic acid throughout the body so it can use the nutrient in a variety of processes for energy and metabolism.  Many foods contain at least some pantothenic acid, but some of the highest amounts are present in:  Pantothenic acid deficiency is rare in the U.S. because it is plentiful in many foods. However, it may affect people with severe malnutrition. In such cases, they are usually deficient in other nutrients as well.  Symptoms of deficiency include:  People with a specific gene mutation called pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration 2 mutation are at a high risk of deficiency.  Vitamin B-6, or pyridoxine, plays a role in more than 100 enzyme reactions. The body needs vitamin B-6 for:  The richest sources of vitamin B-6 include:  Many deficiencies in vitamin B-6 are linked to low levels of vitamin B-12, according to the  National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements .  Vitamin B-6 deficiency may cause:  People at risk of a vitamin B-6 deficiency include those who have:  Manufacturers add biotin to many hair, skin, and nail supplements. However, the NIH state that there is  not sufficient evidence  to conclude whether taking extra biotin helps with hair, skin, or nails.  Some people believe that  biotin may help with psoriasis .  The human body needs biotin for:  Many foods contain biotin, including:  Signs of a biotin deficiency include:  Deficiency is rare in the U.S., but the following groups may be more at risk:  The natural form of vitamin B-9 is called folate.  Folic acid , which is present in fortified foods and some supplements, is a synthetic form of the vitamin.  Because most people cannot take in enough leafy green vegetables for the levels needed in pregnancy, the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  suggest that all women of reproductive age who wish to conceive take 400 mcg of folic acid each day, alongside eating a varied diet that contains folate.  When a woman has high enough levels of folate both before and during pregnancy, the fetus has a  lower risk of certain birth defects  affecting the brain and spinal cord.  Folate is also essential for:  The FDA  require  manufacturers to add folic acid to standardized enriched grain products to help reduce the risk of neural tube defects. People can get folic acid from fortified breads and cereals.  Natural folate occurs in:  The addition of folic acid to grain products has made folate deficiency uncommon. However, the possible symptoms of a folate deficiency may include:  The FDA  recommend  that women increase the intake of folates and take folic acid supplements every day before becoming pregnant and during pregnancy. Other groups who may need extra folate include people who have:  People should not take more than 1,000 mcg of folic acid each day. Taking more than this can  mask symptoms of a vitamin B-12 deficiency . This can cause permanent nerve damage.  Vitamin B-12 contains the mineral cobalt and is sometimes called a "cobalamin." The body uses vitamin B-12 for:  Vitamin B-12 occurs naturally in animal products such as:  People who do not eat animal products may need to get vitamin B-12 from supplements or fortified foods such as breakfast cereals and nutritional yeast.   Learn more about vegetarian and vegan sources of vitamin B-12 here.   Vitamin B-12 deficiency usually causes a condition called megaloblastic anemia. Symptoms of a vitamin B-12 deficiency can include:  People who are at risk of a B-12 deficiency include those who have:  Vegetarians, vegans, and people who are pregnant or lactating may also need extra vitamin B-12.  Most multivitamin supplements contain some of each B vitamin, and many provide 100% or more of a person's daily needs for each vitamin.  People can buy B vitamins as individual supplements if they are deficient in only one type. However, some  evidence suggests  that a full B-complex vitamin supplement may be a better choice, even if a person has just one deficiency.  The researchers state that most people have deficiencies and would benefit from a high-dose B-complex supplement.  Multivitamins and individual vitamin supplements are available to buy in drug stores and online. Choose from a range of B vitamin supplements using the following links:  B vitamins each have their own unique functions, but they depend upon one another for proper absorption and the best health benefits. Eating a healthful, varied diet will generally provide all the B vitamins a person needs.  People can treat and prevent B vitamin deficiencies by increasing their dietary intake of high-vitamin foods or taking vitamin supplements.  Ask a doctor before taking any supplements to be sure they will not interact with medications.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Adding folic acid to corn masa flour may prevent birth defects. (2018).  https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/adding-folic-acid-corn-masa-flour-may-prevent-birth-defects  
 Folic acid. (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/folicacid/about.html  
 Greenberg, J. A.,  et al.  (2011). Folic acid supplementation and pregnancy: More than just neural tube defect prevention.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3218540/#  
 Kennedy, D. O. (2016). B vitamins and the brain: Mechanisms, dose and efficacy—A review.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4772032/  
 Labeling daily values. (2019).  https://www.dsld.nlm.nih.gov/dsld/dailyvalue.jsp  
 Langan, R. C., &amp; Goodbred, A. J. (2017). Vitamin B12 deficiency: Recognition and management.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2017/0915/p384.html  
 Nishimoto, A.,  et al.  (2017). High-dose parenteral thiamine in treatment of Wernicke's encephalopathy: Case series and review of the literature.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5354137/  
 Vitamin B6. (2018).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminB6-HealthProfessional/  
 Vitamin B12. (2018).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminB12-HealthProfessional/     Adding folic acid to corn masa flour may prevent birth defects. (2018).  https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/adding-folic-acid-corn-masa-flour-may-prevent-birth-defects   Folic acid. (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/folicacid/about.html   Greenberg, J. A.,  et al.  (2011). Folic acid supplementation and pregnancy: More than just neural tube defect prevention.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3218540/#   Kennedy, D. O. (2016). B vitamins and the brain: Mechanisms, dose and efficacy—A review.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4772032/   Labeling daily values. (2019).  https://www.dsld.nlm.nih.gov/dsld/dailyvalue.jsp   Langan, R. C., &amp; Goodbred, A. J. (2017). Vitamin B12 deficiency: Recognition and management.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2017/0915/p384.html   Nishimoto, A.,  et al.  (2017). High-dose parenteral thiamine in treatment of Wernicke's encephalopathy: Case series and review of the literature.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5354137/   Vitamin B6. (2018).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminB6-HealthProfessional/   Vitamin B12. (2018).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminB12-HealthProfessional/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "A complete guide to B vitamins."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 May. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325292.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2019, May 28). "A complete guide to B vitamins."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  