 In this article, we discuss some possible causes of lower back and testicle pain. We also cover when to see a doctor.  Lumbar spondylolisthesis is a condition in which one of the vertebrae in the lower part of the spine, called the lumbar region, slips out of place. Spondylolisthesis can occur due to injuries, repetitive strain on the spine, or general wear and tear as a person gets older.  Lumbar spondylolisthesis can cause lower  back pain  if the slipped vertebra places pressure on one of the spinal nerves. This pain can sometimes radiate down to the testicles or legs.  Other symptoms can include:  These symptoms may improve when a person is sitting or leaning forward.  Treatment options for lumbar spondylolisthesis include  physical therapy  to strengthen the lower back muscles and anti-inflammatory medications to reduce pain and swelling. For people with more severe symptoms, a doctor may prescribe steroid injections.  Surgical treatment may be necessary for people with lumbar spondylolisthesis that does not improve with other treatments and for those with a loss of nerve function.   Urinary tract infections  (UTIs) can occur when bacteria build up in the urinary tract, which includes the bladder, kidneys, ureters, and urethra.  UTIs can cause pain or a burning sensation while urinating, and this pain may extend to the testicles. A person may also experience a constant urge to urinate.  Severe pain in the lower back or abdomen alongside  fever , nausea, and vomiting can indicate a  kidney infection , which is the  most serious  type of UTI.  People with symptoms of a UTI, particularly a kidney infection, should see a doctor as soon as possible.  Doctors typically prescribe  antibiotics  for individuals with a bacterial UTI. It is important to follow the doctor's instructions when taking antibiotics and to complete the entire course.  Drinking plenty of water and urinating frequently can help speed up recovery. Over-the-counter (OTC) medications can also help relieve pain and discomfort.   Epididymitis  is the swelling of the epididymis, a duct that stores and transports sperm from the testicles to the vas deferens.  The swelling of the epididymis can cause pain in the scrotum and testicles that sometimes radiates to other areas of the body, including the groin area and the lower back or sides.  Possible causes of epididymitis include  sexually transmitted infections , such as  chlamydia , and UTIs. However, there is not always an obvious cause, and in some people, epididymitis can be a chronic condition.  Depending on the cause, a person with epididymitis may also experience symptoms that include painful urination, fever, and a frequent urge to urinate.  The type of treatment for epididymitis depends on the cause. A doctor will usually prescribe antibiotics for people with a bacterial infection.  Resting and elevating the scrotum can help reduce swelling. OTC anti-inflammatory medications, such as ibuprofen and naproxen, may also provide relief from pain and discomfort. Ibuprofen is available for  purchase online .   Kidney stones  are hard mineral deposits that can form in the kidneys. Small kidney stones do not always cause symptoms, but larger stones can block the flow of urine from the kidneys.  Blockages can result in sharp pain in the lower back and sides that may also radiate to the lower abdomen, the groin area, and the tip of the penis.  Other symptoms of kidney stones can include:  The treatment options will depend on the severity of the symptoms and the size of the stones.  Smaller stones do not always require treatment and may leave the body in the urine. Drinking plenty of fluid can help the stones pass out more quickly. Doctors may also prescribe pain relievers and medications, such as tamsulosin, to relax the ureter.  A doctor may recommend a medical procedure to remove kidney stones that are large, very painful, or affecting kidney function. Removal procedures can include surgery or the use of shock wave therapy to break the stone into smaller pieces that a person can pass.  Rarely, lower back and testicle pain can be a sign of  testicular cancer .  The  most common  first symptom is either a lump on the testicle or the testicle becoming swollen or larger. Testicular cancer can sometimes cause pain in the testicle and a feeling of heaviness in the scrotum or lower abdomen. Some people may also notice breast soreness or unusual breast growth due to hormonal changes.  If testicular cancer spreads to other parts of the body, it can cause additional symptoms,  such as :  Treatment varies depending on the type and stage of testicular cancer when the doctor makes the diagnosis. Treatment options can include:  Pelvic floor dysfunction involves difficulty controlling the muscles of the pelvic floor. It forces the surrounding muscles to contract rather than relax.  A person with pelvic floor dysfunction may have difficulty controlling their urination and experience pain in the testicles. This pain is particularly likely to occur in  younger patients .  The condition currently affects around  100,000 men  in the United States each year.  Other symptoms can include:  Treatment options include  pelvic floor exercises , with an emphasis on contraction, and  biofeedback , which involves learning to control bodily processes that are usually involuntary.  Doctors may also prescribe muscle relaxants to help prevent the pelvic muscles from contracting.  If a person has certain accompanying issues, such as rectal prolapse, a doctor may recommend surgery to loosen the pelvic organs.  People with lower back and testicle pain should see a doctor if the pain is severe, does not get better, or is interfering with daily life. It is also important to seek medical advice if the pain occurs along with other symptoms, such as an unexplained lump or swelling in the testicles.  A person should seek immediate medical attention for symptoms of kidney stones or a kidney infection. These can include:  When testicle pain occurs along with lower back pain, it can indicate an underlying condition. Possible causes include kidney stones, infections, and spinal problems.  People should see a doctor if the pain is severe, does not go away, or occurs along with other concerning symptoms.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Adult spondylolisthesis in the low back. (2010).  https://orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/diseases--conditions/adult-spondylolisthesis-in-the-low-back/  
 Bladder infection (urinary tract infection — UTI) in adults. (n.d.).  https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/urologic-diseases/bladder-infection-uti-in-adults/  
 Leslie, S. W., &amp; Siref, L. E. (2019). Chronic testicular pain (orchialgia).  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK482481/  
 Planken, E.,  et al.  (2010). Chronic testicular pain as a symptom of pelvic floor dysfunction.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19913802  
 Signs and symptoms of testicular cancer. (2018).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/testicular-cancer/detection-diagnosis-staging/signs-and-symptoms.html  
 What are epididymitis and orchitis? (n.d.).  https://www.urologyhealth.org/urologic-conditions/epididymitis-and-orchitis  
 What are kidney stones? (n.d.).  https://www.urologyhealth.org/urologic-conditions/kidney-stones     Adult spondylolisthesis in the low back. (2010).  https://orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/diseases--conditions/adult-spondylolisthesis-in-the-low-back/   Bladder infection (urinary tract infection — UTI) in adults. (n.d.).  https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/urologic-diseases/bladder-infection-uti-in-adults/   Leslie, S. W., &amp; Siref, L. E. (2019). Chronic testicular pain (orchialgia).  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK482481/   Planken, E.,  et al.  (2010). Chronic testicular pain as a symptom of pelvic floor dysfunction.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19913802   Signs and symptoms of testicular cancer. (2018).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/testicular-cancer/detection-diagnosis-staging/signs-and-symptoms.html   What are epididymitis and orchitis? (n.d.).  https://www.urologyhealth.org/urologic-conditions/epididymitis-and-orchitis   What are kidney stones? (n.d.).  https://www.urologyhealth.org/urologic-conditions/kidney-stones   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "What can cause lower back and testicle pain?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Jun. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325375.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2019, June 4). "What can cause lower back and testicle pain?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  