 Muscles tension in the shoulders can also lead to neck stiffness and  headaches , so it is important not to ignore upper  back pain . Regular stretching can relieve current back pain and help prevent it from returning.  In this article, we describe several exercises and stretches for easing upper back pain. For some of these exercises, it may be a good idea to use a  yoga  or exercise mat, rather than performing them on hard flooring.  We also cover when to see a doctor for upper back pain.  To perform the Cat-Cow Pose:  To perform the Child's Pose:  Instead of extending the arms forward, a person can also try placing the arms backward beside their thighs. The palms should be facing upward.  Another variation is to stretch the right arm forward while threading the left arm under the right arm and out to the side, rotating the head to face it.  A person then repeats the stretch on the other side. This variation creates a gentle rotation and twist motion in the back and shoulders.  To perform the wall stretch:  To perform the trunk rotation:  To perform the shoulder roll:  To perform the neck flexion:  To perform the overhead arm reach:  To perform the knee-to-chest stretch:  A yoga block or foam roller is necessary to do this exercise.  To perform the thoracic extension:  Upper back pain often gets better on its own, particularly with rest and gentle stretching.  However, see a doctor if the pain is severe or does not go away. The doctor can help determine whether there is a more serious cause for the pain and can recommend treatment options.  Upper back pain is common and usually not a cause for concern. Rest, over-the-counter medications, and gentle stretches and exercises can often help relieve the pain.  See a doctor for an evaluation if the pain is severe, if it does not get better, or if there are any other symptoms or concerns.    
 5 stretches to help relieve your back pain. (2018).  5 stretches to help relieve your back pain. (2018).  Back pain stretches and exercises. (n.d.).  Upper back pain exercises. (n.d.).  Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Galan, Nicole. "Exercises for easing and preventing upper back pain."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 4 Jun. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325373.php&gt;    APA  Galan, N. (2019, June 4). "Exercises for easing and preventing upper back pain."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  