 As the fetus and uterus grow, they put pressure on the hips, back, and buttocks. Buttocks pain can also stem from pregnancy complications and unrelated medical issues.  No matter the cause, talk to a doctor about any new pain that arises during pregnancy. A doctor can often help develop a treatment plan to relieve any bothersome symptoms.  Below, learn more about the causes of buttocks pain during pregnancy, as well as possible treatments and home remedies.  Buttocks pain during pregnancy can either be referred pain — which originates elsewhere in the body and radiates to the buttocks — or it can result from problems in the area.  The following are some possible causes of buttocks pain during pregnancy:   Hemorrhoids  are swollen veins in the lower rectum or anus.  As the uterus expands during the second and third trimesters, it puts more pressure and strain on the anus, which can cause hemorrhoids to form.   Constipation  and standing for long periods can increase the likelihood of developing hemorrhoids during pregnancy.  Hemorrhoids can cause:  The sciatic nerve runs from the buttocks down the leg. During pregnancy, the expanding uterus and growing fetus can put pressure on the sciatic nerve, causing a condition called  sciatica .  People with sciatica often experience pain in the buttocks. In addition, a person may feel a burning sensation in the leg, butt, and back, as well as a sharp pain in the leg.  Pelvic girdle pain affects about  1 in 5  pregnant women. A combination of extra baby weight and movement during pregnancy is often the cause.  Pelvic girdle pain can cause pain in the buttocks, in addition to:  Pelvic girdle pain can start anytime between the first and third trimesters. It may develop only in the final days of pregnancy.   Contractions  are the body's way of moving the fetus out of the body. Genuine contractions occur during the last part of the third trimester, just before birth. Some women feel contraction pain in the buttocks.  Other symptoms associated with contractions include:  Prior to labor, many women experience false contractions, known as  Braxton-Hicks contractions . These can be painful but — unlike real contractions — they do not occur at regular intervals that are increasingly frequent.  A doctor will ask about symptoms and whether anything makes them better or worse.  In some cases, a visual examination is enough to determine whether a person has hemorrhoids.  Other tests, such as a blood or urine analysis or imaging tests, can also help a doctor determine the underlying cause of the pain.  Anytime a pregnant woman experiences unexplained pain, she should speak to a doctor or another healthcare professional.  During pregnancy, a woman should call a doctor or go to the hospital if she experiences:  There are several potential treatment options for buttocks pain during pregnancy. Some common treatments include:  It is essential to speak with a doctor about which medications are safe to use. Some, including  aspirin  and ibuprofen, can be harmful. Some women wish to avoid using certain other drugs during pregnancy.  For mild pain or if a woman wishes to avoid medical intervention, home remedies may help.  Home remedies for butt pain during pregnancy include:  If pelvic girdle pain causing pain in the buttocks, it may help to use a foam roller or  do stretches to help loosen tight hips . A range of foam rollers is available for  purchase online .  If sciatica is causing the pain,  the stretches in this article have been specifically designed to relieve sciatica pain during pregnancy .  While it is not always possible to prevent pain in the buttocks during pregnancy, a woman may be able to reduce the risk by:  For the most part, buttocks pain during pregnancy is not a major cause for concern. Home remedies can often help relieve common causes of the pain, such as hemorrhoids or the extra weight of pregnancy.  However, if there is no obvious cause, see a doctor. It is especially important to consult a doctor about pain that is severe, new, or persistent.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Contractions and signs of labor. (2018).  https://www.marchofdimes.org/pregnancy/contractions-and-signs-of-labor.aspx  
 Kanakaris, N. K.,  et al.  (2011). Pregnancy-related pelvic girdle pain: An update.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3050758/  
 Pelvic girdle pain and pregnancy. (2015).  https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/patients/patient-information-leaflets/pregnancy/pi-pelvic-girdle-pain-and-pregnancy.pdf  
 Symptoms &amp; causes of hemorrhoids. (2016).  https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/hemorrhoids/symptoms-causes     Contractions and signs of labor. (2018).  https://www.marchofdimes.org/pregnancy/contractions-and-signs-of-labor.aspx   Kanakaris, N. K.,  et al.  (2011). Pregnancy-related pelvic girdle pain: An update.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3050758/   Pelvic girdle pain and pregnancy. (2015).  https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/patients/patient-information-leaflets/pregnancy/pi-pelvic-girdle-pain-and-pregnancy.pdf   Symptoms &amp; causes of hemorrhoids. (2016).  https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/hemorrhoids/symptoms-causes   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Butt pain during pregnancy: Everything you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Jun. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325395.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2019, June 5). "Butt pain during pregnancy: Everything you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  