  Yoga  refers to a series of mind-body practices that originate in Hindu tradition.  However, they are growing in popularity across the world as an alternative well-being practice.  Statistic show that in 2015 in the United States alone, as many as  36.7 million  people practiced yoga, and by 2020, estimates suggest that this number will have increased to over 55 million people.  People who practice yoga often share anecdotes regarding its beneficial effect on their mental and physical health. Intrigued by such reports, some scientists set out to verify whether the benefits are real.  Indeed, some studies have found that different yoga practices are able to improve a person's general sense of well-being, as well as various aspects of their physical health.  For example, a series of studies from 2017 suggested that people who joined a yoga program experienced  lower levels of anxiety and depression .  A study from 2016 found that practicing yoga correlated with a  lower risk of cognitive impairment  in older adults, and research from earlier this year concluded that 8 weeks of intense yoga practice  reduced the symptoms  of  rheumatoid arthritis .  Now, investigators at the University of Edinburgh in the United Kingdom have conducted a review, analyzing the findings of 22 randomized and cluster-randomized clinical trials that assessed the benefits of yoga practice for healthy older adults.  The trials considered the effects of varied yoga programs — with program durations between 1 and 7 months and individual session durations between 30 and 90 minutes — on both mental and physical well-being.  In the review, which features as an open access article in the   International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity  , the researchers conducted statistical analysis to assess the combined findings of the 22 trials. They compared the benefits associated with yoga with those of other light physical activities, such as walking and chair aerobics.   The team found that among people with a mean age of 60 years or over, practicing yoga — compared with not engaging in physical activity — helped improve their physical balance, flexibility of movement, and limb strength. It also reduced depression, improved sleep quality, and boosted their vitality.   Also, the researchers noticed that older adults who practiced yoga perceived their own physical and  mental health  to be satisfactory.  When compared with other light physical activities, such as walking, yoga seemed to more effectively improve older adults' lower body strength, enhance their lower body flexibility, and reduce their symptoms of  depression .  "A large proportion of older adults are inactive and do not meet the balance and muscle strengthening recommendations set by government and international health organizations," notes Divya Sivaramakrishnan, the review's lead author.  However, yoga can be an easy, adaptable, and attractive form of physical activity, and since the evidence suggesting that it can be beneficial for health is building up, joining a yoga program could be a good option for older adults looking to stay in shape — both physically and mentally.   " Based on this study, we can conclude that yoga has great potential to improve important physical and psychological outcomes in older adults. Yoga is a gentle activity that can be modified to suit those with age-related conditions and diseases."  Divya Sivaramakrishnan  