 People can prevent humidity-related  asthma  symptoms using a range of strategies, including taking medication, controlling indoor humidity levels, and avoiding exercising in humid conditions.  Keep reading to learn how humidity and the weather can affect asthma symptoms and what to do to prevent a flare. We also look at the best and worst weather conditions for asthma.  Humidity refers to how much moisture or water vapor is in the air.  People may notice their asthma symptoms get worse on humid days when there is a lot of moisture in the air. This is especially true when exercising in humid conditions.  High levels of humidity may play a role in asthma symptoms in a variety of ways.  The increased moisture can directly irritate the airways, and humidity can increase the levels of other substances in the air that irritate the bronchial tubes, such as pollen and pollution.  High humidity can trigger asthma symptoms, including:  Small-scale  research  has looked into how humid weather affects a person's lungs. The researchers tested airway resistance — a measure of how easy it is to breathe — in six people with asthma and six people without.  After experiencing hot, humid air (49°C and 75–80% humidity) for 4 minutes, people with asthma had a 112% increase in airway resistance as opposed to the healthy group that only had a 22% increase in airway resistance.  Humidity likely causes asthma symptoms because it triggers bronchoconstriction, which is a narrowing of the airways.  Bronchoconstriction may occur because hot, humid air activates C fibers, which are sensory nerve fibers in the airways. Stimulation of C fibers may narrow the airways and stimulate coughing, which makes it difficult to breathe.  High humidity levels create the perfect breeding ground for mold and dust mites, which often trigger asthma. Higher levels of humidity may also increase air pollution. For example, ozone, which is an air pollutant, rises when humidity levels increase.  Increased levels of humidity also often mean higher temperatures. The highest humidity levels usually occur during the summer months. The combination of heat and humidity can irritate the airways making breathing more difficult.  While it is not possible to control the weather and humidity levels outdoors, people can manage humidity-related asthma symptoms by:  Get the weather report from your local news station and check the humidity levels. When high humidity advisories are in effect, try to stay indoors as much as possible.  Recognizing symptoms as soon as they start can prevent an asthma flare from becoming worse. Signs include:  When symptoms start, people should follow the asthma action treatment plan they developed with their doctor.  Fast-acting bronchodilators relax the muscles in the airways, which opens them up. As the narrowing decreases, breathing becomes easier. Common fast-acting inhalers to treat asthma include albuterol and Xopenex.  In some cases, people can prevent humidity-related asthma symptoms from developing by:  The  air quality index (AQI)  indicates the daily level of pollutants, such as smog. Air quality levels vary daily and between locations. The more pollutants in the air, the harder it can be for a person with asthma to breathe.  The AQI measures air quality on a scale from 0–500. The higher the number, the worse the air quality. Air quality tends to be worse on hot and humid days. Staying inside when the air quality is poor might prevent asthma symptoms developing.  Humidity does not only develop outdoors. Humidity levels can also rise inside. However, it is possible to control humidity levels indoors.  According to the  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) , it is best to keep humidity levels between 30–50%.  Lower humidity decreases mold growth, dust mites, and cockroaches, all of which can trigger asthma symptoms.  Check indoor humidity levels with a humidistat, available at many hardware or home improvement stores, or  online .  People can reduce indoor humidity by:  Exercising outdoors when the weather is warm and humid can lead to airway irritation. However, people can still exercise in a gym, pool, or somewhere else that has air conditioning.  There is no optimal weather condition for people with asthma, but many find that consistency in temperatures and conditions is better for symptoms.  Allergens and pollutants in the air are two of the most significant factors that affect asthma symptoms. Certain types of weather may increase both air pollution and common allergens.  Some people with asthma experience problems in very cold or hot temperatures, which can increase airway irritation. Mild temperatures and low levels of humidity might decrease the risk of airway irritation.  Not only is humidity a problem for people with asthma, but other weather conditions can also lead to symptoms.  The weather conditions most likely to trigger asthma include:  Although everyone with asthma has different triggers, humidity and asthma symptoms go hand in hand for many people.  Increased moisture in the air, especially in high temperatures, can trigger bronchospasm and asthma symptoms. Other weather conditions, such as cold, dry air, can also lead to asthma flares.  Monitoring humidity and air quality are helpful to prevent humidity-related asthma symptoms from developing.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Air quality index — a guide to air quality and your health. (2017).  https://airnow.gov/index.cfm?action=aqi_brochure.index  
 Hayes Jr, D.,  et al . (2012). Bronchoconstriction triggered by breathing hot humid air in patients with asthma: Role of cholinergic reflex.  https://www.atsjournals.org/doi/full/10.1164/rccm.201201-0088OC  
 Heat and humidity. (2016).  https://www.lung.ca/news/expert-opinions/pollution/heat-and-humidity  
 Mold course chapter two: Why and where mold grows. (2017).  https://www.epa.gov/mold/mold-course-chapter-2  
 Three ways humidity affects asthma. (2018).  https://community.aafa.org/blog/3-ways-humidity-affects-asthma  
 Weather can trigger asthma. (2017).  https://www.aafa.org/weather-triggers-asthma/     Air quality index — a guide to air quality and your health. (2017).  https://airnow.gov/index.cfm?action=aqi_brochure.index   Hayes Jr, D.,  et al . (2012). Bronchoconstriction triggered by breathing hot humid air in patients with asthma: Role of cholinergic reflex.  https://www.atsjournals.org/doi/full/10.1164/rccm.201201-0088OC   Heat and humidity. (2016).  https://www.lung.ca/news/expert-opinions/pollution/heat-and-humidity   Mold course chapter two: Why and where mold grows. (2017).  https://www.epa.gov/mold/mold-course-chapter-2   Three ways humidity affects asthma. (2018).  https://community.aafa.org/blog/3-ways-humidity-affects-asthma   Weather can trigger asthma. (2017).  https://www.aafa.org/weather-triggers-asthma/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  de Pietro, MaryAnn. "How does humidity affect asthma?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Jun. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325474.php&gt;    APA  de Pietro, M. (2019, June 14). "How does humidity affect asthma?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  