 Increasing cardiorespiratory endurance improves oxygen uptake in the lungs and heart and can help a person sustain physical activity for longer.  Other names for cardiorespiratory endurance include cardiovascular fitness, cardiovascular endurance, and cardiorespiratory fitness.  In this article, we discuss what cardiorespiratory endurance is, how a person can measure it, and why it is important. We also look at how to improve cardiorespiratory endurance, including some examples of exercises.  Cardiorespiratory endurance measures how well the body performs during long periods of exercise. A person with high cardiorespiratory endurance can sustain high-intensity activities over an extended period without getting tired.  Measuring a person's cardiorespiratory endurance involves examining how well their body takes in and utilizes oxygen.  When a person inhales, their lungs fill up with air and some of the oxygen it contains passes into the bloodstream. This oxygen-rich blood then travels to the heart, which circulates it around the body to the tissues and organs that need it.  The muscles require an adequate supply of oxygen and other nutrients to work properly during high-intensity or extended periods of exercise. If the muscles do not get enough nutrients, waste products begin to accumulate and cause  fatigue .  A person's level of cardiorespiratory endurance can directly affect their physical performance.  Tests that measure cardiorespiratory endurance include:  Metabolic equivalents (METs) refers to the ratio between the energy expended during physical activity and the energy expended while at rest. Finding a person's MET involves measuring how much oxygen their body uses at rest.  Maximum oxygen uptake (VO2 max) test determines the maximum amount of oxygen the body is capable of using during high-intensity activities, such as sprinting or biking.  The VO2 max test typically involves running on a treadmill or pedaling on a stationary bike as fast as possible. During the test, the person wears a chest strap or other body attachment that records their heart rate and a face mask that measures oxygen consumption.  Cardiorespiratory endurance indicates a person's level of aerobic health and physical fitness. This information can benefit everyone, not just professional athletes.  Having a high cardiorespiratory endurance generally means that a person can perform high-intensity exercise for longer.  People trying to lose weight may want to focus on increasing their cardiorespiratory endurance because doing higher-intensity aerobic activities can help a person burn more  calories .  Scientific research also suggests some other potential health benefits from having an improved cardiorespiratory endurance. For example:  People can improve their cardiorespiratory endurance through regular exercise.  The authors of a  2019 study  reported that resistance training, endurance training, and high-intensity interval training led to improvements in cardiorespiratory endurance and muscular strength among adults who were aged 40–65 years old and who were not previously physically active.  A  2017 study  investigated the effectiveness of a 12-week cross-circuit training program in students who were overweight and had intellectual disabilities. The researchers found participants who followed the training program had an improved exercise endurance, muscle strength, and body mass index.  The following exercises can help improve cardiorespiratory endurance, build muscle, and burn calories. People can perform these physical activities at home or add them to their gym routine.  Try doing these exercises in sets of 10–15 repetitions, or as many repetitions as possible for 1 minute with a 20-second break in between sets.        Other exercises that can help improve cardiorespiratory fitness include:  Cardiorespiratory endurance is a measure of how well the heart, lungs, and muscles perform during moderate to high-intensity physical activity.  Getting regular physical activity, especially aerobic exercise, can improve cardiorespiratory endurance. Aerobic exercises can help promote heart and lung health and improve how well the body circulates and utilizes oxygen.    
 Amaro-Gahete, F. J.,  et al.  (2019). Changes in physical fitness after 12 weeks of structured concurrent exercise training, high-intensity interval training, or whole-body electromyostimulation training in sedentary middle-aged adults: A randomized controlled trial.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6492765/  
 Gander, J. C.  et al.  (2015). Association of cardiorespiratory fitness with coronary heart disease in asymptomatic men.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4839288/  
 Sui, X.,  et al.  (2017). Longitudinal patterns of cardiorespiratory fitness predict the development of hypertension among men and women.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5362290/  
 Wu, W. -L.,  et al.  (2017). Effectiveness of a cross-circuit exercise training program in improving the fitness of overweight or obese adolescents with intellectual disability enrolled in special education schools.  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0891422216302487?via%3Dihub  
 Wong, C. N.,  et al.  (2015). Brain activation during dual-task processing is associated with cardiorespiratory fitness and performance in older adults.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4532928/     Amaro-Gahete, F. J.,  et al.  (2019). Changes in physical fitness after 12 weeks of structured concurrent exercise training, high-intensity interval training, or whole-body electromyostimulation training in sedentary middle-aged adults: A randomized controlled trial.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6492765/   Gander, J. C.  et al.  (2015). Association of cardiorespiratory fitness with coronary heart disease in asymptomatic men.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4839288/   Sui, X.,  et al.  (2017). Longitudinal patterns of cardiorespiratory fitness predict the development of hypertension among men and women.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5362290/   Wu, W. -L.,  et al.  (2017). Effectiveness of a cross-circuit exercise training program in improving the fitness of overweight or obese adolescents with intellectual disability enrolled in special education schools.  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0891422216302487?via%3Dihub   Wong, C. N.,  et al.  (2015). Brain activation during dual-task processing is associated with cardiorespiratory fitness and performance in older adults.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4532928/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Eske, Jamie. "What to know about cardiorespiratory endurance."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Jun. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325487.php&gt;    APA  Eske, J. (2019, June 17). "What to know about cardiorespiratory endurance."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  