 Skin peeling may be the only symptom that a person experiences, or they may also have itching, burning, or redness.  Most cases of penis skin peeling are not serious and respond well to home remedies. However, in some cases, a person may need topical or oral medications to treat the underlying issue.  In this article, we discuss the leading causes of penis skin peeling and list possible treatments and home remedies.  Irritation from repeated rubbing may cause peeling, flaking skin, along with pain and sensitivity.  Common causes of friction in the genital area include:  Using a lubricant during intercourse and masturbation can reduce friction and the likelihood of penis skin peeling. Choosing loose, cotton clothing to wear around the genital region will also reduce the occurrence of chafing.  Contact dermatitis is a skin reaction to an allergen or irritant. It can affect any area of the body, including the penis.  The symptoms of contact dermatitis include:  Common causes of contact dermatitis on the penis include:  A  Candida  infection, also known as genital thrush, is a common yeast infection that occurs in both women and men.  In men, thrush affects the head of the penis and the foreskin.  As well as peeling skin, symptoms include:  People are more likely to develop a  Candida  infection after using  antibiotics  or steroid medications. People who have a suppressed immune system (immunosuppression) or  diabetes  that they are not managing also have a higher risk.  Although a yeast infection is not technically a  sexually transmitted infection  (STI), it can pass from one person to another during sexual activity.  Atopic dermatitis is the most common form of  eczema . It affects more than 18 million adults in the United States, according to the  National Eczema Association .  Atopic dermatitis is most common on the hands, face, and elbow creases, but it can affect any part of the body, including the penis.  Symptoms of atopic dermatitis include:  The symptoms of atopic dermatitis can come and go, and people with the condition may also experience  asthma  and seasonal allergies.  Genital  herpes  is an STI that affects approximately  one in eight people  aged 14–49 years in the U.S., according to the American Sexual Health Association.  The majority of these people are unaware that they have the infection because their symptoms are so mild. When herpes symptoms do appear, they include sores on the penis, scrotum, anus, and buttocks. Other symptoms include:   Syphilis  is another STI. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) state that people reported over  30,000 cases  of syphilis in the U.S. in 2017.  The condition begins as a painless sore called a chancre on the part of the body where the infection first entered. If the chancre occurs on the penis, it may cause skin peeling in this area.  The chancre typically heals within  3–6 weeks , but a rash appears a few weeks later. The rash begins on the trunk before spreading to cover the whole body. Other symptoms include:  It is important to seek treatment for syphilis as soon as possible. In the early stages, medications can cure the disease. Without treatment, it can cause severe organ damage.   Balanitis  is  inflammation  of the head of the penis and the foreskin. The condition is much more common in those who are uncircumcised, according to the  American Osteopathic College of Dermatology .  Symptoms include:  Several conditions and factors can contribute to the development of balanitis, including:  Psoriasis is a lifelong autoimmune disorder that causes scaly, red, and peeling skin that is itchy and painful. It can affect the skin on any area of the body. When it affects the genital region, it is called  genital psoriasis .  The National Psoriasis Foundation estimate that  between one-third and two-thirds  of people with psoriasis experience genital psoriasis at some point.  Other psoriasis symptoms include:  Sometimes, home treatments can successfully resolve skin peeling or help manage the symptoms of chronic conditions, such as psoriasis and eczema. These treatments include:  The medical treatment options for dry or peeling skin on the penis will depend on its underlying cause.  Sometimes, fungal infections will clear up with home treatment, but at other times, medication will be necessary. Both over-the-counter and prescription antifungals are available to treat yeast infections and some types of balanitis.  People who suspect that they have an STI should always seek medical attention to prevent complications and avoid passing the infection to others. The type of treatment that they receive will depend on the stage and severity of the infection.  If peeling skin on the penis persists for more than a few days or does not respond to home remedies, it is important to see a doctor for assessment and treatment.  Penis skin peeling requires prompt medical attention if it occurs alongside:  A person should see a doctor if they think that they have an STI, even if the symptoms seem to disappear, as they could still pass the infection on to other people, and it may cause complications in the future.  Peeling skin on the penis does not usually indicate a serious medical condition. Often, it is a sign of an allergy, a fungal infection, or a skin condition, such as eczema.  Occasionally, however, it may indicate the presence of an STI that requires treatment.  In most cases, the underlying cause of peeling skin will resolve with either home remedies or prescription medications.    
 Atopic dermatitis. (n.d.).  Atopic dermatitis. (n.d.).  Balanitis. (n.d.).  https://www.aocd.org/page/Balanitis   Genital psoriasis. (2018).  https://www.psoriasis.org/about-psoriasis/specific-locations/genitals   Herpes fast facts. (n.d.).  http://www.ashasexualhealth.org/stdsstis/herpes/fast-facts-and-faqs/   Syphilis. (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/std/stats17/syphilis.htm   Syphilis — CDC fact sheet (detailed). (2017).  https://www.cdc.gov/std/syphilis/stdfact-syphilis-detailed.htm   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What causes penis skin to peel?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 11 Jun. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325438.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2019, June 11). "What causes penis skin to peel?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  