  Lupus  is an autoimmune disease that affects about  5 million people around the world . An autoimmune disease is a condition in which the body's immune system attacks healthy organs or tissues.  The role of the immune system is to fight off foreign invaders, such as viruses and bacteria. In a person with lupus, the immune system mistakes healthy body tissues for harmful substances.  As a result, it initiates an inflammatory attack on healthy tissues, causing symptoms that range from  skin rashes  to joint swelling to  headaches .  Lupus is a chronic condition, which means that it lasts for months to years. To date, there is no cure for lupus, but a doctor can help a person control and manage their symptoms.  In this article, learn more about lupus symptoms and how they appear.  The immune system's attack can affect many different body parts and systems. As a result, lupus can cause a wide variety of symptoms that may be different from person to person.  The symptoms of lupus may appear or get worse during flares. Once a flare is over, a person may have mild or no symptoms for weeks, months, or even years.  A person with lupus may notice some of the following symptoms.  Many people with lupus experience a red or purplish rash that extends from the bridge of the nose over to the cheeks in a shape that resembles that of a butterfly.  The rash may be smooth, or it may have a scaly or bumpy texture. It can look like a  sunburn .  The medical term for this type of rash is a  malar rash . Other conditions can cause a malar rash, however, so this symptom alone is not enough to indicate lupus. Other conditions that cause a malar rash include:  In some cases, a doctor may treat the malar rash with prescription creams or ointments. These medications may include steroids to minimize  inflammation . In other cases, a doctor may prescribe medicines that help stop immune system activity.  Lupus can cause two main types of lesion or sore:  Both types of lesion are photosensitive, which means that they are highly sensitive to sunlight.  People who have these types of lesion should avoid being out in the sunlight as much as possible, use sunscreen, wear sun-protective clothing, and limit or avoid exposure to fluorescent light.  Lupus can cause the hair to get thinner or fall out, either in patches or all over.  Many different factors  lead to  hair loss  in people with lupus, including:  One of the most common symptoms of lupus is joint problems. Lupus may cause swollen, tender, stiff, or warm joints.  These issues usually affect the extremities, including the fingers, toes, wrists, knees, and ankles. Although lupus is not a type of  arthritis , the inflammation that it causes can result in symptoms of arthritis.  A person with lupus may have photosensitivity, which is a sensitivity to ultraviolet (UV) light. They may notice that they get sunburned more easily than other people.  The sun can also trigger the development of skin lesions, such as a butterfly rash or discoid lupus.  Some people with lupus experience  Raynaud's phenomenon , which affects the blood vessels in the fingers, toes, hands, or feet.  Raynaud's phenomenon makes the blood vessels in the extremities constrict, which turns the extremities blue or pale, as well as causing tingling, numbness, and pain.  A person may notice this reaction when they are in cold temperatures or under  stress .  A person may be able to manage their Raynaud's symptoms by avoiding cold temperatures, dressing warmly in gloves, socks, and boots, and using stress management techniques, such as meditation and relaxation.  Lupus can affect the eyes and the area around the eyes in several ways:  Other possible symptoms of lupus include:  Doctors categorize lupus into four different types. These types share common symptoms but have different causes.  To diagnose lupus, a doctor will:  There is no single test that can diagnose lupus. Instead, doctors must look at the results of several different tests and consider the person's symptoms.  They may also need to rule out other health conditions that can cause similar symptoms.  Treatment for lupus focuses on managing lupus flares and preventing them when possible.  Treating symptoms promptly can help avoid complications that can damage the body's organs and systems. A person may need to take medications and see their doctor regularly.  Some medications that doctors recommend to help with lupus symptoms include:  A person can work with their doctor to decide which medications and treatment options are best for them.  Some people may wish to use alternative treatments to help manage their lupus symptoms. While there is  no conclusive evidence  to confirm that any alternative treatments work, some people may find that they help with certain symptoms.  Before trying any alternative treatment, it is important to talk to a doctor. Some of these treatments may interfere with other medications. In addition, a person should never replace the medications that their doctor prescribed them with alternative treatments.  With proper treatment, many people who have lupus can live full, active lives. However, it is vital that they see a doctor regularly and follow an individualized treatment plan to avoid serious complications of the disease.  Dealing with a chronic disease can be challenging. People with lupus may wish to connect with others who have the condition for emotional support and encouragement.   The Lupus Foundation of America  list their support groups by state, and there are other lupus support groups in some states.  The Lupus Research Alliance  also have an online community forum for people with lupus and their loved ones.    
 Concha, J. S. S., &amp; Werth, V. P. (2018). Alopecias in lupus erythematosus.  https://lupus.bmj.com/content/5/1/e000291  
 Find support near you. (n.d.).  https://www.lupus.org/resources/find-support-near-you  
 Lupus community. (n.d.).  https://www.lupusresearch.org/lupus-community/  
 Systemic lupus erythematosus (lupus). (2016).  https://www.niams.nih.gov/health-topics/lupus  
 Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/lupus/facts/detailed.html  
 What is lupus? (2013).  https://www.lupus.org/resources/what-is-lupus     Concha, J. S. S., &amp; Werth, V. P. (2018). Alopecias in lupus erythematosus.  https://lupus.bmj.com/content/5/1/e000291   Find support near you. (n.d.).  https://www.lupus.org/resources/find-support-near-you   Lupus community. (n.d.).  https://www.lupusresearch.org/lupus-community/   Systemic lupus erythematosus (lupus). (2016).  https://www.niams.nih.gov/health-topics/lupus   Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/lupus/facts/detailed.html   What is lupus? (2013).  https://www.lupus.org/resources/what-is-lupus   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "Lupus pictures and symptoms."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 17 Jun. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325482.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2019, June 17). "Lupus pictures and symptoms."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  