 Although this condition is possible in males, researchers suggest that more than  95%  of people with a lump on the areola are females.  In females, there are two different types of lumps on the areola. These are nonpuerperal subareolar abscesses, which occur in a person who is not breastfeeding, and puerperal abscesses, which occur in women who are breastfeeding.  In this article, we review the causes, symptoms, and treatment options for a lump on the areola.  The most common cause of breast infections is breastfeeding.   Inflammation  of the breasts during breastfeeding can affect between  2% to 3% of lactating women , and 5% to 11% of these women may develop an abscess.  Males and females who are not lactating may also develop a lump on the areola. These abscesses may occur in people across a wide range of ages.  Non-lactational breast abscesses seem to have links with smoking and  diabetes .  Also, researchers have shown that people who are obese and black people may have a higher incidence of breast abscesses than others.  Individuals who have nipple piercings can develop lumps on the areola as well.  The  most common bacteria  that causes breast abscesses in lactating women are  Staphylococcus aureus  ( S. aureus ) and  Streptococcus  species.  Doctors are noticing that a specific strain of  S. aureus  that is resistant to methicillin  antibiotics  is sometimes also found in lumps on the areola.  Methicillin-resistant  S. aureus  ( MRSA ) infections are more difficult to treat and require different antibiotics.  Bacteria that tend to cause breast abscesses in males and non-lactating females are usually a mix of  S.s aureus ,  Streptococcus  species, and anaerobic bacteria.  A person with a lump on the areola may complain of the following  symptoms :  People may also report  fever , nausea, vomiting, and fluid drainage from the nipple or site of redness.  Young people of any sex who are not lactating tend to  report more breast pain  than those who are older.  About  15% to 20%  of people with lumps on the areola will have discharge draining from the nipple. The fluid that drains from a lump on the areola of a younger person will appear thinner, whereas an older person may have a thicker discharge.  Doctors report that lumps on the areola in females who are not lactating and males recur more often than lumps in lactating women.  Doctors can request an  ultrasound of the breast or a mammogram  to gain more information on the size, depth, and location of the abscess.  When doctors diagnose a lump on the areola, they will  cut and drain out the fluid  from the lump. They may take a biopsy of the lump to rule out  breast cancer .  People may start antibiotic treatment if the doctor is unable to perform the drainage immediately.  Doctors may prescribe the following  antibiotics  for lumps on the areola:  If the doctor can identify the bacteria present in a sample of the fluid they drain from the lump, they can prescribe an antibiotic that will target those specific bacteria.  Taking a sample of the fluid is important for people who have recurring abscesses because these lumps tend to have  a mixture of bacteria, including anaerobic bacteria , as the cause.  Doctors will consider which antibiotics are safe to give to breastfeeding women with lumps on the areola. Women are commonly encouraged to  continue breastfeeding .  If someone has a large lump or signs of severe infection, the doctor may  admit them to the hospital . These larger lumps require cutting and drainage in the operating room and treatment with intravenous antibiotics.  Once a doctor drains the fluid from the lump, a person  should no longer feel pain  at the site. However, some people will still need painkillers after drainage. Doctors may sometimes suggest narcotics and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) to reduce pain.  If a person is still experiencing inflammation at the site, they can apply a warm compress and moisturizer to prevent cracking of the areola.  People with nipple piercings should make sure they know how to keep the area clean correctly.  Breastfeeding women can consult a lactation nurse to find out how to prevent swelling of the breasts.  Lumps on the areola in breastfeeding women tend to  respond well to treatment  and are less likely to recur if people manage them appropriately with drainage and antibiotics.  Recurrence rates are high in people who are not breastfeeding. Doctors do not have  standardized guidelines  for treating lumps on the areola, and this may be a cause of recurrence in some people.  A person with a lump on the areola can consult a team of professionals, including a radiologist, general surgeon, infectious disease specialist, pharmacist, and lactation nurse, if appropriate.  Consulting a multi-professional team can reduce healthcare costs, improve recurrence rates, and reduce the need for unnecessary operations.  Fistulas are a complication of lumps on the areola that occur in as many as  one-third  of people.  A fistula is a tract that forms between the milk duct or the opening of the abscess in the breast and the areola. If this occurs, a doctor will notice a raised, crusted lesion on the nipple during a physical examination.  Fistulas can also  occur in men .  People should consult their doctors if they notice a lump on the breast or nipple or experience any fluid leaking from the nipple.  Doctors will examine the lump and recommend medical imaging to rule out breast cancer, especially in non-lactating people or any sex.  Women who are breastfeeding also need to see their doctors if a lump forms on the areola. A lactation nurse can help a woman prevent future abscesses and  coach her to continue breastfeeding or using a breast pump  to take the milk from the affected breast.  Any lump that has links with symptoms of severe infection requires hospitalization.  Doctors will also  check for fistulas  if a person has recurring lumps on the areola.  People who notice a lump on the areola should consult a doctor. With a quick diagnosis, the doctor can start the treatment early. Treatment involves draining the lump and antibiotic therapy.  Women who are breastfeeding are more likely to have lumps on the areola, but both males and females who are not lactating may also develop these abscesses.  Smoking and diabetes seem to have links to lumps on the areola. Obese and black people may also have increased incidence rates.  These painful lumps can recur in some people. Recurrence rates are high in females who are not breastfeeding and in males.    
 Johnson, S. P.,  et al.  (2014). Male Zuska's disease.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3987215/pdf/bcr-2013-201922.pdf  
 Kasales, C. J.,  et al.  (2014). Nonpuerperal mastitis and subareolar abscess of the breast.  http://www.ajronline.org/doi/full/10.2214/AJR.13.10551  
 Lim, G. H., &amp; Ng, R. P. (2018). Milk fistula following puerperal breast abscess.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5889231/  
 Mastitis and breast abscess. (2019).  https://bestpractice.bmj.com/topics/en-us/1084  
 Toomey, A., &amp; Le, J. K. (2019). Abscess, breast.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459122/     Johnson, S. P.,  et al.  (2014). Male Zuska's disease.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3987215/pdf/bcr-2013-201922.pdf   Kasales, C. J.,  et al.  (2014). Nonpuerperal mastitis and subareolar abscess of the breast.  http://www.ajronline.org/doi/full/10.2214/AJR.13.10551   Lim, G. H., &amp; Ng, R. P. (2018). Milk fistula following puerperal breast abscess.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5889231/   Mastitis and breast abscess. (2019).  https://bestpractice.bmj.com/topics/en-us/1084   Toomey, A., &amp; Le, J. K. (2019). Abscess, breast.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459122/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Caporuscio, Jessica. "What causes a lump on the areola."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jun. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325501.php&gt;    APA  Caporuscio, J. (2019, June 18). "What causes a lump on the areola."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  