 Friction burns can be very painful, especially on such a sensitive area of the body.  According to the authors of a  review paper , it is difficult to determine the prevalence of friction burns on the penis because ethical and psychological reasons often prevent people from reporting injuries to this part of the body.  Read on to learn more about friction burns on the penis and how to treat and prevent them.  A friction burn on the penis will have similar symptoms to those of friction burns on other parts of the body.  It is important to recognize the symptoms of a friction burn on the penis so that a person can distinguish between this injury and other more serious issues, such as  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs).  The symptoms of a friction burn on the penis include:  These symptoms can also occur as a result of other more serious issues. For example, the following conditions can also cause penile pain and redness:  The other symptoms of a more serious health issue may include:  A person with any of the above symptoms should see their doctor immediately.  Intense rubbing generally causes friction burns.  Most friction burns  that doctors see in a healthcare setting are due to a road accident.  However, there are other possible causes of a friction burn on the penis, including:  Friction burns from masturbation and sexual intercourse may be more likely to occur if a person does not use lubrication.  The best way to treat a friction burn is to give the area time to heal without doing the activity that caused the burn to occur. Most minor friction burns should go away on their own in time.  It is possible to treat most friction burns on the penis at home. While a person is waiting for a penile friction burn to heal, they should do the following to help make themselves more comfortable and prevent further irritation to the penis:  If the affected skin starts to ooze or drain  pus , a person should make an appointment with their doctor. Pus is a sign of infection, and a topical  antibiotic  may be necessary to help the affected area heal.  During sexual activity with a partner, using a lubricated condom can help prevent friction burns. Aside from preventing penile friction burns, condoms can also prevent unplanned pregnancy and help keep both partners healthy by reducing the risk of STIs.  Additionally, a person can ask their partner to be gentler or use lubrication during sexual activity.  One of the best ways to prevent friction burns on the penis when masturbating is for the person to be more gentle with themselves. Using a water-based lubricant can also help prevent friction burns. Many forms of water-based lubricant are available to purchase  online .  People can take other steps to help reduce skin irritation that can cause friction burns, including:  People should also be aware of how other health issues can affect the penis. For example, if a person has  diabetes  that they find difficult to manage, they may be more at risk of yeast infections that can cause penile irritation. Untreated STIs can also irritate this part of the body.  Friction burns on the penis can be painful. A person can treat most friction burns at home unless the burn becomes infected. If this occurs, they should see a doctor.  The best treatments for friction burns are time and rest from the activity that caused the burn.  A person can help prevent friction burns on the penis by avoiding vigorous sexual activity and not wearing tight fitting clothing, especially when exercising. Good hygiene can also help keep a penis healthy.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Agrawal, A.,  et al.  (2008). Friction burns: Epidemiology and prevention.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3188131/  
 Reddy, S. V. K.  et al.  (2014). Penile injuries: A 10-year experience.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4164551/  
 Teichman, J. M. H.,  et al.  (2010). Noninfectious penile lesions.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2010/0115/p167.html     Agrawal, A.,  et al.  (2008). Friction burns: Epidemiology and prevention.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3188131/   Reddy, S. V. K.  et al.  (2014). Penile injuries: A 10-year experience.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4164551/   Teichman, J. M. H.,  et al.  (2010). Noninfectious penile lesions.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2010/0115/p167.html   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What to know about friction burns on the penis."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 24 Jun. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325533.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2019, June 24). "What to know about friction burns on the penis."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  