  Depression  is a condition that affects around  16 million  adults in the United States each year. Depression can take its toll on relationships and may cause loved ones to feel helpless, frustrated, or fearful.  In this article, we explore ways in which people can support a partner with depression in their journey toward recovery.  To understand the severity of a person's depression, it can be helpful to explore how the symptoms affect their life.  Asking about symptoms also shows the person that their partner is interested in their feelings and experiences.  Useful questions to ask include:  Avoid asking questions that seem judgmental or place blame on the person with depression. They may already be blaming themselves for their symptoms, and they need support instead of further judgment.  It is also essential not to trivialize depression, which is a serious medical condition.  Examples of questions to avoid include:  Those supporting a partner with depression may wish to:  Becoming educated about depression can make it easier to support those with the condition. Learning about the symptoms often helps people recognize them in their loved ones.  Symptoms can range from mild to severe, and they may vary over time. However,

the  American Psychiatric Association  state that symptoms need to last for at least 2 weeks before a doctor can diagnose depression.  Symptoms of depression can  include :  It is important to listen to the person with depression and express empathy, which is the ability to understand and share someone else's feelings. One way to demonstrate empathy is to reflect what the person says.  For example, if they say, "I just feel like things will never get better," their partner can reflect that by saying, "It sounds as though you are not hopeful about the future."  Continually trying to cheer the person up is not helpful as this invalidates their condition and their feelings. Phrases such as "tomorrow will be better" or "try to cheer up" do not take into account the nature of the illness.  To show further understanding and support, ask the person what they need. They may need:  Helpful questions to ask include:  Depression can cause a person to lose their motivation, which can be a barrier to seeking treatment. However, according to the  National Institute of Mental Health , most people with depression need treatment to recover.  Those supporting someone with depression can play an important role in their recovery by encouraging them to seek help from a doctor or  mental health  professional.  To inspire a partner to seek treatment, a person can try:  Another way to encourage treatment is to make an appointment on behalf of the person with depression, but only if they make this request. It can also be helpful to accompany them to appointments.  While recovery from depression is possible, it can be challenging at times. To support a partner during the recovery process:  Let them know that they are not alone by saying things such as:  It may also be helpful to attend a support group for family members of those with a mental health condition. Couples may also benefit from couples therapy or family-based counseling.  People with depression have good days and bad days. To deal with the bad days:  Caring for a partner with depression can be draining, frustrating, and frightening.   Research  indicates that having a spouse with depression increases a person's risk of developing depressive symptoms. This risk is particularly high in cases where a man is supporting a woman with depression.  Those looking after someone with a mental health condition also need to take care of their own mental health. They can do this by:  Professional treatment is an important part of the recovery process. The first step is often to see a doctor who can recommend medication, psychotherapy, or both.  For particularly severe depressive symptoms or in life-threatening situations, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency department.  People with depression may be at risk of suicide. According to the  American Foundation for Suicide Prevention , more than half of those who die by suicide have major depression.  Partners of those with depression should be aware of the warning signs of suicide so that they can take swift action if necessary. Warning signs include:  If a person suspects that someone is at immediate risk of suicide, they should seek emergency assistance.  If someone believes that a loved one is considering suicide but is not at immediate risk, they should contact that person's doctor and seek support from other family members or a support group.  Supporting a partner with depression, both emotionally and practically, can help them go through the recovery process.  While it can be rewarding, caring for someone with a mental health condition is also challenging. Caregivers should practice regular self-care to look after their own mental well-being.    
 Depression: What you need to know. (2015).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/depression-what-you-need-to-know/index.shtml  
 Mental health conditions: Depression and anxiety. (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/diseases/depression-anxiety.html  
 Suicide claims more lives than war, murder, and natural disasters combined. (n.d.).  https://www.theovernight.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=cms.page&amp;id=1034  
 Thomeer, M. B.,  et al.  (2013). Marital processes around depression: A gendered and relational perspective.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4408555/  
 What is depression? (2017).  https://www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/depression/what-is-depression     Depression: What you need to know. (2015).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/depression-what-you-need-to-know/index.shtml   Mental health conditions: Depression and anxiety. (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/diseases/depression-anxiety.html   Suicide claims more lives than war, murder, and natural disasters combined. (n.d.).  https://www.theovernight.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=cms.page&amp;id=1034   Thomeer, M. B.,  et al.  (2013). Marital processes around depression: A gendered and relational perspective.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4408555/   What is depression? (2017).  https://www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/depression/what-is-depression   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "How to support a partner with depression."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 20 Jun. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325523.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2019, June 20). "How to support a partner with depression."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  