 People with an  endomorph body type  usually have soft, round bodies with a wide waist and large bones, joints, and hips, regardless of their height.  This article covers what an endomorph diet is, including which foods to eat and which to avoid. We also discuss exercises that may help people with endomorphic bodies lose weight and build muscle.  People with an endomorphic body may have characteristics and traits that make it difficult for them to diet, gain muscle mass, and exercise.  Specialists have devised endomorph diets and exercise plans that work with and against these unique traits to help people with endomorphic bodies lose weight or maintain a healthy  body weight .  In the 1940s, psychologist William Sheldon  described  three main body types, or somatotypes: ectomorphic, mesomorphic, and endomorphic.  Of these, people with endomorphic bodies tend to have a slower metabolism, possibly due to their more substantial build. Having a slower metabolism can mean that the body is more likely to convert excess  calories  into fat.  Therefore, people with endomorphic bodies may need to more carefully control what they eat, when they eat, and how much they eat.  According to Sheldon, people endomorphic bodies may also have traits that make following diet and exercise plans more challenging. For example, they may have a general desire for food, comfort, and relaxation.  Also, these people usually have a larger build and carry excess weight, so they may be more prone to sedentarism.  People with an endomorph body type may also find it difficult to gain muscle mass because excess body fat triggers the release of the hormone  estrogen . Increases in estrogen levels tend to decrease levels of hormones that promote muscle growth, such as  testosterone .  Sources differ on what the best endomorph diet plan is.  Generally, people with endomorphic bodies may benefit from a  nutrition  plan that balances healthful fats, proteins, and  carbohydrates  from fruits, vegetables, and unrefined, high fiber foods.  Some examples of foods that are rich in protein or healthful monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats include:  Some examples of carbohydrates that are fit for an endomorph diet include most:  According to the  American Council on Exercise (ACE) , people with an endomorph body type tend to be more sensitive to carbohydrates and  insulin . Insulin is a hormone that allows blood sugars to enter cells.  So, people following an endomorph diet may wish to limit or avoid carbohydrate dense foods, especially refined carbohydrates such as white flour and sugar.  Foods rich in carbohydrates release sugars rapidly into the bloodstream, causing blood sugar spikes and dips. The body is also more likely to turn these sugars into fat than burn them as energy.  Endomorphic bodies are also more likely to convert excess calories into fat. For this same reason, people following an endomorph diet may also want to avoid foods that are calorie dense but nutrient poor.  Some examples of foods to limit or avoid on the endomorph diet include:  Exercise is an important part of any weight loss plan, especially for people with an endomorph body type. Exercising helps increase metabolism and reduce fat.  Cardiovascular exercises such as running can burn calories and help create a calorie deficit. This means that someone is using more calories than they are consuming and potentially burning excess fat.  The  ACE  recommend that people with an endomorph body type follow "well rounded" exercise routines that focus on both cardiovascular and strength training activities.  Some examples of good cardiovascular exercises include:  Strength and weight training exercises are an important part of almost any weight loss plan, especially for people with an endomorph body type.  These people often have a low percentage of muscle mass, although they have large, wide bones typically capable of bearing large, strong muscles. They also tend to have excess body fat, which triggers the body to release estrogen, reducing testosterone levels and hindering muscle growth.  However, healthy muscle helps increase metabolism, because unlike fat cells, muscle tissues burn calories, even when resting. They also encourage the body to use fat for fuel.  Several weight training routines and exercises are beneficial for people with endomorphic bodies. For example, experts tend to recommend compound exercises.  Compound exercises use multiple body tissues and units at the same time and encourage body control. People can do most of these exercises from a standing position using free weights, body weight, or a barbell.  Some examples of compound exercises include:  To do:  To do:  To do:  Another group of strength exercises that experts recommend for people with an endomorph body type is circuit training. Circuit training involves doing short, intense bouts of exercise with small periods of rest in-between.  One example of circuit training may involve:  People with an endomorph body type may gain weight easier and take longer to lose it because they tend to have a slow metabolism, low muscle mass, and high amounts of body fat.  Endomorph diet plans usually focus on avoiding refined carbohydrates and eating a mix of healthful fats, proteins, and carbohydrates from vegetables, nuts, fruits, and whole-grain foods.  Most endomorph diet plans also involve doing regular cardiovascular and strength exercises to burn calories, boost metabolism, and build lean muscle.    
 Bachus, T., &amp; Macdonald, E. (2014). How to eat and train for an endomorph body type.  https://www.acefitness.org/education-and-resources/lifestyle/blog/5078/how-to-eat-and-train-for-an-endomorph-body-type  
 Fats. (2018).  https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-eating/eat-smart/fats  
 Glycemic index and diabetes. (2014).  http://www.diabetes.org/food-and-fitness/food/what-can-i-eat/understanding-carbohydrates/glycemic-index-and-diabetes.html  
 Kenneth, I. O., &amp; Matthew, B. M. (2013). Investigation of William H. Sheldon's constitutional theory of personality: A case study of the University of the Gambia.  https://www.mcser.org/journal/index.php/mjss/article/view/684/712  
 Oroles, F. (2016). The determining factors in the formation of three types (ectomorph, mesomorph and endomorph).  https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2a1d/cbb2c71cbacb9c23ec95e6e36a0afba58f6e.pdf     Bachus, T., &amp; Macdonald, E. (2014). How to eat and train for an endomorph body type.  https://www.acefitness.org/education-and-resources/lifestyle/blog/5078/how-to-eat-and-train-for-an-endomorph-body-type   Fats. (2018).  https://www.heart.org/en/healthy-living/healthy-eating/eat-smart/fats   Glycemic index and diabetes. (2014).  http://www.diabetes.org/food-and-fitness/food/what-can-i-eat/understanding-carbohydrates/glycemic-index-and-diabetes.html   Kenneth, I. O., &amp; Matthew, B. M. (2013). Investigation of William H. Sheldon's constitutional theory of personality: A case study of the University of the Gambia.  https://www.mcser.org/journal/index.php/mjss/article/view/684/712   Oroles, F. (2016). The determining factors in the formation of three types (ectomorph, mesomorph and endomorph).  https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2a1d/cbb2c71cbacb9c23ec95e6e36a0afba58f6e.pdf   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Huizen, Jennifer. "What to know about the endomorph diet."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jun. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325577.php&gt;    APA  Huizen, J. (2019, June 26). "What to know about the endomorph diet."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  