 Doctors prescribe escitalopram to treat clinical  depression  or general  anxiety  disorder.  Generic and branded versions of escitalopram are available by prescription. The medical community generally considers escitalopram safe, but there is a risk of side effects, which can range from mild to severe.  Doctors typically prescribe escitalopram to treat either depression or generalized anxiety disorder. Some healthcare providers prescribe escitalopram alongside other medications and therapies to treat these conditions.  Researchers have shown that escitalopram is  safe and effective  for treating depression in adolescents aged 12–17, but not in children younger than 12.  Doctors do not use escitalopram to treat general anxiety disorder in people younger than 18.  Some doctors also prescribe escitalopram, off-label, for conditions such as:  Escitalopram is available as a pill or a liquid. A person can take either form orally, with or without food.  People take escitalopram at the same time each day, either in the morning or at night before bed. Escitalopram can make some people drowsy and others more energized. This effect can help determine when a person should take the drug.  It is important to take escitalopram exactly as directed, without skipping or changing doses.  Initially, a doctor usually prescribes an adult a low dosage for  1 week , then gradually increases the dosage over time if they believe that it is necessary. For adolescents, doctors will wait for 3 weeks before increasing the dosage.  As with other  antidepressants , it may take some time before a person feels the effects of escitalopram. A person should continue the treatment, even after they feel better.  It is important not to stop the treatment suddenly, without consulting a doctor. Doing so can cause side effects, such as extreme sleepiness and dizziness. We discuss these effects in depth below.  If a person misses a dose, they can take it as soon as they remember. However, it is not a good idea to double up on doses. If a person realizes that they have missed a dose close to the time of the next dose, they should skip the missed dose and continue as usual.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have approved  two dosages  of escitalopram:  Escitalopram is also available in pills of 5 mg. A person can also cut a pill in half to form a different dosage, as a doctor advises.  The liquid form of escitalopram comes in a strength of 1 mg per milliliter.  In adults, some common side effects of escitalopram include:  In adolescents and children, some common side effects of escitalopram include:  Common side effects are often mild, and they typically go away over time as the person gets used to the medication. However, if they persist or get worse, speak to the doctor.  More severe side effects can also occur. A person who experiences any of these should consult their doctor immediately or seek emergency medical assistance.  Some severe side effects include:   Serotonin syndrome  is a reaction that occurs when the  central nervous system  receives too much stimulation. It is most common when a person takes additional medication that either increases their serotonin levels or decreases their metabolism.  Serotonin syndrome can result in agitation, a racing heartbeat, coordination issues, and low or  high blood pressure .  There are several potential adverse effects if a person stops taking escitalopram. The risk is greater when a person stops the treatment suddenly.  Some possible adverse effects of stopping escitalopram include:  To help prevent these effects, a doctor will often wean a person off of the treatment slowly.  Escitalopram carries a warning label from the FDA indicating that the drug can  increase the risk  of suicidal thoughts or actions. This reaction is most common in children, teens, and young adults.  However, a doctor may still recommend the use of escitalopram in younger people if there is a need that outweighs the potential risk.  Escitalopram also comes with the following warnings, aside from those dealing with possible side effects:  Discuss these warnings with a doctor before starting a course of escitalopram.   Learn more about why doctors do not recommend mixing escitalopram with alcohol here.   Several drugs interact with escitalopram. These interactions can be harmful and cause medications to work less well. A person should tell their doctor about any other medicines,  vitamins , and supplements that they take.  Also, a doctor should monitor anyone who is taking escitalopram. The doctor can help identify changes in mood and help ensure that the person does not take any other treatments that may interact with escitalopram.  Some treatments to avoid while taking escitalopram include:  The cost of escitalopram depends on the dosage, whether a person has  health insurance , and whether a person is taking a generic or branded version.  People without insurance may receive discounted treatment. Most insurance plans cover at least a generic version of escitalopram.  There are several possible alternatives to escitalopram. It is important to note, however, that all antidepressant medications carry similar risks.  Anyone who believes that they would benefit from taking an antidepressant should talk to a doctor or another healthcare provider about the options.   Learn more about antidepressant medications here.   Escitalopram is an antidepressant drug that is generally safe. Doctors typically use it to treat depression and general anxiety disorders.  Before starting a course of escitalopram, discuss any personal or family history of suicidal thoughts or actions with a doctor.  The doctor should also review all medications, supplements, and vitamins that a person is taking before they prescribe this drug.  If a person experiences any mild side effects, they should let their doctor know. If side effects are persistent or severe, seek immediate medical attention.    
 Escitalopram. (2016).  https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603005.html  
 Escitalopram 20mg tablets. (2018).  https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/7059/smpc  
 Label: Lexapro. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=13bb8267-1cab-43e5-acae-55a4d957630a  
 Wade, A. G.,  et al.  (2011). Efficacy, safety and tolerability of escitalopram in doses up to 50 mg in major depressive disorder (MDD): An open-label, pilot study.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3068950/     Escitalopram. (2016).  https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603005.html   Escitalopram 20mg tablets. (2018).  https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc/product/7059/smpc   Label: Lexapro. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=13bb8267-1cab-43e5-acae-55a4d957630a   Wade, A. G.,  et al.  (2011). Efficacy, safety and tolerability of escitalopram in doses up to 50 mg in major depressive disorder (MDD): An open-label, pilot study.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3068950/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Escitalopram: What you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325640.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2019, July 2). "Escitalopram: What you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  