 Zoloft is a common  antidepressant  drug with the generic name sertraline. People take this drug to help treat mood and behavior disorders, including  depression , social  anxiety , and  obsessive-compulsive disorder  (OCD).  In this article, we look at the effects of mixing Zoloft and alcohol, safety, and what to do if someone has taken them together.  Zoloft and alcohol are two drugs that affect the brain. They can have similar effects, such as making a person feel sleepy and affect their abilities to make decisions or think clearly. When taken together, these drugs may interact and worsen these side effects.  For these reasons, healthcare professionals advise that people avoid alcohol while taking Zoloft.   Studies  in healthy people do not suggest that Zoloft increases the mental or motor skill impairments caused by alcohol. However, there is little evidence about the actual effects of mixing the two drugs, and experts advise that people should not drink alcohol while taking Zoloft.  More generally, healthcare professionals recommend that people should avoid alcohol when they have depression. This is because alcohol is a depressant and, when a person drinks alcohol, especially in large amounts, it can make their symptoms worse while drinking and the next day.  Zoloft and alcohol both affect the way the brain functions.  Alcohol is a depressant, meaning it reduces the activity of certain chemical messengers in the brain, known as neurotransmitters. Zoloft is a selective  serotonin  reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), meaning that it works by changing the brain's levels of a neurotransmitter called serotonin.  Alcohol reduces neurotransmitter activity and lowers the amount of mental and physical arousal or stimulation. This can lead to the following effects:  Zoloft also affects brain chemicals. While alcohol has effects on many neurotransmitters, Zoloft specifically affects the balance of serotonin in the brain. Serotonin is involved in regulating mood, behavior, and motivation.  Zoloft, while regulating mood, may have some side effects that  include :  Interactions between alcohol and Zoloft may change how effective Zoloft is and may cause some unexpected side effects. Zoloft and alcohol have some similar effects. When a person drinks alcohol while taking Zoloft, these effects may happen more quickly or intensely.  Drinking alcohol while taking Zoloft often causes sleep problems, such as feeling drowsy or not being able to sleep through the night. A person may also feel more dizzy or uncoordinated.  Zoloft can interact with other drugs, medicines, and supplements. People should tell their doctor about all other drugs they take before starting Zoloft. The doctor may recommend changing some medicines to avoid interactions.  People should not take Zoloft if they are taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), which are another type of antidepressant or pimozide, which is an antipsychotic drug.  Other medications that can interact with Zoloft include:  Other medications can interact with Zoloft as well. A person should work with their healthcare provider to manage all medications they are taking while on Zoloft.  Healthcare professionals advise that people avoid drinking alcohol when taking Zoloft. This is because both drugs can cause similar side effects. Taking both together may make the side effects worse.  Alcohol can also worsen the symptoms of depression because it is a central nervous system depressant.  People can speak to their healthcare provider about their concerns regarding Zoloft and alcohol. If a person is finding it difficult to stop drinking alcohol, they can talk to their friends, family, and healthcare provider for advice and support. The  National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism  can also offer help and advice.  What should I do if I have taken Zoloft with alcohol?  If you’ve taken Zoloft with alcohol, pay attention to how you’re feeling. Some people may be able to drink small amounts of alcohol while taking Zoloft without any side effects. However, other people may experience symptoms such as feeling very sleepy or dizzy or have changes in their mood. If you start feeling more depressed or anxious after drinking alcohol, call a healthcare professional. If your symptoms are severe or you’ve drunk significant amounts of alcohol, call 911 or seek immediate medical attention.    
 Label: Zoloft – sertraline hydrochloride tablet, film coated. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=fe9e8b7d-61ea-409d-84aa-3ebd79a046b5  
 Support and treatment. (n.d.).  https://www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-health/support-treatment  
 Moore, T. J. &amp; Mattison, D.R. (2017). Adult utilization of psychiatric drugs and differences by sex, age, and race.  https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/2592697     Label: Zoloft – sertraline hydrochloride tablet, film coated. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=fe9e8b7d-61ea-409d-84aa-3ebd79a046b5   Support and treatment. (n.d.).  https://www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-health/support-treatment   Moore, T. J. &amp; Mattison, D.R. (2017). Adult utilization of psychiatric drugs and differences by sex, age, and race.  https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamainternalmedicine/fullarticle/2592697   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Is it safe to mix Zoloft and alcohol?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325645.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2019, July 3). "Is it safe to mix Zoloft and alcohol?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  