 However, the size of the  tumor  is only one of the factors that doctors consider when staging a person's  breast cancer . Other factors include the location of the tumor, whether it has spread outside of the breast, the appearance of the  cancer  cells, and the presence of hormone receptors.  In this article, we present a tumor size chart and discuss how tumor size affects cancer staging. We also cover other factors that contribute to staging, treatment, and a person's outlook.  Doctors determine the stage of cancer as part of their diagnosis. To confirm the stage of breast cancer, they assess a number of different factors, including tumor size.  Doctors use a range of tests and examinations to evaluate the specific characteristics of a person's breast cancer. They use this information to assign values to the TNM staging system, where:  The overall stages of cancer range from 0 to 4. Stage 0 means that breast cancer is at a very early stage and has not yet spread. Stage 4 is late-stage breast cancer, in which the cancer has spread to other parts of the body.  Every person's breast cancer is different, but its stage provides a general indication of a person's treatment options and outlook.  People with early-stage breast cancer are likely to have smaller tumors that are easier for doctors to treat. Larger tumors tend to indicate later-stage breast cancer, which may be more difficult to treat.  Doctors measure the size of the primary breast cancer tumor at its widest point. They usually give the size in millimeters (mm) or centimeters (cm).  According to the  American Cancer Society (ACS) , doctors use the following system to grade tumor size:  Tumor size is just one of the factors that doctors consider when determining the stage of a person's breast cancer. Other factors include:  When staging a person's breast cancer, doctors will determine whether it has spread to nearby lymph nodes. They do this by removing one or more of the lymph nodes in the armpit and examining them under a microscope.  Doctors categorize lymph node status using the N value of the TNM system,  where :  Metastasis is when cancer spreads from its original location in the breast to distant parts of the body, such as the liver, lungs, brain, or bones.  The symptoms of metastatic breast cancer depend on which organs the cancer has spread to, and they can vary greatly. Doctors may use additional scans, tests, and exams to diagnose a person with metastatic breast cancer.  Doctors categorize metastasis using the M value of the TNM system,  where :  When staging breast cancers, doctors test the tumor cells for the presence of hormone receptors. The receptors are proteins that respond to the hormones  estrogen  and  progesterone  by telling the cancer cells to grow.  Doctors describe breast cancer that has receptors for estrogen as being estrogen receptor-positive, or ER-positive. They refer to breast cancer that has receptors for progesterone as progesterone receptor-positive, or PR-positive.  Breast cancers that have hormone receptors are far more likely to respond to hormone therapy.  HER2 status refers to whether breast cancer cells are producing too much of a protein called human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Doctors test for HER2 status by taking a sample of the cancer and sending it to a laboratory for analysis.  Doctors describe breast cancer with higher than normal levels of HER2 as being HER2-positive. HER2-positive cancers are typically more aggressive than other types of breast cancer, but they are also more likely to respond to targeted therapies.  The appearance, or differentiation, of the cancer cells is another factor in cancer staging. Doctors grade cancer cells according to how similar they appear to noncancerous cells under a microscope.  Doctors classify cancer cells that are close to resembling healthy cells as being low grade or well differentiated. These cancers typically grow more slowly.  High grade, or poorly differentiated, cancer cells appear very different than normal cells and tend to grow faster.  After assessing the different characteristics of the breast cancer, doctors use the information to determine its overall stage from 0 to 4.  Here is an overview of  each breast cancer stage :  When recommending treatment options for breast cancer, a doctor will take into account:  Treatment options can include:  Early detection and diagnosis of breast cancer can significantly improve a person's outlook.  According to the  ACS , the 5-year relative survival rate for localized breast cancer is 99%. This statistic means that people with this type of cancer are 99% as likely to survive for at least 5 years after diagnosis as those without the condition.  The 5-year relative survival rate is  85%  for people with breast cancer that has spread into neighboring tissues and  27%  for those whose cancer has spread to other organs. The overall 5-year relative survival rate for breast cancer is  90% .  However, these figures are only estimates, and experts have based them on data from 2008–2014. Treatment for cancer is improving all the time, and each person's outlook is different.  Tumor size is an important factor when doctors are determining the stage of a person's breast cancer. However, doctors also take into account several other factors, including:  A doctor will consider all of these factors in addition to the person's age, general health, and personal preferences when recommending treatment options.  People with later-stage breast cancers may need more treatment than those whose cancer is at an early stage. Early diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer can significantly improve a person's outlook. However, everyone's experience of breast cancer is different.    
 Cancer staging. (2015).  https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/diagnosis-staging/staging  
 Sharma, G. N.,  et al.  (2010). Various types and management of breast cancer: An overview.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3255438/  
 Treatment of breast cancer by stage. (2019).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/treatment/treatment-of-breast-cancer-by-stage.html  
 Understanding a breast cancer diagnosis. (n.d.).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/understanding-a-breast-cancer-diagnosis/  
 Your breast cancer diagnosis. (2019).  https://www.breastcancer.org/symptoms/diagnosis     Cancer staging. (2015).  https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/diagnosis-staging/staging   Sharma, G. N.,  et al.  (2010). Various types and management of breast cancer: An overview.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3255438/   Treatment of breast cancer by stage. (2019).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/treatment/treatment-of-breast-cancer-by-stage.html   Understanding a breast cancer diagnosis. (n.d.).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/understanding-a-breast-cancer-diagnosis/   Your breast cancer diagnosis. (2019).  https://www.breastcancer.org/symptoms/diagnosis   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Burgess, Lana. "How does tumor size relate to breast cancer stage?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325669.php&gt;    APA  Burgess, L. (2019, July 5). "How does tumor size relate to breast cancer stage?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  