 Mammary duct ectasia is  most common  in people who are close to or have already gone through  menopause . This condition typically affects females, but there are  very rare  cases of it developing in males.  In this article, we look at mammary duct ectasia in more detail, including its symptoms and causes and when to see a doctor. We also cover medical treatment and home remedies.  The breasts consist of mammary ducts and glands called lobules. The lobules produce milk that flows through the mammary ducts into the nipples.  Mammary duct ectasia is when the milk ducts under the nipple become clogged up with fluid. This blockage can occur when the milk ducts get wider, and their walls thicken. There may also be  inflammation  at the site of the fluid buildup.  The  American Cancer Society  advise that mammary duct ectasia is a noncancerous, or benign, condition that does not increase the risk of  breast cancer . It may cause other symptoms and complications, but these are not generally serious.  Mammary duct ectasia does not always cause symptoms. When symptoms do occur, they can include:  If an infection develops in the milk duct, it may cause additional signs and symptoms. Doctors refer to this infection as mastitis, and its symptoms include:  A person should talk to a doctor if breast or nipple changes are persistent, severe, or worrisome.  Although mammary duct ectasia is a benign condition, and its symptoms often resolve without treatment, it is better to be cautious when new breast symptoms appear. There are some similarities between the symptoms of mammary duct ectasia and those of breast cancer.  People should also see a doctor if they have any of the symptoms of mastitis, especially if these do not begin to improve quickly with home care. Untreated mastitis can lead to an abscess, which is a painful buildup of  pus . Abscesses require medical treatment to prevent further complications.  Doctors do not fully understand what causes mammary duct ectasia. However, potential causes and risk factors include:  To diagnose mammary duct ectasia, a doctor will ask questions about a person's symptoms and review their medical history. They will usually also perform a breast exam.  The doctor may then recommend one or more of the following tests:  People with mammary duct ectasia do not always require treatment. However, if the condition is affecting a person's quality of life, a doctor may recommend treatments to relieve symptoms.  We discuss some of the possible treatment options below:  Over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers, such as acetaminophen, and anti-inflammatory medications, such as ibuprofen and acetaminophen, may help relieve pain, tenderness, and swelling in the breast. A doctor or pharmacist can provide advice on the benefits and risks of OTC medications.  Both  ibuprofen  and  acetaminophen  are available for purchase online.  A doctor may recommend  antibiotics  for people with symptoms of mastitis that do not get better with home care.  Surgery for mammary duct ectasia is rarely necessary. Doctors usually reserve surgery for people with symptoms that do not respond to medication or home treatments.  Surgery options include:  Doctors usually give people undergoing these procedures a general anesthetic so that they are not awake during the surgery and do not feel any pain.  The surgeon will make a small cut, or incision, in the areola, which is the dark skin around the nipple. They will then remove the duct or ducts and close the wound with stitches. After the procedure, there will be a small scar at the site of the incision, but this should fade over time.  People with mild to moderate symptoms often find relief from simple home remedies and self-care. These remedies can include:  Mammary duct ectasia occurs when a milk duct becomes blocked and clogs up with fluid. It is not a serious condition and does not increase a person's risk of breast cancer. However, it may cause discomfort and can sometimes lead to an infection that requires treatment.  The symptoms of mammary duct ectasia can be similar to some of those of breast cancer, so it is important for people to see a doctor for a breast examination. It is also best to see a doctor if symptoms do not improve with home treatments.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Duct ectasia. (2017).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/non-cancerous-breast-conditions/duct-ectasia.html  
 Duct ectasia. (2019).  https://www.breastcancercare.org.uk/information-support/have-i-got-breast-cancer/duct-ectasia  
 Liu, L.,  et al.  (2017). Periductal mastitis: An inflammatory disease related to bacterial infection and consequent immune responses?  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5274658/  
 Rahal, R. M.,  et al.  (2005). Risk factors for duct ectasia [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15982393     Duct ectasia. (2017).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/non-cancerous-breast-conditions/duct-ectasia.html   Duct ectasia. (2019).  https://www.breastcancercare.org.uk/information-support/have-i-got-breast-cancer/duct-ectasia   Liu, L.,  et al.  (2017). Periductal mastitis: An inflammatory disease related to bacterial infection and consequent immune responses?  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5274658/   Rahal, R. M.,  et al.  (2005). Risk factors for duct ectasia [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15982393   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "What to know about mammary duct ectasia."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 5 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325672.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2019, July 5). "What to know about mammary duct ectasia."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  