 In previous years,  MNT 's summer party events have included  community gardening  and a  rocky, but joyous boat trip . This year, we decided to do something a bit different: a laughter workshop.  Never ones to shy away from trying something new, the  MNT  editorial team welcomed the laughter workshop with curiosity, though there were  some  reservations.  "I had no idea what to expect from this session," said one editor. "I thought I'd feel a bit silly and self-conscious."  It's fair to say that running around a  yoga  studio pulling faces at each other and making Santa-style laughing noises did make us feel  slightly  silly, but most of us left the session feeling joyful and revitalized.  "Although I can understand why it might not have been everyone's cup of tea, I had a hoot!" another editor commented. "It gave me the blissed out feeling of a  yoga  session combined with the good feelings of sharing a lot of jokes with a group of friends."  There's science behind these feelings. A study covered by  MNT  in 2017 found that  laughter triggers the release of endorphins , or "feel good hormones," which can promote social bonding.  There's certainly no shortage of social bonding within the  MNT  editorial office, which contributes to our amazing culture, and — importantly — the content that we produce.  Speaking of our content, we reported on some fascinating studies this month. Our article on a  study linking a class of drugs to an increased risk of dementia  piqued your interest, as did our coverage of research that sheds light on  how calcium in coronary arteries may predict future heart health .  Other popular news included our article on  how hypertension treatment could slow the progression of Alzheimer's disease  and our coverage of research that suggests  people with fibromyalgia have different gut bacteria .  Many of you were interested to  learn about Neurobion supplements  this month, as well as  whether there is a link between gluten and rheumatoid arthritis . You also wanted to learn about the  differences between veganism and vegetarianism .  One of my top picks this month is a feature written by our Research Editor Yella, who talks about  how she got started with intermittent fasting . If you're thinking of taking up this popular eating plan, give this article a read!  Do you have any health topics you'd like  MNT  to cover?  Let us know ! You can also reach out to us on  Facebook  and  Twitter .  I'll be back in July with more on what the  MNT  editorial team has been up to.   In the meantime, have a wonderful July filled with love and laughter!    Honor Whiteman , Managing Editor  