 Amantadine comes in capsule, tablet, or liquid forms. The brand names for amantadine are  Gocovri  and  Osmolex ER .  The most common side effects are nausea, dizziness, and sleeping problems. Some less common but more severe side effects include changes to the  central nervous system  and the heart, as well as  suicidal thoughts  or actions.  This article looks into the uses for amantadine and the side effects that a person might experience.  Amantadine can treat a few conditions, and doctors most often prescribe it to treat  Parkinson's disease .  Amantadine can also help with movement-related side effects of antipsychotic medications. The medical name for these effects is  extrapyramidal symptoms .  Extrapyramidal symptoms are similar to the movements that characterize Parkinson's disease. They may involve muscle spasms, jerkiness, tremors, and slowness.  Amantadine can also prevent and treat the  influenza  A virus by helping to stop the virus from replicating. It is not, however, a substitute for an annual  flu  vaccination.  The most common  side effects  of amantadine, affecting 5–10% of people who take the recommended dosage, include:  Less common side effects, affecting 1–5% of people, include:  Infrequent side effects, affecting 0.1 to 1% of people, include:  Amantadine can cause more severe, and sometimes dangerous, side effects, though this is uncommon. These effects can include:  Suicidal thoughts or actions are a rare side effect of amantadine, occurring in fewer than 0.1% of people.  Many people affected in this way have taken amantadine for influenza prevention or treatment. This side effect can develop in people with no history of psychiatric illness.  People taking amantadine, and those close to them, should look carefully for any behavioral changes, including agitation, personality changes, paranoia, depression, and anxiety.  Some people who have taken amantadine have reported falling asleep while performing routine activities, such as driving. The risk is higher in people who take at least one other sedating medication and in people who experience sleep disorders.  Anyone with a history of  epilepsy  or another condition that causes seizures should monitor any change in seizure activity while taking amantadine.  Symptoms such as dizziness, low  blood pressure , and feeling faint have occurred in people taking amantadine. Alcohol consumption could increase this risk.  People who take amantadine may experience impulsive thoughts and behaviors. Common impulsive behaviors include gambling, risky sexual activity, spending money, or binge eating.  The person may not realize that their behavior is unusual, so it is important for caregivers to monitor for these behaviors.  In rare cases, a person may develop congestive  heart failure  while taking amantadine.  For anyone with a history of congestive heart failure or  edema , it is important to monitor closely for any symptoms, such as increased swelling or shortness of breath.  Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a rare but potentially fatal condition that doctors associate with  fever  or hyperthermia. A person with NMS may also exhibit symptoms such as decreased consciousness, changes in muscle movement, rapid breathing, or a rapid heart rate.  NMS may develop when people have reduced their dosage or stopped taking amantadine. It is important to talk to a doctor before stopping the treatment.  People should be aware of  the following  when taking amantadine:  An overdose of amantadine can be fatal. It may result in toxicity of the heart, lungs, kidneys, or central nervous system.  Amantadine overdose has occurred in people with impaired kidney function who are not able to excrete the drug thoroughly.  The kidneys primarily excrete amantadine via the urine. In people with impaired kidney function, the drug can build up in the body. The doctor will lower the dose of amantadine, as a result.  Amantadine can also increase liver enzyme numbers. Anyone with a history of liver disease should take amantadine with caution.  People with Parkinson's disease have a higher risk of  melanoma , compared with the general population. It is unclear whether this risk relates to medications, the disease itself, or other factors.  People taking amantadine should monitor their skin for changes and see a doctor for skin exams regularly.  Amantadine is a pregnancy category C drug, which means that researchers have not performed well-controlled studies in pregnant women.  As a result, doctors do not know the effects of amantadine on a developing fetus. They do not recommend taking the drug while breastfeeding.  Amantadine may interact with other drugs, including the following:   Anticholinergic drugs   These can worsen some side effects of amantadine, including  dry mouth , dizziness, urinary retention, and blurred vision.   Stimulants   Central nervous system stimulants can cause increased anxiety, trouble sleeping, and irritability in people who also take amantadine. These stimulants include methylphenidate and amphetamines.   Flu vaccine   Because of possible interference, do not receive a nasal live attenuated influenza vaccine within 2 weeks of taking amantadine.   Heart drugs   The  National Library of Medicine (NLM)  report that increased plasma amantadine concentration developed in a man who took a blood pressure medication called triamterene (Dyazide).  They also report that quinidine (Quinaglute), a drug that can help treat heart  arrhythmias , can reduce the kidneys' ability to clear amantadine from the body.   Alcohol   The  NLM  recommend that people avoid excessive alcohol use while taking amantadine. This is because it can increase side effects, including:  Anyone who drinks alcohol regularly should consult the doctor before taking amantadine.  Mild side effects may go away in a few days or weeks. If side effects are persistent or bothersome, speak with the doctor.  If side effects are severe, contact the doctor as soon as possible. Anyone who believes that their side effects may be life-threatening should call 911 or otherwise seek emergency medical assistance.  Other drugs can provide the same type of treatment as amantadine. Speak with a doctor about possible alternatives.  Amantadine is a drug that people mainly use to treat Parkinson's disease. Minor side effects are common, and some include nausea,  insomnia , and dizziness.  Severe and potentially dangerous side effects are less common. Some of these include NMS, suicidal thoughts or behaviors, psychosis, and heart problems.  It is also important to be aware that amantadine can interact with other drugs.  Anyone with concerns about the side effects of amantadine should speak with their doctor.    
 D'Souza, R. S., &amp; Hooten, W. M. (2019). Extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS).  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK534115/  
 Gocovri (amantadine) extended release capsules, for oral use. (2017).  https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/208944lbl.pdf  
 Label: Amantadine hydrochloride — amantadine hydrochloride tablet. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=63d9d4aa-5f92-45b0-98d0-d6ec38b727cb  
 Label: Osmolex ER — amantadine tablet, extended release. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=2bced627-51e3-4e5c-a23c-30deb86ff37b  
 Osmolex ER (amantadine) extended-release tablets, for oral use. (2018).  https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2018/209410s000lbl.pdf     D'Souza, R. S., &amp; Hooten, W. M. (2019). Extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS).  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK534115/   Gocovri (amantadine) extended release capsules, for oral use. (2017).  https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/208944lbl.pdf   Label: Amantadine hydrochloride — amantadine hydrochloride tablet. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=63d9d4aa-5f92-45b0-98d0-d6ec38b727cb   Label: Osmolex ER — amantadine tablet, extended release. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=2bced627-51e3-4e5c-a23c-30deb86ff37b   Osmolex ER (amantadine) extended-release tablets, for oral use. (2018).  https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2018/209410s000lbl.pdf   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Shannon. "What are the side effects of amantadine?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 3 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325643.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, S. (2019, July 3). "What are the side effects of amantadine?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  