 Manganese contributes to many bodily functions, including the metabolism of amino acids,  cholesterol , glucose, and  carbohydrates . It also plays a role in bone formation, blood clotting, and reducing  inflammation .  The human body cannot produce manganese, but it can store it in the liver, pancreas, bones, kidneys, and brain. A person usually obtains manganese from their diet.  In this article, learn more about how manganese functions in the body, as well as where to find it.  The potential health benefits of manganese include:  Manganese helps form an  antioxidant  enzyme called superoxide dismutase (SOD). Antioxidants shield the body from free radicals, which are molecules that destroy or damage cells in the body.  The authors of a  2011 study  found that SOD helps break down one of the more dangerous free radicals, called superoxide, into smaller components that are not harmful.  In laboratory and animal models, this process could reduce inflammation related to lung  pleurisy , inflammatory bowel disease, and  psoriasis .  More research is necessary to prove the benefits of these antioxidants in the human body, however.  Manganese may help promote strong, dense bones when combined with other nutrients, such as  calcium  and  vitamin D .  Although some earlier studies have suggested that manganese could make bones denser, more recent  research  has noted that calcium and  vitamin  D are the most significant promoters of good bone health.  For people with  diabetes , manganese may help lower blood sugar levels.  The authors of a  2014 study  that took place in South Korea found that people with diabetes had lower levels of manganese in their bodies. What is not clear, however, is whether this is a causal factor or a result of diabetes.  Another  study , this time in mice, indicated that manganese helps the pancreas create  insulin . Insulin is what the body uses to help regulate blood sugar.  Taking manganese supplements may help a person with diabetes produce more insulin naturally, but more research in humans is necessary to confirm these effects.  Along with vitamin K, manganese aids the  formation of blood clots . Blood clotting, which keeps the blood in a damaged blood vessel, is the first stage of wound healing.  So, having adequate levels of manganese in the body may help stop blood loss when a person has an open wound.  Small amounts of manganese are present in a variety of foods, including:  Infants can get manganese from breast milk and dairy or soy based formula.  Drinking water can also contain small amounts of manganese. However, too much manganese in the water supply can be toxic.  A person can take manganese supplements if their doctor believes that they have a deficiency.  There is no daily recommended intake of manganese, but the  Adequate Intake (AI)  is 2.3 milligrams (mg) per day for adult men and 1.8 mg per day for adult women.  People interested in taking manganese supplements can buy them from their local pharmacy or  online . Manganese is also available in some multivitamins.  Typical forms available include:  However, people do not usually need to take supplements to reach their daily AI of manganese.  Manganese is highly unlikely to cause any side effects if a person is just getting it from dietary sources.  People taking manganese supplements should not take more than the recommended amount on the bottle. However, it would likely take years of overexposure for a person to experience any issues.  People should talk to their healthcare provider before taking manganese supplements. It is important to ask whether the manganese could interfere with their current medications or exacerbate an existing medical condition.  If a person experiences side effects from taking manganese supplements, they should stop taking them and speak to a doctor.  A manganese deficiency is  rare but possible . If this occurs, a doctor will prescribe manganese supplements, or they may suggest taking manganese intravenously if absorption is an issue.  Signs of a potential manganese deficiency include:  It is more likely that a person will experience manganese toxicity (overexposure) than have a manganese deficiency.  The most significant risk related to manganese is for people who work in an environment where they might inhale it.  Smelting and welding are two high risk activities for accidental manganese inhalation. Inhaled manganese is dangerous because the body transports the mineral directly to the brain without first processing it for proper use.  Over time, inhaled manganese can lead to a serious condition called manganism. Manganism is similar to  Parkinson's disease .  Symptoms of manganism include:  Although it is far less common, a person may experience similar symptoms if they have exposure to too much manganese in their water, food, or supplements. An average, healthy person does not need to worry about overexposure to manganese in their food or supplements.  However, some people have a higher risk of experiencing a toxic reaction to manganese, including:  People taking or considering taking manganese supplements should discuss their need for the supplement with their doctor first.  Manganese is a naturally occurring mineral that is present in some food groups. Although it is toxic at high levels, it has an important role in several bodily functions, including maintaining bone health and processing sugar.  Most people will get adequate amounts of manganese from their regular diet. However, some people with deficiencies may need to take manganese supplements.  People who work in occupations such as welding are at risk of developing health issues from long term exposure to inhaled manganese.  Anyone concerned about their manganese intake or exposure can talk to their doctor about testing and next steps.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Chen, P.,  et al.  (2018). Manganese metabolism in humans [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29293455  
 Chon, S. J.,  et al.  (2017). Effects of vitamin D deficiency and daily calcium intake on bone mineral density and osteoporosis in Korean postmenopausal woman.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5313364/  
 Koh, E. S.,  et al.  (2014). Association of blood manganese level with diabetes and renal dysfunction: A cross-sectional study of the Korean general population.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3973834/  
 Lee, S.-H.,  et al.  (2013). Manganese supplementation protects against diet-induced diabetes in wild type mice by enhancing insulin secretion.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3578995/  
 Li, C., &amp; Zhou, H.-M. (2011). The role of manganese superoxide dismutase in inflammation defense.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3185262/  
 Manganese: Fact sheet for health professionals. (2019).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Manganese-HealthProfessional/  
 Whiting, S. J.,  et al.  (2016). Food fortification for bone health in adulthood: A scoping review.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5056988/     Chen, P.,  et al.  (2018). Manganese metabolism in humans [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29293455   Chon, S. J.,  et al.  (2017). Effects of vitamin D deficiency and daily calcium intake on bone mineral density and osteoporosis in Korean postmenopausal woman.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5313364/   Koh, E. S.,  et al.  (2014). Association of blood manganese level with diabetes and renal dysfunction: A cross-sectional study of the Korean general population.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3973834/   Lee, S.-H.,  et al.  (2013). Manganese supplementation protects against diet-induced diabetes in wild type mice by enhancing insulin secretion.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3578995/   Li, C., &amp; Zhou, H.-M. (2011). The role of manganese superoxide dismutase in inflammation defense.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3185262/   Manganese: Fact sheet for health professionals. (2019).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Manganese-HealthProfessional/   Whiting, S. J.,  et al.  (2016). Food fortification for bone health in adulthood: A scoping review.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5056988/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What are the benefits and effects of manganese?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325636.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2019, July 2). "What are the benefits and effects of manganese?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  