 Mirtazapine belongs to a group of medicines called tetracyclic  antidepressants . These medications help balance the chemical messengers, or neurotransmitters, in the brain that regulate mood.  Mirtazapine is available on prescription, but not all pharmacies stock it.  In this article, we provide an overview of mirtazapine, including its uses, side effects, and interactions and how to take it.  Healthcare professionals primarily prescribe mirtazapine to treat  depression .  According to a  review of studies , mirtazapine is also effective in treating people with the following subtypes of depression:  The authors also noted that mirtazapine could effectively help with:  Mirtazapine comes as either an oral tablet or a dissolvable tablet. The dosages for both types are the same.  According to the  Food and Drug Administration (FDA) , the recommended starting dose is 15 milligrams (mg) a day. People should preferably take it in the evening before going to bed.  The effective range of dosage for mirtazapine is between 15 mg and 45 mg a day. If necessary, with a doctor's approval, a person may increase the amount gradually after 1–2 weeks.  The tablets come in the following doses:  Some healthcare professionals may recommend splitting the dose in two and taking one-half twice a day.  People should swallow the oral tablet whole without chewing it. If a person has difficulty swallowing pills, a healthcare professional may prescribe the dissolvable tablet instead.  To take a dissolvable tablet, the person will need to break the tablet out of the blister container, place it on their tongue, and wait for it to dissolve. It should dissolve reasonably quickly.  A person should follow their prescribed dosing and not attempt to adjust their dosage on their own or purposefully skip doses.  There are some side effects that a person may experience when taking mirtazapine. However, these side effects are generally mild, and not everyone experiences them.  Mild side effects of mirtazapine can include:  Serious side effects are rare, but they can sometimes occur. A person should tell their doctor right away if they experience:  People should get immediate medical attention or call the emergency services (911 in the United States) if they experience any of the following after taking mirtazapine:  In addition, although it is uncommon, people can experience allergic reactions to mirtazapine. If a reaction occurs, a person should seek emergency medical help. Some signs to look out for include:  Finally, mirtazapine may very occasionally increase a person's  serotonin  levels. This effect could place a person at risk of developing serotonin syndrome, particularly if they are also taking other medications that can increase these levels.  People should seek emergency medical attention if they experience any of the following signs of serotonin syndrome:  There are some precautions and warnings that a person should consider before taking mirtazapine.  Mirtazapine carries a black box warning, which is a warning label that the FDA use to signal the risk of potentially very dangerous side effects.  Some research  has linked  taking the drug with increase  suicidal thoughts  or actions in children, teenagers, and young adults. The risk seems to reduce after the age of 24 years, and people are more prone to these effects when they first start taking the drug.  When a person starts taking mirtazapine or any other antidepressant, they should pay close attention to how they are feeling and talk to their healthcare provider about any new or sudden changes in their mood, behavior, thoughts, or feelings.  Before taking mirtazapine, a person should talk to their doctor about their history or family history of psychiatric disorders and suicidal thoughts or actions.  Mirtazapine may increase the risk of a person developing a condition called QT prolongation, which affects the rhythm of the heart. In rare cases, QT prolongation can cause:  Older adults, people with a history of heart issues, and those with low levels of  potassium  or  magnesium  in their bloodstream are at increased risk of developing QT prolongation.  Mirtazapine can cause sleepiness or dizziness. For this reason, a person should avoid using heavy equipment or driving after taking mirtazapine.  A person should not stop taking mirtazapine suddenly. Abruptly stopping this medication can lead to the  following symptoms :  People who are stopping their use of the drug should work with their healthcare provider to come off it gradually.  Women should only use mirtazapine if they have no other options during pregnancy. When a woman uses it during the last few months of pregnancy, it is possible that the newborn may experience:  Researchers do not know whether mirtazapine passes through breast milk. Anyone who is breastfeeding should talk to their doctor before using this medication.  Mirtazapine interacts with several different drugs. Drug interactions can prevent the medication from working in the usual way, and they can lead to dangerous side effects.  To help avoid these, a person should discuss all their medications, including both over the counter and prescription drugs, with their healthcare provider before starting mirtazapine. They should also make them aware of any  vitamins  or other supplements that they are taking.  Certain medications increase the risk of a person developing serotonin syndrome. A person should not take any of the following when taking mirtazapine:  Other medications can cause or increase the risk of side effects, including the following:  Other medications may increase the amount of mirtazapine in a person's body. These include:  In other cases, medications may increase the body's exposure to mirtazapine, which can cause more side effects for the person. If a person takes one or more of the following, their healthcare provider may decrease the amount of mirtazapine that they take:  The cost for mirtazapine will vary depending on a person's insurance coverage. A doctor typically needs to get approval from an insurance company before prescribing the medication.  Following approval, a person will pay their typical medication rates for a 30 day supply.  Those without insurance should consider using a prescription discount card to make the purchase as it could save them some money off the retail price.  Medications work differently for different people. A person may respond very well to mirtazapine and not do well on other antidepressants. It is best to discuss any concerns with a healthcare professional who can offer advice on what medication may work best.  Mirtazapine is a tetracyclic antidepressant that healthcare professionals prescribe to treat depression. Some people find that taking this medication can help relieve symptoms and improve their quality of life.  People can speak to a healthcare professional about any side effects of mirtazapine. Everyone responds differently to antidepressants. Some people may find that a different dosage or an alternative medication works better for them.  Doctors do not usually prescribe mirtazapine to children and teenagers because they are more likely to experience suicidal thoughts or actions as a side effect.  Before taking mirtazapine, a person should make their healthcare provider aware of all of the medications, vitamins, and supplements that they are taking. People should take mirtazapine according to their doctor's instructions. It is essential to always speak to a doctor before stopping taking the drug.    
 Alam, A.,  et al.  (2013). A review of therapeutic uses of mirtazapine in psychiatric and medical conditions.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3907331/  
 Label: Mirtazapine — mirtazapine tablet. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=f23631be-c7ae-46e9-b771-a70be17bc9f0  
 Label: Mirtazapine — mirtazapine tablet, orally disintegrating. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=b2a74fcc-99bf-4b0e-ad73-4e9d796f1226  
 Label: Remeron — mirtazapine tablet, film coated. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=010f9162-9f7f-4b6d-a6e4-4f832f26f38e  
 Remeron® (mirtazapine) tablets. (n.d.).  https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2010/020415s023s024.pdf     Alam, A.,  et al.  (2013). A review of therapeutic uses of mirtazapine in psychiatric and medical conditions.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3907331/   Label: Mirtazapine — mirtazapine tablet. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=f23631be-c7ae-46e9-b771-a70be17bc9f0   Label: Mirtazapine — mirtazapine tablet, orally disintegrating. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=b2a74fcc-99bf-4b0e-ad73-4e9d796f1226   Label: Remeron — mirtazapine tablet, film coated. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=010f9162-9f7f-4b6d-a6e4-4f832f26f38e   Remeron® (mirtazapine) tablets. (n.d.).  https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2010/020415s023s024.pdf   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What to know about mirtazapine."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 2 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325633.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2019, July 2). "What to know about mirtazapine."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  