 People who experience this may feel isolated. They often fear a large group because they worry that its members are talking about them. They overanalyze, looking for hidden meaning in the words or actions of others to indicate their dislike.  There are many potential reasons why a person may feel this way. These can include:  In some cases, a person may be able to work through their feelings of distrust and anxiety. Others may need counseling, and possibly medication, to help them overcome negative feelings about how others view them.  Keep reading for some tips on how to cope with such feelings, when to see a doctor or counselor, and possible treatments that may help.  A person dealing with the belief that everyone around them hates them may find it challenging to manage or overcome this feeling.  This can make it harder to make friends and build relationships, and may also affect a person's professional life.  However, some strategies may help a person feel better about themselves and how others perceive them.  The following are some tips to help a person change their mindset:  People who think that others hate them often believe that all the actions and words of others have a hidden meaning.  A person not liking a photo on social media, not returning a friendly greeting when walking by, or not responding to a text right away could all signal that the other person does not like them.  However, in reality, the other person could have many potential reasons for not doing the desired action, which have nothing to do with the person who feels slighted.  To help overcome this, a person can try to look at the same situation from the other person's perspective. Maybe they did not like the photo on social media because they never saw it. Maybe they did not hear the other person greet them or were in a hurry. Maybe the text came at a time of day when they were very busy.  Whatever the situation, people can try to find explanations other than the person not liking them.  It is usually very difficult for a person to look at a situation that they are a part of without emotion, especially when things do not work out as they may have wanted.  For example, if two friends leave a third friend out when they meet up, the third friend may interpret the reason for this as the two friends not liking them. However, instead of focusing on the negative of being left out, the third person could try to look at the situation objectively.  What possible reasons would the friends have to get together without the third person? Did they happen to bump into each other? Did they know or think that the third person was busy? Had it been a long time since they spent time together?  A person should focus on all of the possible reasons why a situation worked out as it did. The majority of reasons have nothing to do with other people's feelings toward them.  Some people may find that they try to read what others are thinking when they interact with them.  To some extent, this can be normal behavior. However, if a person becomes obsessed with trying to determine the negative thoughts that other people have toward them, it can start to affect their life. People with bipolar disorder are commonly prone to this type of thinking.  Instead of attempting to read thoughts, people can try to take most people's words at face value. If they say that they like something, they do. If they do not want to get dinner, maybe they are not hungry or have other plans.  When it comes to overcoming feelings of being hated, this can be helpful advice.  For example, if a person wants to go out with a group, they should proactively ask others to go out with them. Likewise, rather than waiting for someone to greet them, a person should say hello first.  If a person begins to act how they want others to treat them, they may start to see people responding in the same way.  Some people are bullies and are abusive or mean to others.  When a person is on the receiving end of this behavior, it is not their fault. Instead, the individual doing the abusing has some issues on which they need to work. A person should seek to remove the offending individual from their life.  If they need help, for example, in the case of spousal abuse, they can look into getting support from organizations such as the  National Domestic Violence Hotline .  People often find that staying physically active can improve their overall mood and outlook on life.  A person can try taking a walk several times a week, playing a sport, or doing another activity that they enjoy. A person may also benefit from spending time outdoors.  The authors of a  review of studies  acknowledge that an increasing amount of evidence supports the idea that spending time outside can improve mood and help a person recover from  stress  and mental  fatigue .  If a person feels an overwhelming sense that everyone hates them, the feeling should pass shortly.  However, if a person feels this way for long periods, they should seek additional treatment from a healthcare professional. A doctor may be able to help a person find counseling services that can help them start feeling better.  A person may be suffering from an undiagnosed case of depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety, or  personality disorder . These are mostly treatable conditions that often require a combination of therapies, potentially alongside medications, to help the person feel better.  Treatment options will vary among individuals depending on their age, the severity of their condition, and their diagnosis.  People living with anxiety or depression often benefit from counseling and medications. A person with a personality disorder is likely to require more intensive treatment and monitoring, but they can also find relief from their symptoms.  There are many potential reasons why a person may feel like everyone hates them. However, there are also plenty of strategies that a person can use to help them feel better and stop focusing on what others think.  The most important thing to keep in mind is to think positively and remember that if people are unkind, it is not the victim's fault.  If all else fails, a person should seek help from a counselor to work through their feelings and determine additional treatment strategies.    
 Anxiety disorders. (2017).  https://www.nami.org/learn-more/mental-health-conditions/anxiety-disorders  
 Bipolar Disorder. (2016).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/bipolar-disorder/index.shtml  
 Depression. (2018).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml  
 Pearson, D. G., &amp; Craig, T. (2014). The great outdoors? Exploring the mental health benefits of natural environments.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4204431/  
 Social anxiety disorder: More than just shyness. (n.d.).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/social-anxiety-disorder-more-than-just-shyness/index.shtml     Anxiety disorders. (2017).  https://www.nami.org/learn-more/mental-health-conditions/anxiety-disorders   Bipolar Disorder. (2016).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/bipolar-disorder/index.shtml   Depression. (2018).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/depression/index.shtml   Pearson, D. G., &amp; Craig, T. (2014). The great outdoors? Exploring the mental health benefits of natural environments.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4204431/   Social anxiety disorder: More than just shyness. (n.d.).  https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/social-anxiety-disorder-more-than-just-shyness/index.shtml   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What to do if you feel people hate you."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 10 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325705.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2019, July 10). "What to do if you feel people hate you."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  