 In most cases, masturbation is a normal sexual practice that does not cause any physical or emotional distress.  However, it can become a problem if it is interfering negatively with a person's life.  In the sections below, we discuss why it may be beneficial to stop masturbating, how to stop, and how to recognize when it may be becoming a problem.  In some cases, masturbation can lead to negative emotions or interfere with certain aspects of a person's life.  For example, if a person limits their interaction with others or misses work to masturbate, it may be time to consider how to stop masturbating.  Although uncommon, frequent masturbation can cause skin irritation and swelling of the penis.  When this is the case, it may be necessary to stop masturbating to ease the symptoms.  If masturbation is becoming a problem, there are strategies and techniques to help a person stop.  A combination of techniques may be helpful, including the following:  Exposure to pornography may trigger the desire to masturbate.  People who want to stop masturbating should avoid pornographic movies, images, and websites. If a person can place a barrier between themselves and pornography, it can help them break the habit.  It is now very easy to access pornography in just a few seconds. However, people can try to limit their access to pornography by using filters on electronic devices that block certain types of content, such as pornographic material.  Although a person can unblock such websites, taking the time to do so can give them time to regain control of their impulses and allow the urge to pass.  It can be helpful for a person to find ways to occupy their time that does not trigger the desire to masturbate.  Finding outlets for energy release can replace the time spent masturbating. People can consider taking up a new hobby or learning a new skill, such as learning a musical instrument or trying a new sport.  Developing new goals can help a person refocus their energy and find excitement and fulfillment in other things.  It may also be helpful to determine when the urge to masturbate is highest and plan other activities for that time.  When masturbation is negatively affecting a person's life, it may be helpful to seek advice from a  mental health  professional who specializes in human sexuality.  It is possible that additional issues, such as  obsessive-compulsive disorder , are the underlying problem. Talking with a therapist or psychologist is useful to work through negative feelings and learn behavior modification strategies to stop masturbating.  The  American Association of Sexuality Educators, Counselors, and Therapists  offer resources to find help.  Some people may masturbate because they feel lonely or have nothing else to fill their time with.  Spending less time alone reduces the opportunities to masturbate. Spending time with others will not only keep a person occupied, but it might also redirect their focus.  There are several ways to decrease solitude. People can meet up with friends or family, take a class, or join a gym to stay socially engaged with others.  Exercise is an effective way to both lower tension and positively focus energy.  Activities such as running, swimming, and weight lifting can strengthen the body and release endorphins that promote feelings of well-being.  Feeling happier and more relaxed may reduce the urge to masturbate as frequently.  When masturbation is compulsive, it might be due to various reasons. For example, it may be due to:  However, having support from a trusted group of people may be helpful for some people to quell the habit. Finding a support group can give them the space they need to express concerns and develop positive coping strategies.  When a person talks openly about the challenges they face, others can help them feel validated. This can decrease any feelings of guilt or shame associated with compulsive masturbation.  Masturbation does not typically cause side effects.  However, if masturbation is compulsive, constant, or vigorous, it may cause the following side effects:  Myths that masturbation causes blindness or  infertility  are not true.  Masturbation becomes a problem if it is negatively affecting a person or impacting other areas of their life.  For example, if it starts to interfere with their ability to orgasm or have sexual relationships with a partner, it may be worth addressing the habit.  In some instances, masturbation can be a compulsive sexual behavior.  A compulsive sexual behavior involves an intense and repetitive preoccupation with sexual urges, fantasies, and behaviors.  It is worth noting that this is not the same thing as having a high sex drive.  Compulsive behavior causes psychosocial issues or distress. This makes it hard for a person to actually enjoy the behavior.  When masturbation is a compulsion, it is a mental health issue. According to a case study report in the   Journal of Psychiatry  , compulsive masturbation is usually either an impulse control condition or a type of sexual dysfunction.  For some people, masturbation also causes feelings of intense guilt.  One study in the journal    Sexual Medicine  , which involved 4,211 men attending a sexual medicine outpatient clinic, found that 8.4% of the men reported feeling a sense of guilt after masturbating.  All the participants completed a questionnaire and a structured interview regarding their frequency of masturbation and associated feelings.  Feelings of guilt may also lead to other issues. For example, higher levels of guilt was linked to increased alcohol use, which may cause other mental and physical health concerns.  In most cases, masturbation is a normal part of sexuality. Masturbation frequency varies greatly from person to person, and there is no "normal" frequency.  However, if masturbation begins to interfere with other parts of a person's life or starts to cause distress, it might be helpful to stop or reduce the frequency.  There are several ways to stop masturbating, including avoiding pornography and focusing on other activities. However, if someone suspects that they have a problem with sexual compulsion, it is best to seek professional help.    
 Alsughier, N. (2015). Compulsive masturbation treated with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.  https://www.longdom.org/open-access/compulsive-masturbation-treated-with-selective-serotonin-reuptake-inhibitors-Psychiatry-1000299.pdf  
 Castellini, G.,  et al.  (2016). Psychological, relational, and biological correlates of ego-dystonic masturbation in a clinical setting.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5005301/  
 Derbyshire, K. L., &amp; Grant, J. E. (2015). Compulsive sexual behavior: A review of the literature.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4500883/  
 Karia, S.,  et al.  (2015). Compulsive masturbation in a patient with delusional disorder.  http://www.jmhhb.org/article.asp?issn=0971-8990;year=2015;volume=20;issue=1;spage=38;epage=40;aulast=Karia  
 Locate a professional. (n.d.).  https://www.aasect.org/referral-directory  
 SAMHSA's national helpline. (2019).  https://www.samhsa.gov/find-help/national-helpline     Alsughier, N. (2015). Compulsive masturbation treated with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.  https://www.longdom.org/open-access/compulsive-masturbation-treated-with-selective-serotonin-reuptake-inhibitors-Psychiatry-1000299.pdf   Castellini, G.,  et al.  (2016). Psychological, relational, and biological correlates of ego-dystonic masturbation in a clinical setting.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5005301/   Derbyshire, K. L., &amp; Grant, J. E. (2015). Compulsive sexual behavior: A review of the literature.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4500883/   Karia, S.,  et al.  (2015). Compulsive masturbation in a patient with delusional disorder.  http://www.jmhhb.org/article.asp?issn=0971-8990;year=2015;volume=20;issue=1;spage=38;epage=40;aulast=Karia   Locate a professional. (n.d.).  https://www.aasect.org/referral-directory   SAMHSA's national helpline. (2019).  https://www.samhsa.gov/find-help/national-helpline   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  De Pietro, MaryAnn. "Ways to stop masturbating."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 12 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325743.php&gt;    APA  De Pietro, M. (2019, July 12). "Ways to stop masturbating."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  