 Aging affects everyone differently. Age-related changes in the breasts are not usually harmful but are a natural part of aging.  These changes in the breasts occur as a result of low  estrogen  levels and changes in skin elasticity. Aging also increases the risk of developing growths, such as  fibroids ,  cysts , and  cancer , all of which can affect the appearance of the breasts.  In this article, we explain how aging affects the breasts and discuss treatment options and prevention tips.  Over time, estrogen levels drop, which leads to a loss of gland tissue in the breast. Along with changes in skin elasticity, this may cause the breasts to appear smaller and lower down than before. The nipples may also change in appearance.  Possible breast changes that may occur as a result of aging include:  Changes to the breasts can occur due to:  As females get older, their bodies start to produce less of the reproductive hormone estrogen than before. Estrogen stimulates the growth of breast tissue, while low levels of this hormone cause the mammary glands to shrink. Fat may fill the new space, making the breasts appear softer and less full.  Low estrogen levels can also cause connective tissue in the breast to lose its elasticity and become dehydrated.  These changes can cause the breasts to appear smaller, and they may seem to sag.  Other symptoms of low estrogen include:  During  menopause , the body's levels of estrogen and  progesterone  decrease significantly.  According to the  Office on Women's Health , females officially reach menopause when they do not have a menstrual period for at least 12 continuous months. In the United States, the average age for menopause is 52 years.  Over time, the skin starts to become thinner, lose fat, and develop wrinkles and age spots. In the same way, the breasts start to lose fat, and the tissues lose elasticity. As a result, they appear smaller and lower down.  The chances of developing growths in the breast, such as fibroids, cysts, and tumors, increases with age. In most cases, these lumps are noncancerous, and  most females have them . However, it is important to get a doctor to check any new lumps.  Noncancerous lumps can include the following:  According to the  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , doctors most commonly diagnose  breast cancer  in people 50 years of age or older. However, it is important for younger adults to conduct regular breast self-examinations and attend regular mammograms.   Read about how to do a breast self-exam here .  Cancer cells may develop into growths that people can feel under the skin during breast self-exams.  Other symptoms can include:   Learn more about the symptoms of breast cancer besides a lump here .  Hormone therapy affects the amount of hormones that the body produces.  Doctors often use this type of therapy to treat hormone receptor-positive breast cancer by slowing the growth of cancer cells.  Hormone therapy can make the breasts appear firmer or more dense. These changes can also occur if people take menopause hormone therapy or hormonal  birth control .  People should contact their doctor if they experience the following symptoms of an underlying medical condition:  Doctors can use  ultrasound ,  MRI , or biopsy to identify changes inside the breast.  Aging is a natural process, and age-related changes to the breast are not harmful and do not need treatment.  However, if a person feels uncomfortable with changes in their breasts, they can talk to a doctor about the following options:  Maintaining a healthy  body weight  through regular exercise and a balanced diet may also help reduce age-related changes to the breasts.   Read about five ways to improve skin health here .  Although there is no way to prevent the natural aging process entirely, people can lessen the likelihood of significant age-related breast changes by:  As a person ages, their body produces fewer reproductive hormones. This drop in hormone levels contributes to changes in the shape and texture of the breasts.  Low estrogen levels can cause the mammary glands to shrink and the connective tissue in the breast to lose its elasticity. These changes may make the breasts appear soft or flattened.  Breast aging is a natural process. If a person is uncomfortable with the changes, they can manage them using cosmetic surgery and topical ointments.  Quitting smoking can help preserve healthy skin and tissue. Leading a healthy lifestyle by getting regular physical activity and eating a balanced diet may help minimize the extent of age-related breast changes.    
 Menopause basics. (2017).  https://www.womenshealth.gov/menopause/menopause-basics  
 Non-cancerous breast conditions. (n.d.).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/non-cancerous-breast-conditions.html  
 Skin care and aging. (2017).  https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/skin-care-and-aging  
 What are the risk factors for breast cancer? (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/breast/basic_info/risk_factors.htm     Menopause basics. (2017).  https://www.womenshealth.gov/menopause/menopause-basics   Non-cancerous breast conditions. (n.d.).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/non-cancerous-breast-conditions.html   Skin care and aging. (2017).  https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/skin-care-and-aging   What are the risk factors for breast cancer? (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/breast/basic_info/risk_factors.htm   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Eske, Jamie. "How do the breasts change with age and why?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 15 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325749.php&gt;    APA  Eske, J. (2019, July 15). "How do the breasts change with age and why?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  