 Emotional and mental abuse involves a person acting in a way to control, isolate, or scare somebody else. The form of abuse may be statements, threats, or actions, and there may be a pattern or regularity to the behavior.  Learning more about the signs and situations in which emotional abuse may occur can help people identify their situation and seek the help they need.  Abusive people tend to abuse those they are very close with. For example, it may be their partner that they are abusing.  However, emotional abuse may also take place in other types of relationships. These include:  As the  National Association of Adult Survivors of Child Abuse  note, emotional and mental abuse can be very subtle at times. The person may not even notice that someone is manipulating them. It is essential to identify these patterns and try to put an end to them.  Emotional abuse takes many shapes but may fall into one of several categories depending on what the abusive person is attempting to do.  We cover some of these types of abuse in the sections below.  Controlling behavior is a red flag in any relationship. Examples of controlling behavior include:  Abusive people may try to make a person feel shame for their shortcomings or feel as though they are much worse for these shortcomings.  This takes many forms, including:  Blame typically stems from the abusive person's sense of insecurity. By blaming others, they do not have to feel their shortcomings.  This may take many forms, such as:  Much of the time, an abusive person's actions or words seem to serve no purpose other than to humiliate the other. This type of behavior includes:  Abusive people may seem to make situations chaotic for no other reason than to keep the other in check. Unpredictable behaviors may include:  Abusive people also act in many ways to make the other feel isolated from others, including:  Anyone who feels that they are in immediate danger of physical harm should try to call 911.  Anyone who is seeing the signs of emotional abuse but is not in immediate danger should seek help. The  National Domestic Violence Hotline  offers anonymous help by phone, text, or even online chat.  The hotline is available 24/7 and can help a person find a shelter or other services.  If a person feels uncomfortable reaching out to services such as these immediately, they can reach out to a friend or family member. Telling a trusted person may help them feel supported and less isolated.  Some people feel that they can deal with the abuse, or they may try to justify it by saying that it is not as bad as physical abuse. However, as the  Office on Women's Health  note, emotional abuse has its own long term affects, and it is also often a sign that physical abuse will follow.  Because of this, it is important to take action toward stepping away from an emotionally abusive situation.  This includes steps such as:  Emotional abuse takes many forms and can be much more subtle than other forms of abuse. Anyone seeing the signs of emotional abuse should seek help in any manner they feel comfortable with.  Confiding in a professional or a close friend may help them move toward a future in which they can step away from the situation.    
 Abuse defined. (n.d.).  https://www.thehotline.org/is-this-abuse/abuse-defined/  
 Ebersohn, S. (n.d.). 25 signs of emotional abuse.  http://www.naasca.org/2018-Articles/010718-25SignsOfEmotionalAbuse.htm  
 Emotional and verbal abuse. (n.d.).  https://www.womenshealth.gov/relationships-and-safety/other-types/emotional-and-verbal-abuse  
 The National Domestic Violence Hotline. (n.d.).  https://www.thehotline.org/     Abuse defined. (n.d.).  https://www.thehotline.org/is-this-abuse/abuse-defined/   Ebersohn, S. (n.d.). 25 signs of emotional abuse.  http://www.naasca.org/2018-Articles/010718-25SignsOfEmotionalAbuse.htm   Emotional and verbal abuse. (n.d.).  https://www.womenshealth.gov/relationships-and-safety/other-types/emotional-and-verbal-abuse   The National Domestic Violence Hotline. (n.d.).  https://www.thehotline.org/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "What are the signs of emotional abuse?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 18 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325792.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2019, July 18). "What are the signs of emotional abuse?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  