 Common digestive problems include:  An unhealthful diet or lifestyle can cause more regular digestive problems, and lifestyle changes can often help resolve symptoms. A doctor can offer support and advice.  An underlying medical issue, a medication, or a food intolerance can also cause regular digestive discomfort.  Home remedies can help improve digestion in the short term. Lasting improvement may require more significant dietary or lifestyle changes.   Stress  can  affect  the digestive system.  Many people experience an unsettled stomach before an exam or a big event, but sustained stress can affect the connection between the brain and the gut, causing ongoing problems.  There is a link between physical and  mental health , and reducing stress can have a positive impact on both. The  American Psychological Association  recommend three key ways to manage stress:  During a busy day it can be tempting to rush meals, but this can cause  indigestion  and stomach discomfort. Take time to relax, particularly before and after eating.  Reducing stress by seeking support and making some lifestyle changes may improve problems with digestion.   Mint  tea is a home remedy for nausea and indigestion. However, some people find that mint can contribute to heartburn or  acid reflux .  To make a simple mint tea:  Researchers have found that  peppermint oil  may relieve symptoms of  irritable bowel syndrome  — including stomach pain — in the short term. However, there has been too little research to determine whether mint has lasting digestive benefits.  Doing gentle exercise can help with digestion. Being upright and active allows gravity to help move food through the digestive system.  A slow walk around the block, for example, may ease bloating and reduce feelings of fullness.  Gas can  come from  swallowing air when eating or drinking. The body also produces gas when digesting food. Trapped gas in the gut can cause bloating and stomach discomfort.  Having a certain amount of gas is healthful, but some activities cause a person to swallow more air than usual, and this can increase the amount of gas in the body. Examples of these activities include:  Certain foods create more gas when they go through the digestive system. These include:  Gently rubbing the belly can help gas move through the body, which can help reduce stomach discomfort and bloating.  Fermented foods have been partially or wholly broken down by microorganisms such as bacteria. These microorganisms work to preserve food, and they may also benefit gut health.  Bacteria occur naturally in the gut. Some help digest food, but others can cause problems with digestion if there are too many in the body. Fermented foods contain bacteria that may help support a healthy digestive system.  Some fermented foods include:  Incorporating these foods into the diet may help improve digestion. However, confirming the benefits will require more scientific research.  Fiber has a wide range of health benefits, from lowering  cholesterol  to reducing the risk of  heart disease . It can also help improve digestion by regulating bowel movements.  According to national  dietary guidelines , the average adult should include around 30 grams of fiber in their daily diet.  Good sources of fiber include:  A person should also drink plenty of liquids to ensure that the fiber absorbs enough water to pass through the digestive system easily.  Some foods and drinks trigger problems with digestion. These triggers can vary from person to person, and keeping a food diary can help with identifying the culprits.  Make a note of meals, snacks, and drinks, as well as any digestive problems that follow. Then, try cutting out potentially problematic foods and drinks from the diet to see whether symptoms improve.  A nutritionist can provide guidance before a person makes any significant changes to their diet. A food diary will also help a medical professional gain a better understanding of the situation so that they can offer more specific advice.  While people react differently to different foods, some foods and drinks commonly cause problems with digestion.  Examples include:  Limiting the intake of these can help improve digestion.  Also, fast foods and ready-made meals are high in sugar, salt, and saturated fats. They can be harder for the body to digest and cause problems such as constipation and gas.  If digestive symptoms are ongoing or severe, they may result from an underlying medical condition.  Some common digestive diseases include:  Medications such as antacids or  antibiotics  can also cause digestive problems. These issues are side effects, and they should resolve once a person stops taking the medication.  For quick relief from digestive problems, mint tea, a belly rub, or a gentle walk can help. Eating slowly and relaxing before and after meals can also help the body digest.  Eating more fiber and avoiding certain products, such as processed foods, can result in more lasting relief from symptoms of digestive problems.    
 Bell, V.,  et al.  (2018). One health, fermented foods, and gut microbiota.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6306734/  
 Gas in the digestive tract. (n.d.).  https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/gas-digestive-tract  
 Khanna, R.,  et al.  (2014). Peppermint oil for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24100754  
 Nutritional goals for age-sex groups based on dietary reference intakes and  Dietary Guidelines  recommendations. (n.d.).  https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/appendix-7/  
 Stress effects on the body. (n.d.).  https://www.apa.org/helpcenter/stress/effects-gastrointestinal     Bell, V.,  et al.  (2018). One health, fermented foods, and gut microbiota.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6306734/   Gas in the digestive tract. (n.d.).  https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/gas-digestive-tract   Khanna, R.,  et al.  (2014). Peppermint oil for the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24100754   Nutritional goals for age-sex groups based on dietary reference intakes and  Dietary Guidelines  recommendations. (n.d.).  https://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/guidelines/appendix-7/   Stress effects on the body. (n.d.).  https://www.apa.org/helpcenter/stress/effects-gastrointestinal   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Claire. "Ways to improve digestion."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325822.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, C. (2019, July 22). "Ways to improve digestion."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  