 People with yellow feet may also have areas of thick, waxy, or dry skin. In some cases, only the toes or the sole is yellow, while in others, the entire foot is this color.  There may be other symptoms, depending on the underlying cause. These may include  fatigue , itching, or sensitivity to cold temperatures. The treatment for yellow feet depends on what is causing this symptom.  Read on to learn more about six possible causes of yellow feet.  A  callus  is a thick, hard area of skin. It can often appear as a yellow, flaky, or waxy patch. Calluses develop on the skin as a response to pressure or friction.  Calluses typically form on the feet, usually as a result of a person wearing ill-fitting shoes or spending long periods standing or walking.  Calluses are not a cause for concern, and they do not generally require treatment.  If they are bothersome, however, people can usually relieve discomfort and remove the callus by:   Jaundice  is a yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes.  It develops when too much bilirubin, which is a waste product from the breakdown of red blood cells, builds up in the body.  People with jaundice may have yellow feet, but they will have yellow skin on other parts of the body as well.  They may also experience itching, which can sometimes be intense.  Jaundice can be a symptom of:  The treatment for jaundice involves addressing the underlying cause. People who have jaundice should see their doctor for tests and treatment.  According to the  American Society of Hematology , pale or yellow skin is a symptom of iron deficiency  anemia .  Other symptoms include:  People with iron deficiency anemia typically require iron supplements to increase the levels of this mineral in their blood. They may also need to make other dietary changes.  If blood loss is contributing to low iron levels, other treatments may be necessary. For example, people who experience  heavy menstrual periods  can often benefit from oral contraceptives or medical procedures.  If only the toes, rather than the entire foot, appear yellow, then this discoloration may be due to  Raynaud's disease , which some people call Raynaud's phenomenon.  Raynaud's disease affects up to  10% of the population , and it causes the fingers and toes to feel unusually numb and cold in low temperatures or in response to emotional  stress . Other sensations include prickling or tingling.  Under these circumstances, the skin  will generally turn  white, which can sometimes appear yellow. In time, the skin turns blue and then red, which is an exaggerated version of the body's normal response to cold.  Treatment depends on the severity of the symptoms and the presence of other medical conditions. People with mild symptoms can usually manage them by wearing thick gloves and socks, in addition to reducing stress.  More severe forms of Raynaud's disease may require medication or nerve surgery.   Turmeric  is a mild spice that people often use medicinally for its  antioxidant  and anti-inflammatory properties. The most active compound in turmeric, curcumin, is a bright yellow pigment.  At least  one case study  describes yellow discoloration of the soles of the feet due to high doses of turmeric root. The woman in the study took 500 mg of turmeric root daily for 4 months. After she stopped taking the capsules, the symptoms resolved.  The study authors also note that the topical application of turmeric can discolor the skin.  Carotenemia results from high levels of carotenoids in the blood. Carotenoids are yellow-red pigments in fruits and vegetables. The most well-known carotenoid is  beta carotene , which occurs naturally in carrots. The body converts beta carotene to  vitamin A .  When a person consumes normal amounts of carotenoids, these pigments leave the body in the urine, sweat, and stool.  However, high intakes of more than  30 milligrams (mg)  per day can result in the skin taking on a yellow tinge that commonly affects the soles of the feet and the palms of the hands.  Foods high in carotenoids include:  Medical conditions that affect the body's ability to remove carotenoids also contribute to carotenemia. These include:  People who develop carotenemia from consuming too many carotenoid-rich foods typically notice that their yellow skin returns to normal once they reduce their intake of these foods.  People who get carotenemia due to an underlying medical condition may notice an improvement in carotenemia symptoms once they control the condition with medications, lifestyle changes, and other treatments.  Yellow skin can sometimes indicate a more serious medical issue, especially if the discoloration appears on more than one area of the body.  People should see their doctor if they experience the following symptoms in addition to yellow skin:  If yellow feet are the only symptom that a person has, the cause is most likely to be a callus or a high intake of carotenoid-containing foods. A podiatrist can treat calluses and other foot problems, while a dietician can help a person plan a more balanced diet.  The outlook for people with yellow feet depends on what causes this discoloration. In most cases, the feet will return to their normal color once the person addresses the underlying condition.  As yellow feet may sometimes indicate a more serious issue, it is important that a person sees a doctor promptly if they have any concerns or experience other symptoms.    
 Al Nasser, Y., &amp; Albugeaey, M. (2018). Carotenemia.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK534878/  
 Fardoun, M. M.,  et al.  (2016). Raynaud's phenomenon: A brief review of the underlying mechanisms.  https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphar.2016.00438/full  
 Herrick, A. L. (2017). Evidence-based management of Raynaud's phenomenon.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5700788/  
 Horev, L.,  et al.  (2015). Yellow feet in a patient with breast and thyroid carcinoma, due to oral intake of turmeric.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5005595/  
 Iron-deficiency anemia. (n.d.).  https://www.hematology.org/Patients/Anemia/Iron-Deficiency.aspx     Al Nasser, Y., &amp; Albugeaey, M. (2018). Carotenemia.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK534878/   Fardoun, M. M.,  et al.  (2016). Raynaud's phenomenon: A brief review of the underlying mechanisms.  https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphar.2016.00438/full   Herrick, A. L. (2017). Evidence-based management of Raynaud's phenomenon.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5700788/   Horev, L.,  et al.  (2015). Yellow feet in a patient with breast and thyroid carcinoma, due to oral intake of turmeric.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5005595/   Iron-deficiency anemia. (n.d.).  https://www.hematology.org/Patients/Anemia/Iron-Deficiency.aspx   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Causes of yellow feet."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 26 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325874.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2019, July 26). "Causes of yellow feet."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  