 Using shaving products that contain artificial scents and harsh chemicals, such as alcohol, can irritate the skin and contribute to itchiness.  People may shave for aesthetic, hygienic, or personal reasons. Regardless of the motivation, shaving provides an effective and efficient means of removing body hair.  This article explains why the skin itches after shaving and how to prevent it.  Shaving with a razor can irritate the skin or cause ingrown hairs, which may lead to razor burn or folliculitis:   Razor burn  is a type of skin irritation that develops immediately after shaving. Improper shaving techniques can irritate the skin, causing patches of red, itchy bumps.  Razor burn does not necessarily mean the skin is infected. It can happen when people dry shave, which is shaving without using creams or gels.  Razor bumps also develop after shaving. However, these occur as the result of ingrown hairs.  Itching after shaving could also be a sign of  folliculitis . This is a skin condition that results from a bacterial, fungal, or rarely, a viral infection of the hair follicle under the skin. It often results in red, acne-like spots and itchy, painful skin.  According to the  American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) , the bacteria  Staphylococcus aureus  often causes folliculitis.  Some people are more prone to folliculitis than others. Shaving in the opposite direction to the way the hairs grow may increase a person's risk of folliculitis.  Shaving can irritate hair follicles. Shaving with an unclean razor and against the grain can introduce bacteria into the hair follicles, which can lead to an infection.  Razor burn, razor bumps, and folliculitis can technically affect any part of the body. However, they usually develop on areas of skin that people frequently shave, such as the legs, pubic area, and face.  Highly sensitive areas, such as the pubic region and face, may get irritated more often than the legs and chest.  This section discusses the effects of shaving and how to treat skin irritation in different areas of the body.  The skin on the legs is less sensitive than some other areas, such as the pubic region.  However, people may develop razor burn on their legs if they:  People can resolve razor burn on their legs by:  People should never shave their legs when they are dry. Using gentle shaving creams and gels keeps the skin hydrated.  The skin around the pubic area is very sensitive, so people should use caution when shaving in this area. There are many reasons why the skin on the pubic region is prone to irritation.  The groin area is prone to excessive moisture and chafing, which can lead to skin irritation. This is especially problematic in warmer weather.  The hair that grows in this area is thicker, curlier, and coarser than most other body hair, which may make it more susceptible to growing inward.  People may also shave this area often because pubic hair tends to grow rapidly. Shaving too frequently can irritate the skin.  People can use the following guidelines to prevent skin irritation when shaving pubic hair:  People with sensitive skin may want to consider using an electric trimmer because the blade is further away from the skin than traditional razor blades.  Less hair grows on the scrotum than the pubic region but shaving this area can cause irritation because the skin of the scrotum is delicate. Some men may find using a trimmer a better option.  When shaving the scrotum, follow the same steps as for shaving pubic hair. However, a person should always remember to:  Male facial hairs tend to grow at a low angle close to the skin, which can raise the risk of ingrown hairs and skin irritation.  Pseudofolliculitis barbae is a condition where the beard hair curls back inward and penetrates the skin, resulting in inflammation. While this condition usually affects the face and neck, it can appear in other areas.  Having curly hair can increase a person's chances of developing pseudofolliculitis.  One dermatologist, Robert Anolik, MD, FAAD, shares the following tips for shaving facial hair in a  press release  from the AAD:  The dermatologist also recommends that people store their razors in a dry place. Leaving a razor on a wet surface, such as in the shower or next to the sink, can allow bacteria to grow on the blades. This may lead to a higher risk of bacteria entering the skin and causing irritation.  Shaving may cause skin irritation if people:  Shaving with a razor is a quick and easy way to remove body hair. However, shaving can irritate the skin and lead to razor burn or folliculitis.  Some of the home remedies listed in this article are available for purchase online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Acne-like breakouts could be folliculitis. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/bumps-and-growths/folliculitis  
 American Academy of Dermatology. (2018). Tips for men: How to shave [Press release].  https://www.aad.org/media/news-releases/tips-for-men-how-to-shave  
 Maurer, M.,  et al.  (2016). The male beard hair and facial skin — challenges for shaving [Abstract].  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/ics.12328     Acne-like breakouts could be folliculitis. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/bumps-and-growths/folliculitis   American Academy of Dermatology. (2018). Tips for men: How to shave [Press release].  https://www.aad.org/media/news-releases/tips-for-men-how-to-shave   Maurer, M.,  et al.  (2016). The male beard hair and facial skin — challenges for shaving [Abstract].  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/ics.12328   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Eske, Jamie. "Causes and remedies for itchiness after shaving."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325886.php&gt;    APA  Eske, J. (2019, July 29). "Causes and remedies for itchiness after shaving."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  