 While anyone can get plantar  warts , they are  most common  in children and teenagers.  Some athletes, including dancers, gymnasts, and swimmers, may be  more likely  to get plantar warts due to being barefoot in communal areas. People with a weakened immune system are also at higher risk.  In this article, learn more about the causes and symptoms of plantar warts, as well as the treatment options.  A skin growth on the foot may be a plantar wart if it:  A plantar wart may sometimes be painful when a person walks or presses on it.  This type of wart can either be solitary, meaning that just one appears, or mosaic. Mosaic warts are collections of warts that cluster together in the same area of skin.  When skin cells become infected with  HPV , the virus tends to make them grow quicker than the cells in surrounding areas, causing a wart to form.  The HPV virus that causes plantar warts is contagious, which means that it can spread between people, particularly in warm, wet environments.  People may be more likely to get plantar warts if they:  Plantar warts can look similar to  corns  and calluses on the feet, which are layers of skin that develop to protect areas of the skin from friction and pressure. A doctor can do a physical examination to see whether the growth is a plantar wart.  In some cases, the doctor may take a skin sample of the wart and send it to a laboratory for testing. This procedure is called a biopsy.  Warts often go away without treatment. About  65–78%  of warts shrink or disappear within 2 years.  If they do not go away after this time, or a person wants to remove them more quickly, there are several treatment options, including:  A doctor may prescribe salicylic acid for plantar warts. This compound is usually the first treatment option for removing warts.  People can apply salicylic acid topically to the wart each day over a few months.  Cryotherapy uses liquid nitrogen to freeze off the wart. Researchers have found this method to be  less effective  than salicylic acid in some situations. Most dermatologists will use both treatments in combination to maximize the likelihood of removing the wart.  To get the best results from cryotherapy, people may need to return every 3 weeks for repeat treatment. Some people require several treatments with cryotherapy to resolve the wart. Cryotherapy tends to be painful and, therefore, may not be suitable for young children.  If warts do not respond to other treatments, immunotherapy can stimulate the immune system to fight off the HPV virus that is responsible for their development.  Fluorouracil (5-FU) is a  chemotherapy  drug that people can use off label and apply as a cream to the wart. The medical community does not recommend it for use in women who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant.  People can also take oral medication, such as cimetidine, off label in an attempt to boost the immune response, although there is a lack of evidence to recommend its use in all populations.  Some researchers  have suggested that oral zinc supplementation may be beneficial, but the evidence is similarly inconclusive.  Intralesional candida injection is another type of treatment that  studies  have proven to be quite successful as an off label treatment for warts. It essentially involves the injection of the antigen from the yeast  Candida  into one or two warts in the affected area.  This antigen ramps up the immune system, which helps resolve the injected wart, as well as other warts in the area. In people who respond to this treatment, multiple injections are sometimes necessary to make a noticeable difference.  Laser treatment involves the use of a beam of high intensity light to destroy the wart. This treatment can be effective, but it can sometimes cause scarring.  According to the American Osteopathic College of Dermatology, the pulsed dye laser method is  60–75%  effective in removing warts that are difficult to treat. However, multiple treatments may be necessary.  Only a doctor or certified dermatologist should deliver this treatment.  People should avoid having surgical removal of the wart because residual wart can remain, and the whole wart may grow back.  People with the following conditions should check with their doctor before treating the wart themselves:  Home remedies for plantar warts include:  People who use a pumice stone or emery board on their wart should take care not to use it on any other part of their body or share it with others, as this can spread the infection. They should also replace it every so often to avoid reinfecting their foot.  People may also find that wearing flat, comfortable shoes helps them walk without irritation or pain.  People may be able to avoid getting plantar warts by:  Plantar warts often go away without treatment within 2 years. However, if a person wants to remove the plantar wart, they can see their doctor for prescription medicine or have a medical procedure to reduce its appearance.  People may also be able to treat the wart at home with OTC products, such as salicylic acid.  Some warts can look similar to other skin growths, so people should also see a doctor if they are unsure what the growth is or notice any unusual symptoms, such as:  People with diabetes, a weakened immune system, or a circulatory health issue that affects the feet should seek the advice of a doctor before trying any treatment that may damage the skin.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Al-Gurairi, F. T.,  et al.  (2002). Oral zinc sulphate in the treatment of recalcitrant viral warts: Randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11952542  
 Khozeimeh, F.,  et al.  (2017). Intralesional immunotherapy compared to cryotherapy in the treatment of warts [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28108992  
 Plantar wart (verruca plantaris). (n.d.).  https://www.acfas.org/footankleinfo/Plantar_Wart.htm  
 Warts. (n.d.).  https://www.aocd.org/page/Warts  
 Warts. (n.d.).  https://www.apma.org/warts  
 Witchey, D. J.,  et al.  (2018). Plantar warts: Epidemiology, pathophysiology, and clinical management.  https://jaoa.org/article.aspx?articleid=2671439     Al-Gurairi, F. T.,  et al.  (2002). Oral zinc sulphate in the treatment of recalcitrant viral warts: Randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11952542   Khozeimeh, F.,  et al.  (2017). Intralesional immunotherapy compared to cryotherapy in the treatment of warts [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28108992   Plantar wart (verruca plantaris). (n.d.).  https://www.acfas.org/footankleinfo/Plantar_Wart.htm   Warts. (n.d.).  https://www.aocd.org/page/Warts   Warts. (n.d.).  https://www.apma.org/warts   Witchey, D. J.,  et al.  (2018). Plantar warts: Epidemiology, pathophysiology, and clinical management.  https://jaoa.org/article.aspx?articleid=2671439   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Sissons, Beth. "Plantar warts: Everything you need to know."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325813.php&gt;    APA  Sissons, B. (2019, July 22). "Plantar warts: Everything you need to know."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  