 A scab protects a wound while it heals. Keeping a wound clean and covering it with a layer of petroleum jelly, such as plain Vaseline, can retain moisture and  prevent the wound from scabbing over .  When a wound dries out and a scab forms, the healing process takes longer. Also, a person may find the cosmetic outcome less appealing.  Some people find scabs unpleasant or annoying, and the area around the scab may feel itchy or uncomfortable. However, it is important not to pick a scab off.  In this article, we list eight ways to help wounds with scabs heal faster. We also describe how to reduce discomfort and the risk of scarring.  The following tips can help get rid of scabs:  Always keep the scab and surrounding skin clean to avoid  infection .  If the wound is exposed to dirt or sweat, gently wash the area with warm water and gentle soap, then carefully pat the skin dry.  Try not to touch the scab unless it is necessary.  Touching a scab increases the chances of bacteria and other microbes entering the wound.  When scabs become itchy, some people scratch, scrub, or pick at them.  This can feel tempting, but it delays healing and increases the risk of scarring. It may also cause bleeding or redness.  To alleviate itchiness, try gently pressing on the scab with a clean, wet or dry cloth.  Gently holding a warm compress against the area can increase circulation to the wound. More blood flow brings fresh oxygen and cells that promote healing.  Also, a cold compress can reduce  inflammation  and pain at the site of the scab.  The  American Academy of Dermatology  recommend keeping the wound moist to help the damaged skin heal. They suggest using petroleum jelly to prevent the skin from drying out, as well as to encourage healing and reduce scar formation.  Some people also find other moisturizing products helpful, such as  coconut oil  or emollient cream, ointment, or lotion.  Coconut oil is available for  purchase online , along with  emollient products .  Once a scab has formed, a person only needs to cover it if it tears, oozes, or bleeds.  However, physically active people may wish to cover scabs if there is a risk that the scabs may be damaged, during sports or exercise, for example.  To cover a scab, apply a bandage just before being physically active and remove it afterward. If it is necessary to wear the bandage for more than a few hours, make sure to change it regularly.  A range of bandages is available for  purchase online .  Rest can help the body heal more quickly, while restricted sleep impairs immune function.  A study published in the   Journal of Applied Physiology   indicates that even relatively modest disruptions to sleep can delay wound healing.  Although the delay may not be very significant, aiming to regularly get 7–9 hours of sleep a night can help boost the healing process.  Certain nutrients play roles in the regeneration and healing of the body's tissues. Some of the most beneficial nutrients for regeneration and healing  include :  To ensure an adequate intake of these nutrients, aim to eat a balanced diet that includes plenty of:  A study in the   Journal of Wound Ostomy &amp; Continence Nursing   suggests that smoking impairs wound healing. Nicotine and other chemicals in cigarette smoke reduce oxygen flow throughout the body. Doctors call this reduction hypoxia.  According to the study, smoking also lowers the number of white blood cells that make their way to the site of the wound.  In addition, the study authors note that smoke reduces the function of lymphocytes and other cells that provide protection from infection and inflammation.  Most scabs fall away on their own. However, see a doctor if a wound with a scab has any of the following characteristics:  Also, see a doctor if a  fever  or chills develop.  When a person sustains an injury that is very deep or painful, they should seek medical aid.  It is also important to receive medical attention for wounds caused by a human bite or a dirty or rusty object. If a wound becomes infected, consult a healthcare provider.  Scabs are a healthy part of the healing process. They protect the wound from dirt and microbes and reduce the risk of infection. A scab will typically fall off within a few days to a few weeks.  A person can take steps to promote wound healing and reduce the risk of scarring. Some of these methods also alleviate any itching or discomfort that a scab causes.  If a scab is causing severe discomfort or if the wound does not begin to improve within a few days, see a doctor.  Antibiotic  treatment may be necessary.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Chow, O., &amp; Barbul, A. (2014). Immunonutrition: Role in wound healing and tissue regeneration.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3900114/  
 McDaniel, J. C., &amp; Browning, K. K. (2014). Smoking, chronic wound healing, and implications for evidence-based practice.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4241583/  
 Proper wound care: How to minimize a scar. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/skin-hair-nails/injured-skin/wound-care  
 Smith, T. J.,  et al.  (2018). Impact of sleep restriction on local immune response and skin barrier restoration with and without "multinutrient" nutrition intervention.  https://www.physiology.org/doi/full/10.1152/japplphysiol.00547.2017     Chow, O., &amp; Barbul, A. (2014). Immunonutrition: Role in wound healing and tissue regeneration.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3900114/   McDaniel, J. C., &amp; Browning, K. K. (2014). Smoking, chronic wound healing, and implications for evidence-based practice.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4241583/   Proper wound care: How to minimize a scar. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/skin-hair-nails/injured-skin/wound-care   Smith, T. J.,  et al.  (2018). Impact of sleep restriction on local immune response and skin barrier restoration with and without "multinutrient" nutrition intervention.  https://www.physiology.org/doi/full/10.1152/japplphysiol.00547.2017   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Leonard, Jayne. "Ways to help scabs heal."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325836.php&gt;    APA  Leonard, J. (2019, July 23). "Ways to help scabs heal."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  