 People of all ages may experience knee pain. According to  one article , a type of knee pain called patellofemoral pain syndrome, or runner's knee, is the most common orthopedic condition in sports medicine. In addition to being common in athletic people, knee pain can also be a problem for people who have  arthritis .  While it may be tempting to avoid exercise when knee pain occurs, this is not always the appropriate solution. Certain types of exercise can help alleviate existing knee pain and prevent future pain or injury by providing the knee with extra support.  The  Arthritis Foundation  state that exercise may be the most effective way to treat osteoarthritis without surgery, while the  American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons  note that strong and flexible muscles can keep knees healthy and prevent injury.  Knee strengthening exercises do not affect the knee joint directly, but they strengthen the muscles surrounding it. Strong muscles in the legs can help provide support for the knees. This support may alleviate pressure and strain on these joints, which can relieve pain and help a person be more active.  The following exercises can help strengthen the muscles surrounding the knee. If a person experiences pain during these exercises, they should stop doing them and speak to a doctor. Anyone with severe knee pain should consult a doctor before trying to exercise.  It is best to warm up with light exercise before starting any knee strengthening exercises. Examples of gentle exercise include walking, cycling, and using an elliptical machine, all of which put minimal  stress  on the knees. This activity will help increase blood flow to the muscles and allow them to be more flexible.   Muscles involved : Quadriceps (front of the thigh) and abdominal (stomach) muscles.   Muscles involved : Hamstrings (back of the thigh) and gluteal (buttock) muscles.   Muscles involved : Hamstrings and gluteal muscles.  This exercise is a variation of the standing hamstring curl. A person can try this version if they have access to a weight bench that is purpose-built for this exercise. It may be more challenging than the standing hamstring curl, depending on how much weight a person uses.   Muscles involved : Quadriceps, hamstrings, hip flexors, and gluteal muscles.   Muscles involved : Quadriceps, hamstrings, hip flexors, and gluteal muscles.   Muscles involved : Quadriceps and gluteal muscles.  After exercising any muscle group, it is essential to stretch the muscles. Stretching helps improve flexibility and reduce pain and injury.  There are many different ways to stretch the hamstrings in the back of the legs. One is through traditional toe touching.  What not to do:  A standing hamstring stretch is also an effective way to stretch the backs of the legs, and it is less strenuous for the lower back than toe touches.  Exercise is a noninvasive and healthful way to help with minor knee pain due to overuse, arthritis, or other causes.  Knee strengthening exercises are an effective way to help prevent injury and keep the legs strong. Stretching can also help keep the muscles flexible, which can prevent or alleviate pain.  People who have health conditions should speak with a doctor before beginning any exercise program.    
 Benefits of exercise for arthritis. (n.d.).  https://www.arthritis.org/living-with-arthritis/exercise/benefits/  
 Knee exercises. (2009).  https://orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/staying-healthy/knee-exercises/  
 Vora, M.,  et al.  (2017). Patellofemoral pain syndrome in female athletes: A review of diagnoses, etiology and treatment options.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5850065/     Benefits of exercise for arthritis. (n.d.).  https://www.arthritis.org/living-with-arthritis/exercise/benefits/   Knee exercises. (2009).  https://orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/staying-healthy/knee-exercises/   Vora, M.,  et al.  (2017). Patellofemoral pain syndrome in female athletes: A review of diagnoses, etiology and treatment options.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5850065/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "How to strengthen your knee."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325804.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2019, July 19). "How to strengthen your knee."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  