 Toujeo is a brand-name prescription medication. It's used to treat type 1 and  type 2 diabetes .  Toujeo contains a form of  insulin  called insulin glargine, which is classified as a long-acting insulin.  Clinical  studies  tested Toujeo in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. The studies showed that after 26 weeks of treatment, Toujeo lowered fasting blood sugar levels by 17 to 61 mg/dL and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) by 0.4 to 1.42.  Toujeo is available in two different prefilled pens that are used to inject insulin under the skin (subcutaneous).  Toujeo is a brand-name drug. It's not currently available as a generic drug.  Toujeo contains a long-acting form of insulin called insulin glargine. Insulin glargine is also available as the brand-name drugs Lantus and Basaglar.  Toujeo can cause mild or serious side effects. The following list contains some of the key side effects that may occur while taking Toujeo. This list doesn't include all possible side effects.  For more information on the possible side effects of Toujeo, or tips on how to deal with a troubling side effect, talk with your doctor or pharmacist.  The more common side effects of Toujeo can include:  If these side effects are severe, talk to your doctor or pharmacist.  Serious side effects from Toujeo aren't common, but they can occur. Call your doctor right away if you have serious side effects. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.  Serious side effects and their symptoms can include the following:  Rash, or redness and itching, sometimes occurs around the injection site in people who use Toujeo. It's not known how often this occurs.  Weight gain can occur in some people who use Toujeo. This is a side effect that can happen with all insulin products. How much weight gain occurs with Toujeo isn't clear. In  studies  of a similar type of insulin (Lantus), weight gain of up to about 2 pounds occurred over 28 weeks of treatment.  Weight loss isn't a side effect that has occurred in studies of Toujeo.  Low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) is one of the most common side effects of all types of insulin, including Toujeo.  In  studies  of people taking Toujeo, mild hypoglycemia occurred in up to 69 percent of people with  type 1 diabetes , and up to 37 percent of those with type 2 diabetes.  Severe hypoglycemia occurred in about 5 percent to 7 percent of people with either type of  diabetes . The risk of hypoglycemia was greater for people who received Toujeo in combination with other types of insulin.  If you often have low blood sugar levels or have severe hypoglycemia while taking Toujeo, talk with your doctor about changing your dosage.  Taking Toujeo along with certain diabetes medications can increase your risk of  heart failure , or worsen symptoms if you already have heart failure. These drugs are called thiazolidinediones and include Actos and Avandia.  Symptoms of heart failure can include:  If you have symptoms of heart failure or worsening symptoms, talk with your doctor. You may need to stop taking thiazolidinediones.  Joint pain isn't a side effect that has occurred in studies of Toujeo. It has occurred in as much as  14 percent  of people taking Lantus, a very similar type of insulin. Therefore, it might also happen in people who take Toujeo.   Diarrhea  isn't a side effect that has occurred in studies of Toujeo. It has occurred in as much as  11 percent  of people taking Lantus, a very similar type of insulin. Therefore, it might also happen in people who take Toujeo.  Toujeo and Lantus are both brand-name drugs that contain a long-acting insulin. In fact, they contain the same ingredient, insulin glargine.  The main difference between Toujeo and Lantus is that Toujeo is more concentrated than Lantus.  (For comparisons of Toujeo with other drugs, see "Toujeo vs. other medications" below.)  Toujeo is FDA-approved to improve blood sugar control in adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes.  Lantus is FDA-approved to improve blood sugar control in adults and children who have type 1 diabetes and adults with type 2 diabetes.  Both Toujeo and Lantus are given by an injection under the skin (subcutaneous). They're both usually given once daily.  Toujeo and Lantus contain the same long-acting insulin ingredient, insulin glargine. Therefore, both medications can cause similar common and serious side effects.  More common side effects of Toujeo and Lantus can include:  Other common side effects that have been reported in people using Lantus include:  Serious side effects that can occur in people using Toujeo or Lantus may include:  Although these medications can cause mostly similar side effects, there may be some differences. In one  study , Toujeo was less likely to cause hypoglycemia than Lantus.   Researchers  in one study found that people taking Toujeo had less weight gain than people taking Lantus. However, in another  study , there was no difference in the amount of weight gain between the two drugs.  Toujeo and Lantus have been directly compared in several studies. These  studies  show that Toujeo and Lantus work about equally well for decreasing fasting blood sugar and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. (They haven't been compared for use in children.)  A difference between these drugs is that Toujeo may work for a longer time than Lantus. Toujeo lasts up to 36 hours, while Lantus works for 20 to 24 hours. Toujeo may also cause more stable blood sugar levels throughout the day, with fewer low or high blood sugar events.  Toujeo and Lantus are brand-name medications. They're not available in generic forms.  Toujeo may cost slightly less than Lantus. The actual amount you pay for either drug will depend on your insurance plan.  The Toujeo dosage your doctor prescribes will depend on several factors. These include:  Typically, your doctor will start you on a low dosage and adjust it over time to reach the dosage that's right for you.  The following information describes dosages that are commonly used or recommended.  However, be sure to take the dosage your doctor prescribes for you . Your doctor will determine the best dosage to suit your needs.  Toujeo is available in two different prefilled pens that are used to deliver insulin with an injection under the skin (subcutaneous).   Toujeo pens    Toujeo pen needles   Pen needles must be attached to either type of pen before each injection. Needles aren't included with the Toujeo pens. The manufacturer of Toujeo recommends using one of the following pen needles:  Your dosage of Toujeo for type 1 diabetes will depend on whether you're starting treatment with insulin for the first time or you're switching from a different insulin product to Toujeo.   Starting insulin for the first time    Switching insulin treatment to Toujeo   Toujeo dosing for type 2 diabetes depends on whether you're starting treatment with insulin for the first time or you're switching from a different insulin product to Toujeo.   Starting insulin for the first time    Switching insulin treatment to Toujeo   What you should do if you miss a dose depends on when you realize that you've missed a dose. If it's within about two hours of your scheduled dose, it should be OK to go ahead and take your Toujeo dose. You should just be aware that you'll likely need to adjust the timing of your next dose accordingly.  If it's been more than two hours since your scheduled dose, talk with your healthcare provider right away. They can advise you on the best approach to control your blood sugar levels.  Be sure not to take a double dose to make up for a missed dose. This can cause dangerous side effects.  It's a good idea to talk with your doctor in advance about what to do if you miss a dose. They can tell you at what point you should avoid taking the missed dose and instead wait for the next dose.  Yes. Toujeo is used long term to control blood sugar levels in people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes.  It's important to remember that it can take up to five days for Toujeo to reach its full effect on your blood sugar levels. Therefore, it may not seem like it's working when you first start taking it.  But if you've already taken it for five days or longer and it still doesn't seem to be working, talk with your healthcare provider. They may need to adjust your Toujeo dosage.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves prescription medications such as Toujeo for certain uses.  Toujeo is FDA-approved to control blood sugar levels in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.  Clinical  studies  tested Toujeo in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. The studies showed that after 26 weeks of treatment, Toujeo lowered fasting blood sugar levels by 17 to 61 mg/dL and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) by 0.4 to 1.42.  Toujeo contains a long-acting insulin called insulin glargine. There are many different types of insulin, which are classified by how fast they work or how long they work. Here's a table of the different kinds of insulins that are available.  You may wonder how Toujeo compares to other medications that are prescribed for similar uses. Below are comparisons between Toujeo and several medications.  Toujeo and Tresiba are both long-acting insulin products, but they contain different forms of insulin. Toujeo contains insulin glargine, and Tresiba contains insulin degludec.   Uses   Toujeo is FDA-approved to control blood sugar levels in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Tresiba is FDA-approved to control blood sugar in adults and children 1 year of age and older with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.   Drug forms and administration   Toujeo and Tresiba are both available as a prefilled pen that's used to deliver insulin using an injection under the skin (subcutaneous).   Side effects and risks   Toujeo and Tresiba both contain a long-acting insulin ingredient. Therefore, the side effects that they cause are very similar.  More common side effects of Toujeo and Tresiba include:  Other common side effects that have been reported in people using Tresiba include headache and diarrhea.  Serious side effects that can occur in people using Toujeo or Tresiba may include:  Although both Toujeo and Tresiba can cause hypoglycemia, Toujeo may have a lower risk of this condition. In one  study , Toujeo had a lower risk of hypoglycemia than Tresiba when these medications were first started and dosages were being increased.  In another  study , low blood sugar levels at night were less common in people taking Toujeo compared to Tresiba. And in yet another  study , the risk of severe low blood sugar and nighttime low blood sugar was lower in people taking Toujeo compared to those taking Tresiba.   Effectiveness   Toujeo and Tresiba have been directly compared in several clinical studies. Overall, they were found to be very similar in effectiveness.  In a 2018  study  in people with type 2 diabetes, Toujeo and Tresiba worked about equally well for decreasing hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) after 24 weeks of treatment. Another 2018  study  in people with type 2 diabetes also found that Toujeo and Tresiba worked about equally well for lowering blood sugar levels. And there were similar results in yet another 2018  study .  One study evaluated switching people with type 2 diabetes from a long-acting insulin such as Lantus or Levemir, to Toujeo or Tresiba. In this  study , making the switch improved HbA1c about equally well in people who switched to Toujeo as people who switched to Tresiba.  Some research did find a difference between the performance of the two drugs. A 2018 analysis of  studies  found that Toujeo may cause more stable blood sugar levels throughout the day as compared to Tresiba.   Costs   Toujeo and Tresiba are brand-name medications. Neither drug is available in a generic form.  Toujeo may cost less than Tresiba. The actual amount you pay for either drug will depend on your insurance plan.  Toujeo and Basaglar are both brand-name drugs that contain a long-acting insulin. In fact, they contain the same ingredient, insulin glargine. The main difference between them is that Toujeo is more concentrated than Basaglar.   Uses   Toujeo is FDA-approved to improve blood sugar control in adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes.  Basaglar is FDA-approved to improve blood sugar control in adults and children with type 1 diabetes, and in adults with type 2 diabetes.   Drug forms and administration   Both Toujeo and Basaglar are delivered using an injection that's given under the skin (subcutaneous). They're also both usually given once daily.   Side effects and risks   Toujeo and Basaglar contain the same long-acting insulin ingredient, insulin glargine. Therefore, both medications can cause similar common and serious side effects.  More common side effects of Toujeo and Basaglar include:  Other common side effects that have been reported in people using Basaglar include:  Serious side effects that can occur in people using Toujeo or Basaglar may include:    Other differences in side effects    Although these medications can cause mostly similar side effects, there may be some differences.  In one  study , people with type 2 diabetes were switched from Lantus to either Basaglar or Toujeo. After the switch, people taking Toujeo had a lower risk of low blood sugar levels compared to Basaglar or Lantus.  This is similar to studies comparing Toujeo and Lantus, which is biologically similar to Basaglar. In one  study , Toujeo was less likely to cause hypoglycemia than Lantus.   Researchers  in one study found that people taking Toujeo had less weight gain than people taking Lantus. However, in another  study , there was no difference in weight gain between the two drugs.   Effectiveness   Toujeo and Basaglar have been directly compared in one  study . In this study, people with type 2 diabetes were switched from Lantus to either Basaglar or Toujeo. After the switch, both Toujeo and Basaglar worked about equally well for maintaining blood sugar control.  Toujeo has also been directly compared to Lantus, which is biologically similar to Basaglar. (Lantus and Basaglar are expected to have the same effects.) These  studies  show that Toujeo and Lantus work about equally well for decreasing fasting blood sugar and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.  One difference is that Toujeo may work longer than Lantus or Basaglar. Toujeo lasts up to 36 hours, while Lantus and Basaglar last for 20 to 24 hours. Toujeo may also cause more stable blood sugar levels throughout the day, with fewer low or high blood sugar events.   Costs   Toujeo and Basaglar are brand-name medications. Neither drug is available in a generic form.  Basaglar may cost slightly less than Toujeo. The actual amount you pay for either drug will depend on your insurance plan.  Toujeo and Levemir are both long-acting insulin products, but they contain different forms of insulin. Toujeo contains insulin glargine, and Levemir contains insulin detemir.   Uses   Toujeo is FDA-approved to control blood sugar levels in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Levemir is FDA-approved to control blood sugar in adults and children 2 years of age and older with type 1 diabetes or adults with type 2 diabetes.   Drug forms and administration   Both Toujeo and Levemir are given by an injection under the skin (subcutaneous). They're also both usually given once daily.   Side effects and risks   Toujeo and Levemir both contain a long-acting insulin ingredient. Therefore, the side effects that they can cause are very similar.  More common side effects of Toujeo and Levemir include:  Other common side effects that have been reported in people using Levemir include:  Serious side effects that can occur in people using Toujeo or Levemir may include:   Effectiveness   Toujeo and Levemir haven't been directly compared in clinical studies. However, an  indirect comparison  found that Toujeo and Levemir may work about equally well for decreasing hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c).   Costs   Toujeo and Levemir are brand-name medications. Neither drug is available in a generic form.  Toujeo may cost less than Levemir. The actual amount you pay for either drug will depend on your insurance plan.  Toujeo is a long-acting insulin product that contains insulin glargine. Trulicity, which contains the drug dulaglutide, is classified as a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist.   Uses   Toujeo is FDA-approved to control blood sugar levels in adults with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.  Trulicity is FDA-approved to improve blood sugar levels in adults with type 2 diabetes. It's not used for people with type 1 diabetes.   Drug forms and administration   Both Toujeo and Trulicity are given by injection under the skin (subcutaneous). Toujeo is given once daily. Trulicity is given once weekly.   Side effects and risks   Toujeo and Trulicity have some similar side effects and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.   *  Trulicity  has a  boxed warning  from the FDA about this side effect. This is the strongest warning the FDA requires. A boxed warning alerts doctors and patients about drug effects that may be dangerous.   Some people wonder how diabetes medications will affect their weight. In  studies  of Toujeo, some people gained weight. In  studies  of Trulicity, some people lost weight, ranging from about 3 pounds to 5 pounds over 26 weeks.   Effectiveness   Toujeo and Trulicity haven't been directly compared in clinical studies. This is likely because they're meant for people with different treatment needs.  According to  treatment guidelines , Trulicity is considered a first-choice treatment option for people with type 2 diabetes who can't take metformin. And long-acting insulin, such as Toujeo, is recommended when one or more other drugs, such as Trulicity or metformin, don't lower hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) enough.   Costs   Toujeo and Trulicity are brand-name medications. Neither drug is available in a generic form.  Toujeo may cost less than Trulicity. The actual amount you pay for either drug will depend on your insurance plan.  Alcohol should be avoided, or consumed carefully, while taking Toujeo. Drinking alcohol can increase or decrease blood sugar levels.  If you drink alcohol while taking Toujeo, you should monitor your blood sugar levels more closely.  Toujeo can interact with several other medications. It can also interact with certain supplements.  Different interactions can cause different effects. For instance, some can interfere with how well a drug works, while others can cause increased side effects.  Below is a list of medications that can interact with Toujeo. This list doesn't contain all drugs that may interact with Toujeo.  Before taking Toujeo, be sure to tell your doctor and pharmacist about all prescription, over-the-counter, and other drugs you take. Also tell them about any  vitamins , herbs, and supplements you use. Sharing this information can help you avoid potential interactions.  If you have questions about drug interactions that may affect you, ask your doctor or pharmacist.   Drugs that increase the risk of low blood sugar (hypoglycemia)   When taken with Toujeo, some medications can cause low blood sugar levels and increase the risk of hypoglycemia. If you take these medications, you may need to check your blood sugar levels more often. Also, your doctor may need to change your dosage of Toujeo.  Examples of these medications include:   Drugs that increase your blood sugar levels   Some medications can increase blood sugar levels in your body. If you take these medications, you may need to check your blood sugar levels more often. Also, your doctor may need to change your dosage of Toujeo.  Examples of these medications include:  When taken with Toujeo, some herbs and supplements might increase your risk of low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). Examples include:  You should take Toujeo according to your doctor or healthcare provider's instructions.  Toujeo is taken once daily. It should be taken at about the same time each day. Your healthcare provider may recommend taking it in the morning before breakfast, or in the evening before dinner.  Toujeo doesn't need to be taken with food or at the time of a meal.  However, people with diabetes need to follow consistent diet, exercise, and insulin schedules, which would include treatment with Toujeo. These schedules may be different for each person. Your healthcare provider can tell you more.  For people with type 1 diabetes, their bodies don't produce enough insulin. People with type 2 diabetes, on the other hand, usually have  insulin resistance . This means their body doesn't respond to insulin the way it should. Over time, people with type 2 diabetes may also stop producing enough insulin.  Toujeo helps improve blood sugar levels in people with either type of diabetes.  Normally, when you eat food, your body releases insulin to help transport glucose (sugar) from your bloodstream into the cells of your body. The cells then turn the glucose into energy.  When your body doesn't produce enough insulin, or when your body doesn't respond to insulin the way it should, this causes problems. The cells of your body may not get the glucose they need to work correctly.  Also, you may get too much glucose in your blood. This is called high blood sugar (hyperglycemia). Having too much glucose in your blood can damage your body and organs, including your eyes, heart, nerves, and kidneys.  Toujeo is a type of insulin called insulin glargine. It's a long-acting insulin, which means it works for the whole day (up to 36 hours).  Toujeo is used to partly replace the body's natural production of insulin, which will help move glucose into your cells. This helps your cells get the sugar they need. It also helps stabilize your blood sugar levels.  Toujeo is often used with other medications. For instance, for type 2 diabetes, it may be used with metformin. And for type 1 diabetes, it may be used with a type of insulin that's taken with meals.  Toujeo doesn't work right away. When you first start taking the drug, it can take up to five days to reach its full effect.  Toujeo SoloStar and Toujeo Max SoloStar pens should be refrigerated until you start using them. They shouldn't be stored with the needle attached.  Be sure to keep Toujeo SoloStar and Toujeo Max SoloStar pens in the refrigerator until you use them. When the pens are in use, keep them at room temperature.  The pens can stay at room temperature for up to 42 days. After the needles have been at room temperature for 42 days, you shouldn't use them. You should dispose of them at that time. And once you take the pens out of the refrigerator for use, don't put them back in the refrigerator.  Also, don't freeze the pens. If a pen becomes frozen, don't use it. Dispose of it.  Each Toujeo package has an expiration date. Toujeo shouldn't be used if it has gone beyond the expiration date.  There are no studies of Toujeo use during pregnancy. An  analysis  of studies of insulin glargine, the insulin contained in Toujeo, didn't find any negative effects in mother or fetus when it was used during pregnancy.  If you're pregnant or planning to become pregnant while taking Toujeo, talk with your doctor about the risks and benefits. Your body's insulin requirements may change during pregnancy. If you'll be using Toujeo, your dosage may need to be different during your pregnancy.  Toujeo is considered safe to use during breastfeeding. However, your body's insulin requirements may change during pregnancy. So, your doctor may need to change your Toujeo dosage while you're breastfeeding.  Be sure to talk to your doctor first if you want to breastfeed while taking Toujeo.  Here are answers to some frequently asked questions about Toujeo.  No. Toujeo isn't the same as Lantus, but they're very similar. Both Toujeo and Lantus contain the same long-acting insulin, insulin glargine. But Toujeo contains 300 units per mL of solution, while Lantus contains 100 units per mL of solution.  Toujeo is more concentrated than Lantus.  No, Toujeo isn't fast-acting. It has a slow onset. When you first start taking Toujeo, it can take up to five days to take full effect on your blood sugar levels.  But Toujeo is long-acting. It can work for up to 36 hours in your body.  Toujeo, like other long-acting insulins, doesn't have a peak. It mimics the body's natural steady release of insulin throughout the day.  No. Toujeo shouldn't be mixed with other insulins.  This depends on the other form of insulin that you're taking. Talk with your healthcare provider about the best way to switch.  Usually, when switching from another once-daily, long-acting insulin to Toujeo, the starting dosage of Toujeo is the same as the dosage for the other long-acting insulin. If needed, your healthcare provider will work with you to adjust your dosage of Toujeo after your switch.  However, most people who switch from Lantus to Toujeo need a higher daily dose of Toujeo than Lantus. This is probably because your body absorbs Toujeo more slowly than it absorbs Lantus.  When switching from twice-daily NPH insulin, the typical Toujeo starting dosage is 80 percent of the total daily NPH insulin dose. Your healthcare provider will adjust your dosage of Toujeo if needed.  When injecting Toujeo, it's common to feel a small amount of pain, such as a stinging or burning sensation.  One way to decrease this discomfort is to take your Toujeo pen out of the refrigerator at least one hour before giving an injection. The injection hurts more when the solution is cold.  Taking too much of this medication can increase your risk of serious side effects.  Symptoms of an overdose of Toujeo can include:  If you think you've taken too much of this drug, call your doctor or seek guidance from the American Association of Poison Control Centers at 800-222-1222 or through their  online tool .  But if your symptoms are severe, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room right away.   Before taking Toujeo, talk with your doctor about any medical conditions you have. Toujeo may not be right for you if you have certain medical conditions. Examples of these conditions include:  Each Toujeo package has an expiration date listed on the label. Don't use Toujeo if the expiration date listed on the label has passed.  Toujeo SoloStar and Toujeo Max SoloStar pens also shouldn't be used if they've been kept at room temperature for more than 42 days.  The pens should be refrigerated until you start using them. During use, they should be left at room temperature. The pens can stay at room temperature for up to 42 days.  Once you take the pens out of the refrigerator for use, don't put them back in the refrigerator.  The following information is provided for clinicians and other healthcare professionals.  Toujeo contains insulin glargine U-300. Insulin glargine is a long-acting, or basal, insulin. Insulin glargine, like other insulins, lowers blood glucose by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and decreasing glucose production in the liver. It also inhibits the breakdown of glucose, fat, and proteins.  The insulin glargine U-300 onset of action occurs over a period of six hours and has a duration of action of about 36 hours.  The median time to maximum insulin concentration following subcutaneous injection of Toujeo is 12 hours. Steady state concentration occurs within five days.  Toujeo should not be used by people who are allergic to insulin glargine or excipients of Toujeo.  Toujeo should not be used during episodes of hypoglycemia.  Toujeo SoloStar and Toujeo Max SoloStar pens can be refrigerated but should not be frozen. Frozen pens must be discarded.  Once Toujeo is taken out of the refrigerator for use, it should not be placed back in the refrigerator. Toujeo may be stored at room temperature for up to 42 days. After 42 days at room temperature, Toujeo pens must be discarded.  Toujeo should not be stored with the needle attached.   Disclaimer : MedicalNewsToday has made every effort to make certain that all information is factually correct, comprehensive, and up-to-date. However, this article should not be used as a substitute for the knowledge and expertise of a licensed healthcare professional. You should always consult your doctor or other healthcare professional before taking any medication. The drug information contained herein is subject to change and is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. The absence of warnings or other information for a given drug does not indicate that the drug or drug combination is safe, effective, or appropriate for all patients or all specific uses.    
 Basaglar - insulin glargine injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=0ad21db3-2b1c-4ed9-a687-bdd6a74d0aae  
 Clinical pharmacology. (2018). Elsevier.  http://www.clinicalpharmacology-ip.com/  
 Freemantle, N.,  et al . (2016). Safety and efficacy of insulin glargine 300 u/mL compared with other basal insulin therapies in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A network meta-analysis.  https://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/6/2/e009421.long  
 Garber, A. J.,  et al . (2018). Consensus statement by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American College of Endocrinology on the comprehensive type 2 diabetes management algorithm - 2018 executive summary.  https://journals.aace.com/doi/10.4158/CS-2017-0153?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&amp;rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&amp;rfr_dat=cr_pub%3dpubmed  
 GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com  
 A guide to drug safety terms at FDA. (2012).  https://www.fda.gov/downloads/forconsumers/consumerupdates/ucm107976.pdf  
 Heise, T.,  et al . (2017). Day-to-day and within-day variability in glucose-lowering effective between insulin degludec and insulin glargine (100 U/mL and 300 U/mL). DOI: 10.1177/1932296817731422   
 Insulin comparison chart. (2018).  http://ww4.mgh.org/Physicians/Formulary%20Documents/Insulin%20Comparison%20Chart.pdf  
 Is biosimilar insulin available? (n.d.).  https://www.biosimilarsresourcecenter.org/faq/biosimilar-insulin-available/  
 Ito, H.,  et al . (2018). A comparison of the clinical courses of type 2 diabetic patients whose basal insulin preparation was replaced from insulin glargine 100 units/mL to insulin glargine biosimilar or 300 units/mL.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6127835/  
 Kawaguchi, Y.,  et al . (2018). Efficacy and safety of insulin glargine 300 U/mL vs insulin degludec in patients with type 2 diabetes: A randomized, open-label, cross-over study using continuous glucose monitoring profiles [Abstract].  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jdi.12884  
 Lantus - insulin glargine injection, solution; Lantus SoloStar - insulin glargine injection, solution. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=6328c99d-d75f-43ef-b19e-7e71f91e57f6  
 Levemir - insulin detemir injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=82192527-99aa-4b53-8ce9-9173668d309c  
 Lv, S.,  et al . (2015). Safety of insulin analogs during pregnancy: A meta-analysis [Abstract].  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00404-015-3692-3  
 Mayo Clinic Staff. (2016). Insulin: Compare common options for insulin therapy.  https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/diabetes/in-depth/insulin/art-20050970  
 Missing insulin injections. (n.d.).  https://www.diabetes.co.uk/insulin/missing-insulin-injection.html  
 Riddle, M.C.,  et al . (2014). New insulin glargine 300 Units/mL versus glargine 100 Units/mL in people with type 2 diabetes using basal and mealtime insulin: Glucose control and hypoglycemia in a 6-month randomized controlled trial (Edition 1).  https://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/37/10/2755.long  
 Rosenstock, J.,  et al . (2018). More similarities than differences testing insulin glargine 300 Units/mL versus insulin degludec 100 Units/mL in insulin-naïve type 2 diabetes: The randomized head-to-head BRIGHT trial.  https://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/41/10/2147.long  
 Should my insulin dose be lower? Toujeo vs. Lantus. (2015).  https://www.goodrx.com/blog/should-my-insulin-dose-be-lower-toujeo-vs-lantus/  
 Sullivan, S. D.,  et al . (2018). Clinical outcomes in real-world patients with type 2 diabetes switching from first- to second-generation basal insulin analogues: Comparative effectiveness of insulin glargine 300 units/mL and insulin degludec in the DELIVER D+ cohort study.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6099352/  
 Toujeo. (n.d.).  https://www.toujeo.com/  
 Toujeo - insulin glargine injection, solution; Toujeo Max - insulin glargine injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=c9561d96-124d-48ca-982f-0aa1575bff36  
 Tresiba - insulin degludec injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=456c5e87-3dfd-46fa-8ac0-c6128d4c97c6  
 Trulicity - dulaglutide injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=463050bd-2b1c-40f5-b3c3-0a04bb433309  
 Vargas-Uricoechea, H. (2018). Efficacy and safety of insulin glargine 300 U/mL versus 100 U/mL in diabetes mellitus: A comprehensive review of the literature.  https://www.hindawi.com/journals/jdr/2018/2052101/  
 Yamabe, M.,  et al . (2018). Comparison of insulin glargine 300 U/mL and insulin degludec using flash glucose monitoring: A randomized cross-over study [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6400163/  
 Yki-Järvinen, H,  et al . (2015). Glycaemic control and hypoglycaemia with new insulin glargine 300 U/ml versus insulin glargine 100 U/ml in people with type 2 diabetes using basal insulin and oral antihyperglycaemic drugs: The EDITION 2 randomized 12-month trial including 6-month extension.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5049622/     Basaglar - insulin glargine injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=0ad21db3-2b1c-4ed9-a687-bdd6a74d0aae   Clinical pharmacology. (2018). Elsevier.  http://www.clinicalpharmacology-ip.com/   Freemantle, N.,  et al . (2016). Safety and efficacy of insulin glargine 300 u/mL compared with other basal insulin therapies in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A network meta-analysis.  https://bmjopen.bmj.com/content/6/2/e009421.long   Garber, A. J.,  et al . (2018). Consensus statement by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and American College of Endocrinology on the comprehensive type 2 diabetes management algorithm - 2018 executive summary.  https://journals.aace.com/doi/10.4158/CS-2017-0153?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&amp;rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&amp;rfr_dat=cr_pub%3dpubmed   GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com   A guide to drug safety terms at FDA. (2012).  https://www.fda.gov/downloads/forconsumers/consumerupdates/ucm107976.pdf   Heise, T.,  et al . (2017). Day-to-day and within-day variability in glucose-lowering effective between insulin degludec and insulin glargine (100 U/mL and 300 U/mL). DOI: 10.1177/1932296817731422    Insulin comparison chart. (2018).  http://ww4.mgh.org/Physicians/Formulary%20Documents/Insulin%20Comparison%20Chart.pdf   Is biosimilar insulin available? (n.d.).  https://www.biosimilarsresourcecenter.org/faq/biosimilar-insulin-available/   Ito, H.,  et al . (2018). A comparison of the clinical courses of type 2 diabetic patients whose basal insulin preparation was replaced from insulin glargine 100 units/mL to insulin glargine biosimilar or 300 units/mL.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6127835/   Kawaguchi, Y.,  et al . (2018). Efficacy and safety of insulin glargine 300 U/mL vs insulin degludec in patients with type 2 diabetes: A randomized, open-label, cross-over study using continuous glucose monitoring profiles [Abstract].  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jdi.12884   Lantus - insulin glargine injection, solution; Lantus SoloStar - insulin glargine injection, solution. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=6328c99d-d75f-43ef-b19e-7e71f91e57f6   Levemir - insulin detemir injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=82192527-99aa-4b53-8ce9-9173668d309c   Lv, S.,  et al . (2015). Safety of insulin analogs during pregnancy: A meta-analysis [Abstract].  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00404-015-3692-3   Mayo Clinic Staff. (2016). Insulin: Compare common options for insulin therapy.  https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/diabetes/in-depth/insulin/art-20050970   Missing insulin injections. (n.d.).  https://www.diabetes.co.uk/insulin/missing-insulin-injection.html   Riddle, M.C.,  et al . (2014). New insulin glargine 300 Units/mL versus glargine 100 Units/mL in people with type 2 diabetes using basal and mealtime insulin: Glucose control and hypoglycemia in a 6-month randomized controlled trial (Edition 1).  https://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/37/10/2755.long   Rosenstock, J.,  et al . (2018). More similarities than differences testing insulin glargine 300 Units/mL versus insulin degludec 100 Units/mL in insulin-naïve type 2 diabetes: The randomized head-to-head BRIGHT trial.  https://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/41/10/2147.long   Should my insulin dose be lower? Toujeo vs. Lantus. (2015).  https://www.goodrx.com/blog/should-my-insulin-dose-be-lower-toujeo-vs-lantus/   Sullivan, S. D.,  et al . (2018). Clinical outcomes in real-world patients with type 2 diabetes switching from first- to second-generation basal insulin analogues: Comparative effectiveness of insulin glargine 300 units/mL and insulin degludec in the DELIVER D+ cohort study.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6099352/   Toujeo. (n.d.).  https://www.toujeo.com/   Toujeo - insulin glargine injection, solution; Toujeo Max - insulin glargine injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=c9561d96-124d-48ca-982f-0aa1575bff36   Tresiba - insulin degludec injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=456c5e87-3dfd-46fa-8ac0-c6128d4c97c6   Trulicity - dulaglutide injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=463050bd-2b1c-40f5-b3c3-0a04bb433309   Vargas-Uricoechea, H. (2018). Efficacy and safety of insulin glargine 300 U/mL versus 100 U/mL in diabetes mellitus: A comprehensive review of the literature.  https://www.hindawi.com/journals/jdr/2018/2052101/   Yamabe, M.,  et al . (2018). Comparison of insulin glargine 300 U/mL and insulin degludec using flash glucose monitoring: A randomized cross-over study [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6400163/   Yki-Järvinen, H,  et al . (2015). Glycaemic control and hypoglycaemia with new insulin glargine 300 U/ml versus insulin glargine 100 U/ml in people with type 2 diabetes using basal insulin and oral antihyperglycaemic drugs: The EDITION 2 randomized 12-month trial including 6-month extension.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5049622/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  MNT's Medical Network. "Toujeo (insulin glargine)."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325812.php&gt;    APA  MNT's Medical Network. (2019, August 31). "Toujeo (insulin glargine)."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  