 Good posture can boost more than a person's self-confidence. It also offers long term health benefits, such as:  As people start improving their posture, they may gain a greater awareness of their body. A person may begin noticing when their muscles feel tense and become more attuned to misalignments in various areas.  Over time, the body will learn to correct bad posture naturally.  In this article, we discuss effective exercises and other tips for better posture.  The following guidelines describe good posture when standing, sitting, and lying down:   Standing    Sitting at a desk or table    Lying down   People can have good posture while lying on their back or side. Make sure to keep the spine aligned and avoid twisting at the waist. Placing a pillow underneath or between the legs can help relieve back pain.  People should avoid sleeping on their stomachs because this position forces the neck to twist, putting excessive stress on the neck, shoulders, and back.  Maintaining proper posture requires adequate muscle strength, joint motion, and balance, according to the  American Chiropractic Association .  The following exercises focus on increasing muscle strength and flexibility for better posture.   Bridges   Bridges help strengthen the gluteal and abdominal muscles, which helps relieve excess stress in the lower back.  To do a bridge:   Plank   Plank Pose helps improve posture by strengthening muscles in the shoulders and back as well as the core, glutes, and hamstrings. It also encourages proper alignment of the spine.  To plank:   Hip flexor stretch   This stretch gently opens the hips and improves balance and coordination, which can help improve posture.  To do a hip flexor stretch:   Mountain Pose   Tadasana, or Mountain Pose, is a simple  yoga  position that can help improve posture. Mountain Pose focuses on upright body alignment, and it incorporates several aspects of good posture.  To do Mountain Pose:   Child's Pose   This yoga pose lengthens the lower back and opens the hips. People can use Child's Pose as a resting position during yoga or other forms of exercise or as part of their regular stretching routine.  To do Child's Pose:  Placing a mat or towel on the floor can make this pose more comfortable.  Around 1 in 4 adults in the United States sits for more than 8 hours a day, according to a  2018 study . People who sit for long periods tend to slouch in their chairs.  Slouching happens when the shoulders drop in front of the chest and the head tilts forward. This posture puts an extreme curve in the spine, placing stress on the neck and constricting the lungs. People may also appear smaller if they slouch while standing.  A person can correct their posture by pulling their shoulders back and keeping their head upright, in line with their spine.  Sitting for many hours may be unavoidable, but a person can maintain good posture. Here are a few ways to improve posture while seated:  Also, the  National Institutes of Health (NIH)  recommend the following general tips for improving posture:  The term "posture" describes the position of the body when standing, sitting, and lying down. Slouching and hunching forward can lead to poor posture, which may cause joint and muscle pain.  General tips for good posture include:  Having good posture can improve self-confidence and may provide several health benefits, such as:  People can use the stretches and exercises in this article to improve their posture.    
 Guide to good posture. (2019).  https://medlineplus.gov/guidetogoodposture.html  
 Maintaining good posture. (n.d.).  https://acatoday.org/content/posture-power-how-to-correct-your-body-alignment  
 Ussery, E. N.,  et al.  (2018). Joint prevalence of sitting time and leisure-time physical activity among US adults, 2015-2016.  https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2715582  
      Guide to good posture. (2019).  https://medlineplus.gov/guidetogoodposture.html   Maintaining good posture. (n.d.).  https://acatoday.org/content/posture-power-how-to-correct-your-body-alignment   Ussery, E. N.,  et al.  (2018). Joint prevalence of sitting time and leisure-time physical activity among US adults, 2015-2016.  https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2715582      Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Eske, Jamie. "Exercises and tips for better posture."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325883.php&gt;    APA  Eske, J. (2019, July 29). "Exercises and tips for better posture."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  