 People primarily use PEFR measurements as a guide for managing  asthma  symptoms.  However, doctors may also recommend peak flow measurements for people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) to determine an increase in symptoms.  This article looks at how peak flow meters work, their benefits, and how to use them.  To use a peak flow meter, a person must forcefully blow into the device. The meter measures the forced air in liters per minute.  The indicator on the device moves in response to the exhalation and provides a reading on a numbered scale.  Recording peak flow measurements is a part of asthma action plans to help treat the condition. A peak flow meter is useful in detecting changes in a person's airway, which could indicate a worsening of symptoms of asthma.  People with asthma may develop narrowing of the airways, which lowers the amount of air they can exhale. The PEFR often changes in response to a flare-up of asthma. Weather, exposure to allergens, and infection can all lead to a change in a person's asthma.  Regular monitoring with a peak flow meter can help a person detect changes in their airways before other symptoms start. In some cases, a decrease in PEFR is the only sign of an impending asthma attack.  A  2012 study  involved 53 people with asthma who recorded their symptoms and peak flow measurements twice daily for 274 days. Researchers analyzed the relationship between changes in peak flow measurements and the participants' asthma symptoms.  The researchers found that some people incorrectly perceived their symptoms as mild, even if they had significant airway obstruction. The study also indicated that people with poorly controlled asthma had fluctuations in PEFR even without reported asthma symptoms.  Recognizing the signs of an asthma attack through peak flow monitoring, and following an asthma action plan, can prevent symptoms from becoming severe. A gradual decline in PEFR over time can also indicate a decrease in lung function and help a doctor modify an asthma treatment plan.  Along with its uses for asthma, a peak flow meter can also be helpful with other lung conditions, such as COPD. People with COPD may also develop narrowing of the airways and  inflammation .  By monitoring their PEFR, people with COPD can determine what is normal for them. Just as with asthma, when there is a significant decrease in the peak flow, this is a red flag that something might be triggering an increase in COPD symptoms.  It is vital to use a peak flow meter properly and put forth a good effort to get an accurate measurement. Peak flow meters have slightly different designs depending on the manufacturer, but they all require the same procedure.  People should take a peak flow measurement while standing up. To use a peak flow meter, follow these steps:  Peak flow predictions vary based on a person's sex, age, and height. However, it is more important for a person to determine their personal best, or what is "normal" for them.  According to the  Asthma and Allergy Foundation of American , people can determine their personal best by using the device daily for a few weeks and recording the highest number they can reach.  Once a person knows their personal best, they can determine whether or not their peak flow changes. The results of a peak flow may indicate different things depending on whether the measurement improved, worsened, or stayed the same.  Changes in peak flow may indicate the following:  By measuring the peak flow daily for a few weeks, a person can identify their personal best. Subsequent monitoring of the peak flow involves determining what percentage of their "best" a person is getting during any given measurement.  Peak flow zones interpret peak flow rates and help an individual know what steps they should take to manage their asthma.  According to the  American Lung Association , peak flow zones to follow include:  A peak flow meter is a small device that measures the amount of air a person can forcefully blow out of their lungs in one fast breath. It is one indicator of airways changes that may occur in people with asthma or COPD.  To get a peak flow meter, speak to a doctor. They may give you one or recommend a type to purchase. There are many varieties to choose from  online .  A person's peak flow measurement can indicate a worsening of their asthma symptoms or those of a lung condition. Although it is only one test, it can be a useful tool to determine the treatment needed, including emergency medical care.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 How to use your peak flow meter. (n.d.)  https://getasthmahelp.org/peak-flow-how-to.aspx  
 Kamiya, K.,  et al.  (2012). Relationship between sensitivity to dyspnea and fluctuating peak expiratory flow rate in the absence of asthma symptoms.  https://synapse.koreamed.org/DOIx.php?id=10.5415/apallergy.2012.2.1.49  
 Measuring your peak flow rate. (2019).  https://www.lung.org/lung-health-and-diseases/lung-disease-lookup/asthma/living-with-asthma/managing-asthma/measuring-your-peak-flow-rate.html  
 Peak flow meters. (2017).  https://www.aafa.org/peak-flow-meters/     How to use your peak flow meter. (n.d.)  https://getasthmahelp.org/peak-flow-how-to.aspx   Kamiya, K.,  et al.  (2012). Relationship between sensitivity to dyspnea and fluctuating peak expiratory flow rate in the absence of asthma symptoms.  https://synapse.koreamed.org/DOIx.php?id=10.5415/apallergy.2012.2.1.49   Measuring your peak flow rate. (2019).  https://www.lung.org/lung-health-and-diseases/lung-disease-lookup/asthma/living-with-asthma/managing-asthma/measuring-your-peak-flow-rate.html   Peak flow meters. (2017).  https://www.aafa.org/peak-flow-meters/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  de Pietro, MaryAnn. "Peak flow meters: A user's guide."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 23 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325830.php&gt;    APA  de Pietro, M. (2019, July 23). "Peak flow meters: A user's guide."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  