 Itchiness within the mouth can range from mild to severe, depending on the underlying issue.  In this article, we explore the causes of an itchy mouth. We also describe treatment options, strategies for prevention, and when to see a doctor.  Several conditions can cause itchiness within the mouth, including the following:  Oral allergy syndrome (OAS) is a type of  food allergy  that affects the mouth, lips, tongue, and throat. It occurs in people with pollen allergies.  OAS can, for example, cause a person with  hay fever  — or  allergic rhinitis  — to experience an allergic reaction to apples or celery.  Proteins in specific foods can be very similar to proteins in certain pollens. In a person with OAS, the body reacts to proteins in these foods as though they were proteins in pollen allergens. This misidentification could result in a new allergic reaction or cause existing allergy symptoms to intensify.  According to the  American Academy of Allergy, Asthma &amp; Immunology , OAS affects 50–75% of adults who are allergic to birch tree pollen.  Tingling and itching in the mouth are among the most common symptoms of food allergies, according to a  2015 small-scale review .  Other symptoms of OAS can include:   Foods  that can cause OAS reactions include:   Learn more about the causes and symptoms of OAS here .   Anaphylaxis  is another allergic reaction, but it is far more serious than OAS and requires immediate medical attention. People are at risk of anaphylaxis when their immune system becomes hypersensitive to acute allergens, such as bee stings, pollen, and certain foods.  Anaphylaxis affects the entire body and can cause low  blood pressure  and severe swelling. The dramatic drop in blood pressure can starve the organs and tissues of oxygen.  The swelling can affect the mouth and throat, making it difficult or even impossible to breathe.  Symptoms of anaphylaxis include:  Viruses that attack the upper respiratory tract, such as those responsible for the common cold or  flu , can cause an itchy mouth.  When a person gets a viral infection, the immune system sends specialized cells to capture and destroy the invading pathogens.  The buildup of immune cells can lead to  inflammation  and congestion, which can cause the roof of the mouth and the throat to feel itchy.  Viral infections can cause the following symptoms:   Oral thrush  is a fungal infection that occurs due to an overgrowth of  Candida  yeasts in the mucous membranes that line the mouth and throat.  Oral thrush causes thick, cream-colored patches on the tongue, inner cheeks, roof of the mouth, and throat. People may experience itching, burning, or general discomfort in the affected areas.  Other symptoms of oral thrush include:  The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  state that the following factors can increase a person's risk of developing oral thrush:   Here, find out more about oral thrush, including home remedies that can help .  Treatment options for an itchy mouth vary depending on the cause.  A mild allergic reaction may clear up on its own, either after the person spits out the food that is causing the reaction or once their body has finished digesting the allergenic proteins.  People can also take medications called antihistamines to treat symptoms such as:  A severe allergic reaction, such as anaphylaxis, requires immediate treatment. A person having a severe reaction can self-administer medication using an epinephrine auto-injector, sometimes called an EpiPen.  Epinephrine is a hormone that increases blood flow and relaxes the smooth muscles, which opens up the airways, helping a person breathe.  A doctor is likely to prescribe or recommend antifungal medications to treat oral thrush. Some examples include:  Anyone who thinks that they have an infection in their mouth should see a doctor.  If a person thinks that they could have a particular allergy, they can schedule an allergy test. During this test, a healthcare professional will scratch or prick the skin and introduce a small sample of the allergen into the area. If the person is allergic to the substance, their body will react.  Allergy tests help identify specific allergens to avoid. A doctor can use the results to make a diagnosis and, possibly, prescribe epinephrine.   Learn more about epinephrine here .  A physical examination and a culture test help a doctor diagnose oral thrush. During a culture test, a doctor often uses a cotton swab to collect a small sample from the patches in the mouth, which goes to a laboratory for analysis.  The doctor may also request a blood test to rule out any underlying conditions.  People can prevent allergic reactions by avoiding known allergens.  Preventing oral thrush can involve improving oral hygiene and making some lifestyle changes, such as:  An itchy mouth often results from a mild food allergy or an infection.  In the case of an allergy, the itchiness usually goes away when a person stops eating the food responsible for the reaction.  However, an itchy mouth can also be a symptom of a more severe and sometimes life threatening allergic reaction called anaphylaxis. Anyone experiencing anaphylaxis will need immediate medical treatment.    
  Candida  infections of the mouth, throat, and esophagus. (2019).  https://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/candidiasis/thrush/index.html  
 Kashyap, R. R., &amp; Kashyap, R. S. (2015). Oral allergy syndrome: An update for stomatologists.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4655061/  
 Moriyama, T. (2015). Diversity of food allergy.  https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/jnsv/61/Supplement/61_S106/_pdf  
 Oral allergy syndrome (OAS) or pollen fruit syndrome (PFS). (n.d.).  https://www.aaaai.org/conditions-and-treatments/library/allergy-library/outdoor-food-allergies-relate      Candida  infections of the mouth, throat, and esophagus. (2019).  https://www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/candidiasis/thrush/index.html   Kashyap, R. R., &amp; Kashyap, R. S. (2015). Oral allergy syndrome: An update for stomatologists.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4655061/   Moriyama, T. (2015). Diversity of food allergy.  https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/jnsv/61/Supplement/61_S106/_pdf   Oral allergy syndrome (OAS) or pollen fruit syndrome (PFS). (n.d.).  https://www.aaaai.org/conditions-and-treatments/library/allergy-library/outdoor-food-allergies-relate   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Eske, Jamie. "What to know about an itchy mouth."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325959.php&gt;    APA  Eske, J. (2019, August 6). "What to know about an itchy mouth."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  