 Cheek biting and the biting of other areas in the mouth affect  750 out of every 1 million people . Research suggests that this behavior is more common in females than in males.  Cheek biting can affect people of all ages, but it may be more likely in children. In an older survey from 2005, researchers showed that the prevalence of cheek and lip biting in children between the ages of 2 and 17 years in the United States was slightly  under 2% .  Keep reading to learn more about the causes and complications of cheek biting and when to see a doctor.  There are many reasons why people bite their cheek. Cheek biting can sometimes be a minor accident, but it may also be due to a  mental health  condition.  Careless chewing or talking while eating can sometimes result in someone biting their cheek accidentally. Accidental biting can cause injury and  inflammation  at the location of the bite.  If someone is regularly biting their cheek accidentally, they may wish to discuss it with a dentist. This symptom may be due to the teeth or implants becoming misaligned in the mouth. People with  temporomandibular disorders  may also frequently bite their cheeks.  People who chronically bite their cheek may be experiencing a  body-focused repetitive behavior . Cheek biting  may also occur during sleep .  Chronic cheek biting is a more serious condition that requires appropriate medical attention. The current  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders  ( DSM-5 )  includes  it among obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.  Other body-focused repetitive disorders include hair pulling, nail biting, and lip biting.  Unless the behavior is due to an ill-fitting dental device or another dental problem, chronic cheek biting often has a psychological cause.   Some researchers  think that body-focused repetitive behaviors may have a genetic factor. If this is the case, having an immediate family member, such as a parent or sibling, with body-focused repetitive behavior may increase a person's risk of the condition.  Researchers are currently trying to determine which genes may play a role in body-focused repetitive behaviors, which may help doctors diagnose and treat these behaviors in the future.  Many other factors may also contribute to a person developing chronic cheek biting. These include  stress , as well as emotional and environmental factors.  When someone repeatedly bites their cheek, the area can become thick, scarred, and paler than the surrounding tissue. Sometimes, the affected area may become inflamed with purple spots.  When the lining of the cheek becomes irregular, the person may have the desire to continue biting the area to try to create a smooth surface.  In more severe cases, dentists may notice  eroded tissue  in the cheek.  The complications of chronic cheek biting are not only physical. People who chronically bite their cheek may  stop engaging in social activities  to prevent others from observing the behavior.  Some people may feel shame, isolation, and low self-esteem in relation to their body-focused repetitive behaviors, which can affect their overall well-being.  If a person is regularly biting their cheek, they may want to speak to a dentist to ensure that their teeth or implants remain properly aligned. If necessary, the dentist may advise a person to visit an orthodontist, who can repair a misalignment to prevent regular cheek biting.  Sometimes a dentist will prescribe a mouthguard to a person who regularly bites their cheek. A mouthguard can prevent any further damage to the tissue and give it a chance to heal. Dentists will recommend using the mouthguard until the tissue has completely healed.  People who chronically bite the inside of their cheek should speak to a doctor about whether they have a body-focused repetitive behavior.  A doctor may suggest one of the following types of therapy:  Sometimes, doctors may recommend medication in addition to psychotherapy.  The most effective treatment that a person can receive is one that addresses both the behavior and the underlying cause. A therapist will help a person discover what is driving their need to chew their cheeks and develop a plan for managing the cause.  There is  no robust evidence  to show that special diets, electrical stimulation, hypnosis, massage, or other practices are effective in treating body-focused repetitive behaviors.  If a person is regularly biting their cheek by accident, they should consult a dentist. The dentist will be able to determine the reason and help correct any misalignments.  Chronic cheek biting requires medical attention to address the cause of the behavior. Some people for whom cheek biting is a self-injurious behavior are unaware of the problem and  may not seek medical attention .  The loved ones of a person with body-focused repetitive behaviors can maintain a supportive relationship with the individual and encourage them to speak with a doctor or therapist if they have concerns.  Cheek biting may occasionally be a harmless accident or the result of misaligned teeth, but many people experience chronic cheek biting. Chronic cheek biting is a body-focused repetitive behavior that relates to  obsessive-compulsive disorder .  Doctors prescribe psychotherapy to help people resolve chronic cheek biting. Sometimes, people may also need to take medications.  The complications of chronic cheek biting are not only physical. Many people feel shame and low self-esteem because of this behavior, which may lead them to avoid social and career-related interests.  A therapist will aim to treat both the chronic cheek biting and the underlying cause of the behavior.    
 Afrashtehfar, K. I., &amp; Belser, U. C. (2018). Prevention and management of cheek and/or tongue biting related to posterior implant-supported fixed dental prostheses (ISFDPs) [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29855110  
 Alzahem, A. M. (2017). Cheek bite keratosis among temporomandibular disorder patients.  http://www.jidonline.com/article.asp?issn=2229-5194;year=2017;volume=7;issue=3;spage=87;epage=90;aulast=Alzahem  
 Bhatia, S. K.,  et al.  (2013). Habitual biting of oral mucosa: A conservative treatment approach.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3793567/  
 Golomb, R.,  et al.  (2016). Expert consensus treatment guidelines. Body-focused repetitive behaviors: Hair pulling, skin picking, and related disorders.  https://www.bfrb.org/storage/documents/Expert_Consensus_Treatment_Guidelines_2016w.pdf  
 Traube, M. (n.d.). About chronic cheek biting.  https://www.bfrb.org/learn-about-bfrbs/cheek-biting     Afrashtehfar, K. I., &amp; Belser, U. C. (2018). Prevention and management of cheek and/or tongue biting related to posterior implant-supported fixed dental prostheses (ISFDPs) [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29855110   Alzahem, A. M. (2017). Cheek bite keratosis among temporomandibular disorder patients.  http://www.jidonline.com/article.asp?issn=2229-5194;year=2017;volume=7;issue=3;spage=87;epage=90;aulast=Alzahem   Bhatia, S. K.,  et al.  (2013). Habitual biting of oral mucosa: A conservative treatment approach.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3793567/   Golomb, R.,  et al.  (2016). Expert consensus treatment guidelines. Body-focused repetitive behaviors: Hair pulling, skin picking, and related disorders.  https://www.bfrb.org/storage/documents/Expert_Consensus_Treatment_Guidelines_2016w.pdf   Traube, M. (n.d.). About chronic cheek biting.  https://www.bfrb.org/learn-about-bfrbs/cheek-biting   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Caporuscio, Jessica. "Everything you need to know about cheek biting."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325985.php&gt;    APA  Caporuscio, J. (2019, August 7). "Everything you need to know about cheek biting."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  