 The human body does not store zinc, so a person has to get enough from their daily diet. They can also take supplements, if necessary.  In this article, learn about the benefits of zinc and which foods to eat to ensure adequate intake.  The  National Institutes of Health (NIH)  recommend the following daily intake of zinc:  It is well known that of all food types, oysters contain the most zinc per serving. However,  most people  get their zinc from poultry and red meat.  Food manufacturers may also fortify foods with zinc to help a person meet their daily requirements.  Examples of foods high in zinc  include :  Other zinc sources in a person's diet include low fat yogurt,  pumpkin seeds , milk,  chickpeas , instant oatmeal,  almonds , and Cheddar cheese.  These all contain around 1–2 mg of zinc per serving.  Without proper planning, vegan and vegetarian diets can result in deficiencies in nutrients such as  vitamin  B-12, iron,  calcium , iodine,  vitamin D , and zinc.  Examples of vegan and vegetarian friendly foods that are high in zinc include:  Vegetable based zinc sources are not as bioavailable as animal based sources, which means that the body does not absorb zinc from vegetarian sources as effectively.  According to  2017 research , a person eating a vegetarian or vegan diet may need to consume 50% more zinc than people who regularly eat animal products.  This means that male vegans and vegetarians may need to eat about 16.5 mg of zinc each day, while females following these eating patterns should eat up to 12 mg per day.  If a person chooses to supplement their diet with zinc, they may wish to avoid taking it at the same time as supplements of  calcium ,  copper ,  folic acid , iron, and  magnesium . This is because these nutrients can affect how the body absorbs zinc.  Zinc plays a role in several bodily functions, including:  According to the  NIH , most children and adults consume enough zinc. Older adults, however, may not get the recommended intake.  Some of the symptoms associated with zinc deficiency include:  Doctors do not have an easy blood test to determine if a person is zinc deficient. Instead, they will often consider the person's symptoms and average dietary intakes when determining if they are zinc deficient.  Conversely, a person can also experience zinc toxicity from excess zinc supplementation. However, eating foods high in zinc — even in large amounts — does not usually cause symptoms.  Symptoms of zinc toxicity include:  Zinc is present in many natural foods, and many manufacturers add zinc to foods such as cereals.  Meat based products are usually higher in bioavailable zinc. If a person does not eat meat, they may need to make an effort to increase their zinc intake through eating beans, seeds, and oats, among other zinc-containing foods.  Although zinc deficiencies are rare in the United States, people should always speak to a doctor if they have concerns about their nutrient intake.  People can find zinc supplements at their local pharmacy, drugstore, and  online .  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Rogerson, D. (2017). Vegan diet: Practical advice for athletes and exercisers.  https://jissn.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12970-017-0192-9?sf114327445=1  
 Zinc. (2013).  https://www.crnusa.org/sites/default/files/files/resources/32-CRNVMS3-ZINC.pdf  
 Zinc: Fact sheet for health professionals. (2019).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Zinc-HealthProfessional/     Rogerson, D. (2017). Vegan diet: Practical advice for athletes and exercisers.  https://jissn.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12970-017-0192-9?sf114327445=1   Zinc. (2013).  https://www.crnusa.org/sites/default/files/files/resources/32-CRNVMS3-ZINC.pdf   Zinc: Fact sheet for health professionals. (2019).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Zinc-HealthProfessional/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nall, Rachel. "The top foods high in zinc."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325916.php&gt;    APA  Nall, R. (2019, July 31). "The top foods high in zinc."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  