 Lantus is a brand-name prescription medication. It's used to improve blood sugar levels in:  Lantus contains the drug  insulin  glargine, which is a long-acting insulin.  Lantus is given as an injection just under your skin (subcutaneous injection). The drug comes in the form of a solution (liquid mixture). The solution is in a 10 mL vial that has 100 units of insulin glargine per mL. The vial is used with needles, which aren't included with the vial.  Lantus also comes as a prefilled SoloStar pen. Each pen contains 3 mL of drug solution that has 100 units of insulin per mL of solution.  Lantus has been found effective at improving blood sugar levels in people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes.  In  clinical studies , Lantus was tested with mealtime insulin in adults with type 1 diabetes. After 28 weeks of treatment, Lantus reduced fasting blood sugar levels by 20 to 21 mg/dL. Fasting blood sugar levels are tested after waking up in the morning or after not eating for 8 to 12 hours.  In a 28-week  clinical study  involving children with type 1 diabetes, Lantus reduced fasting blood sugar levels by 23 mg/dL.  Lantus has also been found effective in treating type 2 diabetes in adults. In a year-long  clinical study , Lantus taken with an oral (by mouth)  diabetes  medication reduced fasting blood sugar levels by 49 mg/dL.  Lantus is available only as a brand-name medication. It doesn't currently have a generic form.  Lantus contains the active drug insulin glargine.  Although there isn't a generic form of Lantus, a "follow-on" insulin glargine product called Basaglar is available. Follow-on insulins are biologic products (made from parts of living organisms) that are highly similar to the original brand-name drug. However, follow-ons aren't considered true generic drugs. This is because the way biologic drugs are made is very complex and can't create true copies of the original drug.  Basaglar is made with the same type of insulin as Lantus, so it's a follow-on to Lantus. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) considers follow-on drugs to be just as safe and effective as the original brand-name version.  Lantus can cause mild or serious side effects. The following lists contain some of the key side effects that may occur while taking Lantus. These lists don't include all possible side effects.  For more information on the possible side effects of Lantus, talk with your doctor or pharmacist. They can give you tips on how to deal with any side effects that may be bothersome.  The more common side effects of Lantus can include:  Most of these side effects may go away within a few days or a couple of weeks. If they're more severe or don't go away, talk with your doctor or pharmacist.  Serious side effects from Lantus aren't common, but they can occur. Call your doctor right away if you have serious side effects. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.  Serious side effects and their symptoms can include the following:  You may wonder how often certain side effects occur with this drug. Here's some detail on some of the side effects this drug may cause.   Allergic reaction   As with most drugs, some people can have an allergic reaction after taking Lantus. Symptoms of a mild allergic reaction can include:  A more severe allergic reaction is rare but possible. Symptoms of a severe allergic reaction can include:  Call your doctor right away if you have a severe allergic reaction to Lantus. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.   Weight gain   Weight gain is one of the most common side effects of Lantus. In  clinical studies , the average weight gain was:  Weight gain is a common side effect seen with all insulins, not just Lantus. This is a normal healthy process because insulin causes your body to store sugar for future energy needs.  If you're concerned about weight gain while taking Lantus, talk with your healthcare team. They can suggest helpful diet and exercise tips.   Hypoglycemia   Hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) is one of the most common side effects of Lantus and other insulins.  It's important to be aware of the symptoms of low blood sugar so you can fix it before it becomes severe. Symptoms of mild low blood sugar include:  If your blood sugar levels get and stay too low, your symptoms can become a medical emergency. Symptoms of severe hypoglycemia (very low blood sugar) can include sweating, confusion, anxiety, seizure, and even  coma .   Clinical studies  looked at adults who took Lantus for type 1 diabetes. A 16-week study found that 6.5% of the adults experienced at least one episode of severe hypoglycemia. And a 28-week study found that 10.6% of adults experienced severe hypoglycemia at least once.  Another  study  looked at children who took Lantus for type 1 diabetes. In this group, 23% of the children had an episode of severe hypoglycemia over a six-month period.  In a five-year  clinical study  in adults with type 2 diabetes, 7.8% of them had a severe hypoglycemic episode while taking Lantus with regular insulin.  If your blood sugar is low, try to fix it right away. Eat or drink  carbohydrates  that are easy to digest so they can raise your blood sugar quickly. Examples of these foods or drinks include:  If you're at risk for frequent episodes of low blood sugar, talk with your doctor. They may give you a prescription for glucagon (a hormone) to quickly raise your blood sugar levels in an emergency.  Side effects of Lantus in children are similar to those seen in adults.  However, in  clinical studies  of people with type 1 diabetes who took Lantus, children had more episodes of hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) than adults. In the 26-week study, 23% of children had at least one episode of severe low blood sugar. This was compared to 10.6% of adults in a 28-week study.  If you're a parent or caregiver of a child who takes Lantus, know the symptoms of hypoglycemia. This will help you notice when your child needs to consume foods or drinks to quickly raise their blood sugar. By aiding your child right away, you can help prevent a medical emergency.  Other drugs are available that can treat your condition. Some may be better suited for you than others. If you're interested in finding an alternative to Lantus, talk with your doctor. They can tell you about other medications that may work well for you.  There are several different types of drugs that can be used to improve blood sugar levels for people with diabetes. Your doctor will prescribe the best medication for you based on several factors, including:  People with type 1 diabetes need insulin treatment because their bodies don't make insulin on their own. People with type 2 diabetes may need insulin treatment if other diabetes drugs aren't working or if their bodies stop making insulin.  There are also several non-insulin treatment options that may help improve blood sugar levels in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.  Note: Some of the drugs listed here are used off-label to treat these specific conditions.  Examples of other insulins that may be used to improve blood sugar levels in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes include:  Several premixed insulin products are also available. They contain long-acting insulins and shorter-acting insulins. These combination medications help control baseline blood sugar levels and any blood sugar spikes that can occur around mealtime.  Examples of non-insulin diabetes medications that can be used to improve blood sugar levels in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes include:  There are also combination medications that contain insulin. They can be used to improve blood sugar levels in people with type 2 diabetes, including:  You may wonder how Lantus compares to other medications that are prescribed for similar uses. Here we look at how Lantus and Levemir are alike and different.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved both Lantus and Levemir to improve blood sugar levels in children and adults with type 1 diabetes. Lantus is approved for children ages 6 years and older with type 1 diabetes. Levemir is approved for children ages 2 years and older with type 1 diabetes.  Lantus is approved to treat adults with type 2 diabetes. Levemir is approved to treat both children and adults with type 2 diabetes.  Lantus and Levemir are both long-acting insulins. This means that they work the same way in the body. They both help control blood sugar levels for up to 24 hours or longer.  Lantus contains the drug insulin glargine. Levemir contains the drug insulin detemir.  Lantus and Levemir are both solutions (liquid mixtures).  The two drugs come in two different forms:  The Lantus pen is called Lantus Solostar. It contains 3 mL of solution with 100 units of insulin per mL.  The Levemir pen is called Levemir FlexTouch. It also contains 3 mL of solution with 100 units of insulin per mL.  Lantus and Levemir are both given as an injection just under your skin (subcutaneous injection).  Lantus is typically given once a day. Levemir is given once or twice a day.  Lantus and Levemir both contain long-acting insulins. Therefore, both medications can cause very similar side effects. Below are examples of these side effects.   More common side effects   This list contains examples of more common side effects that can occur with both Lantus and Levemir (when taken individually):   Serious side effects   This list contains examples of serious side effects that can occur with both Lantus and Levemir (when taken individually):  Lantus and Levemir have different FDA-approved uses. But they're both used to treat adults and children with type 1 diabetes and adults with type 2 diabetes.  A  review of studies  found that Lantus and Levemir were equally effective at improving blood sugar levels in adults with type 1 diabetes. There was also no difference in the risk of low blood sugar episodes between the two drugs.  The  review of studies  also looked at people with type 2 diabetes. The analysis found no difference between Lantus and Levemir in improving blood sugar levels or in the rates of low blood sugar episodes.  Lantus and Levemir are both brand-name drugs. There are currently no generic forms of either drug. Brand-name medications usually cost more than generics.  According to estimates on  GoodRx.com , Levemir may cost more than Lantus. The actual price you'll pay for either drug will depend on your dose, your insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  You may wonder how Lantus compares to other medications that are prescribed for similar uses. Here we look at how Lantus and Basaglar are alike and different.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved both Lantus and Basaglar to improve blood sugar levels in children (ages 6 and older) and adults with type 1 diabetes.  Both drugs are also approved to improve blood sugar levels in adults with type 2 diabetes.  Lantus and Basaglar both contain insulin glargine.  Basaglar is called an insulin follow-on drug to Lantus. This means that Basaglar is a biologic product (made from parts of living organisms) that is highly similar to Lantus. The FDA considers follow-on drugs to be just as effective and safe as the original brand-name version of the drug.  Lantus and Basaglar both come as a solution (liquid mixture) in a disposable, prefilled pen.  The Lantus pen is called Lantus SoloStar. The Basaglar pen is called Basaglar KwikPen.  The Lantus SoloStar and Basaglar KwikPen pens each contain 3 mL of solution with 100 units of insulin per mL.  Lantus also comes in a 10-mL vial that contains 100 units of insulin per mL.  Lantus and Basaglar are both given as an injection just under your skin (subcutaneous injection). The drugs are typically given once a day.  Lantus and Basaglar both contain insulin glargine. Therefore, both medications can cause very similar side effects. Below are examples of these side effects.   More common side effects   These lists contain examples of more common side effects that can occur with Lantus, with Basaglar, or with both drugs (when taken individually).   Serious side effects   This list contains examples of serious side effects that can occur with both Lantus and Basaglar (when taken individually):  Lantus and Basaglar are both FDA-approved to lower blood sugar levels in adults and children with type 1 diabetes. They are also both approved to lower blood sugar levels in adults with type 2 diabetes.  The use of Lantus and Basaglar for type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes has been directly compared. In a  one-year study , Lantus and Basaglar were found to be equally effective at improving blood sugar levels in people with type 1 diabetes. The people had similar rates of hypoglycemia (low blood sugar), allergic reactions, and changes in weight. In this study, both drugs were used in combination with mealtime insulin.  In another  clinical study , Lantus and Basaglar helped control blood sugar levels about equally well in people with type 2 diabetes. The drugs were used in combination with oral (taken by mouth) medications for six months.  Lantus and Basaglar are both brand-name drugs. There are currently no generic forms of either drug. Brand-name medications usually cost more than generics.  According to estimates on  GoodRx.com , Basaglar may cost less than Lantus. The actual price you'll pay for either drug will depend on your dose, your insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  You may wonder how Lantus compares to other medications that are prescribed for similar uses. Here we look at how Lantus and Tresiba are alike and different.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved both Lantus and Tresiba to improve blood sugar levels in people with diabetes.  Lantus is approved for people ages 6 years and older with type 1 diabetes and for adults with type 2 diabetes.  Tresiba is approved for people ages 1 year and older with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.  Lantus contains the drug insulin glargine. It comes in two forms:  Tresiba contains the drug insulin degludec. It comes in:  Both Lantus and Tresiba are given as an injection just under your skin (subcutaneous injection). They're typically given once a day.  Lantus and Tresiba both contain long-acting insulins. Therefore, both medications can cause very similar side effects. Below are examples of these side effects.   More common side effects   This list contains examples of more common side effects that can occur with both Lantus and Tresiba (when taken individually):   Serious side effects   This list contains examples of serious side effects that can occur with both Lantus and Tresiba (when taken individually):  Lantus and Tresiba are both FDA-approved to improve blood sugar levels in people with type 1 and type 2 diabetes.  The use of Lantus and Tresiba in treating type 1 diabetes has been directly compared in several clinical studies. In a  pooled analysis  of these studies, Lantus and Tresiba were found to be equally effective at improving blood sugar levels in adults with type 1 diabetes. However, the analysis found that people who took Tresiba were 32% less likely to have low blood sugar levels at night.  Another  clinical study  found no difference in blood sugar level improvements between Lantus and Tresiba in children with type 1 diabetes.  The use of Lantus and Tresiba in treating type 2 diabetes has also been directly compared. A  pooled analysis  of nine studies found that Lantus and Tresiba improved blood sugar levels to a similar degree in adults with type 2 diabetes. However, there was a lower risk of severe low blood sugar and low blood sugar at night with Tresiba.  Lantus and Tresiba are both brand-name drugs. There are currently no generic forms of either drug. Brand-name medications usually cost more than generics.  According to estimates on  GoodRx.com , Lantus may cost less than Tresiba. The actual price you'll pay for either drug will depend on your dose, your insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  Lantus may be used with other diabetes medications, including other injectable drugs or medications taken by mouth.  People with type 1 diabetes will need to take Lantus along with a mealtime insulin. This is because Lantus is a basal insulin, a "background" insulin that helps control blood sugar levels in between meals. A mealtime insulin is needed to control spikes in blood sugar that occur after eating.  Examples of mealtime insulins that may be taken along with Lantus include:  People with type 2 diabetes will also likely need to take other diabetes medications besides Lantus. There are several different types of injectable or oral (taken by mouth) medications that your doctor may prescribe. These drugs lower your blood sugar further and help prevent serious complications, such as nerve damage.  The Lantus dosage your doctor prescribes will depend on several factors. These include:  Typically, your doctor will start you on a low dosage. Then they'll adjust it over time to reach the amount that's right for you. Your doctor will ultimately prescribe the smallest dosage that provides the desired effect.  The following information describes dosages that are commonly used or recommended.  However, be sure to take the dosage your doctor prescribes for you . Your doctor will determine the best dosage to suit your needs.  Lantus comes in two forms: a vial and a disposable, prefilled pen.  Each vial of Lantus contains 3 mL of solution (liquid mixture). Each mL contains 100 units of insulin glargine. So there's a total of 300 units of insulin glargine in each vial.  The disposable, prefilled pen of Lantus is called SoloStar. Each pen contains 3 mL of solution. There are 100 units of insulin glargine in each mL. That adds up to a total of 300 units of insulin per Lantus SoloStar pen.  Lantus SoloStar pens come in a package of five.  Needles aren't included in the packages of either form of Lantus.  The Lantus vial and Lantus SoloStar pen are each meant to be used more than once. The number of times will be different for each person, depending on your dosage. You can use the vials and pens for up to 28 days after you open them. After that time, you should dispose of the vial or pen, even if it still contains some of the drug.  You should use each needle only once.  If you have type 1 diabetes, the starting dose of Lantus is generally about one-third of your total daily insulin dose.  Your total daily insulin dose is based on your weight. It typically ranges from 0.4 to 1.0 units/kg a day.  For example, a 150-lb. man weighs about 68 kg. If his doctor prescribes 0.5 units/kg a day, his total daily insulin dose would be 34 units a day. His starting dose of Lantus would be about one-third of 34 units, which is about 11 units of Lantus.  Lantus is typically taken once a day. The drug is given as an injection just under your skin (subcutaneous). You can inject Lantus in the skin of your upper arms, belly (at least 2 inches away from your belly button), or thighs.  The usual starting dose of Lantus for people with type 2 diabetes is 0.2 units/kg. The maximum starting dose of Lantus is 10 units a day.  The drug is given once a day, as an injection just under your skin (subcutaneous). You can inject in the skin of your upper arms, belly (at least 2 inches away from your belly button), or thighs.  The usual starting dose of Lantus for children with type 1 diabetes is calculated in the same way as for adults.  The dosage of Lantus for these children is about one-third of their total daily insulin dose. The total daily dose is based on the child's weight. It ranges from 0.4 to 1.0 units/kg a day.  For example, a 60-lb. child weights about 27 kg. If her doctor prescribes 0.5 units/kg a day, her total daily insulin dose would be about 14 units a day. The child's starting dose of Lantus would be about one-third of 14 units, which is about 5 units.  Lantus is given as an injection just under your skin (subcutaneous injection), once a day. You can inject it in your upper arms, belly (at least 2 inches away from your belly button), or thighs.  If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it's almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and go back to your normal schedule.  Don't take more than one dose in 24 hours unless your doctor tells you to. This could increase your risk for serious side effects, such as hypoglycemia (low blood sugar).   Medication reminders  can help make sure that you don't miss a dose.  You might. Lantus is typically used for long-term treatment of diabetes. If your doctor decides that Lantus is effective and safe for you, you'll probably use it long term.  As with all medications, the cost of Lantus can vary. To find current prices for Lantus in your area, check out  GoodRx.com.   The cost you find on  GoodRx.com  is what you may pay without insurance. The actual price you'll pay depends on your insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  If you need financial support to pay for Lantus, help is available.  Sanofi-Aventis US LLC, the manufacturer of Lantus, offers a copay savings card and a program called Valyou Savings Program. For more information on these options, and to find out if you're eligible for one of them, visit the  manufacturer's website .  If you have  Medicare  Part D, you can check to see if your insurance plan covers Lantus at the manufacturer's  website .  There's no known interaction between Lantus and alcohol. However, drinking too much alcohol while taking Lantus can increase your risk for hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). This is because both alcohol and Lantus can lower blood sugar levels on their own.  Ask your doctor about how much alcohol is safe for you to drink.  Lantus can interact with several other medications. It can also interact with certain supplements as well as certain foods.  Different interactions can cause different effects. For instance, some interactions can interfere with how well a drug works. Other interactions can increase side effects or make them more severe.  Below is a list of medications that can interact with Lantus. This list doesn't contain all drugs that may interact with Lantus.  Before taking Lantus, talk with your doctor and pharmacist. Tell them about all prescription, over-the-counter, and other drugs you take. Also tell them about any  vitamins , herbs, and supplements you use. Sharing this information can help you avoid potential interactions.  If you have questions about drug interactions that may affect you, ask your doctor or pharmacist.   Lantus and diabetes medications   Lantus can interact in different ways with different diabetes medications.    Lantus and certain diabetes medications    Taking Lantus with other diabetes medications can increase your risk for hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). If you take Lantus with other diabetes drugs, your doctor may need to adjust your dosage of one or all of them to reduce your risk for low blood sugar. They may also want you to monitor your blood sugar levels more often.  Examples of other diabetes medications that can increase your risk for low blood sugar if taken with Lantus include:    Lantus and diabetes drugs called thiazolidinediones    Taking Lantus with thiazolidinediones can cause  heart failure , or worsen heart failure if you already have it. If you take a thiazolidinedione, be sure to discuss it with your doctor before you start treatment with Lantus. If you take one of these drugs with Lantus, your doctor will likely monitor you for signs of heart failure.  Examples of thiazolidinediones include:   Lantus and certain blood pressure medications   Taking Lantus with certain  blood pressure  medications can increase your risk for hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). If you take Lantus with one of these drugs, your doctor may need to adjust the dosage of either Lantus or the blood pressure medication. They may also want you to monitor your blood sugar levels more often.  Examples of blood pressure medications that can increase your risk for low blood sugar if taken with Lantus include:  Taking Lantus with other types of blood pressure medications can hide the symptoms of low blood sugar when they occur. This can put you at risk for severe hypoglycemia (very low blood sugar) with little warning. If you take Lantus with any of these drugs, your doctor may want you to check your blood sugar levels more often.  Examples of these medications include:   Lantus and certain antipsychotic medications   Taking Lantus with certain antipsychotics can decrease how well Lantus works. This can lead to high blood sugar levels and an increased risk of complications from diabetes. If you're taking Lantus with one of these medications, your doctor may increase your dose of Lantus. They may also recommend that you check your blood sugar levels more often.  Examples of antipsychotics that can decrease how well Lantus works include:   Lantus and corticosteroids   Taking Lantus with corticosteroids can decrease how well Lantus works. This could increase your blood sugar levels, leading to a higher risk of serious complications, such as  heart disease . If you're taking Lantus with a corticosteroid, your doctor may increase your dose of Lantus. They will also advise you to check your blood sugar levels more often.  Examples of corticosteroids that can decrease how well Lantus works include:  Lantus is a long-acting insulin that lowers blood sugar levels in people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Lantus is made to work like natural insulin in your body. Insulin is a hormone that does the following:  This is how your body keeps your blood sugar at a safe level.  In type 1 diabetes, your pancreas doesn't make insulin. So you take medication, such as Lantus, to replace the insulin.  In type 2 diabetes, your body's cells don't respond to insulin the way they should. Your pancreas may also stop making insulin, which would need to be replaced with medication. You may also need insulin if other drugs can't control your blood sugar levels.  Lantus replaces naturally occurring insulin for people with type 1 or type 2 diabetes.  Lantus starts lowering blood sugar levels within a few hours. It's a long-acting insulin that's meant to help control blood sugar levels over 24 hours or longer. After you inject Lantus, the drug forms clusters beneath your skin. As these clusters break down, insulin is slowly released into your bloodstream throughout the 24-hour period. However, each person's body will respond differently to Lantus.  Lantus doesn't work right away, like rapid-acting mealtime insulins do. So Lantus shouldn't be used in emergency situations.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves prescription drugs such as Lantus to treat certain conditions.  Lantus is FDA-approved to improve blood sugar levels in adults with type 2 diabetes.  Type 2 diabetes is a chronic (long-term) condition where your cells don't respond to insulin as well as they should. Insulin is a hormone that enables sugar to pass from your blood into your cells. Because your cells don't react to insulin the right way, they can't get the energy they need to work properly. In addition, sugar levels build up in your blood. If not treated, this can lead to serious complications such as nerve damage.  Some people with type 2 diabetes need to take insulin because their body stops making insulin on its own.  Lantus is approved by the FDA to improve blood sugar levels in adults and children with type 1 diabetes.  Type 1 diabetes is a chronic (long-term) condition where your pancreas doesn't make insulin. Your body needs the hormone insulin to bring sugar into your cells, where sugar is used for energy. Without insulin, your cells can't get the energy they need to work properly. It also leads to high blood sugar levels, which can cause serious problems if not treated.  People with type 1 diabetes need to take insulin to survive.  Lantus is FDA-approved to improve blood sugar levels in children with type 1 diabetes.  Many people with type 1 diabetes are diagnosed with the condition when they're a child.  You should take Lantus according to your doctor or healthcare provider's instructions.  Lantus is given as an injection just under your skin (subcutaneous injection), once a day. When you first get your Lantus prescription, your healthcare provider will explain how to inject the medication yourself.  Lantus comes in two forms:  The solution in the vial is injected using a syringe and needle. Needles aren't included in the package.  The SoloStar pen also uses needles, which aren't included in the package. The manufacturer of Lantus recommends using BD Ultra-Fine needles.  Your doctor will discuss whether the vial or SoloStar pen is right for you. Whether you use a syringe or the Solostar pen, never reuse a needle or share a needle with another person. This helps prevent the spread of germs.  Below is information on how to use the vial and syringe, and SoloStar pen. You can also visit the manufacturer's  site  for helpful images, a video, and more.  If you're going to inject Lantus using a syringe and vial, follow these steps.   Gathering supplies and preparing the vial   Before you inject Lantus, first collect your supplies and get the vial ready.   Preparing your dose   Once you have your supplies and cleaned the vial, you're ready to fill the syringe.   Choosing your injection spot   Now you're ready to prepare the part of your body where you'll give yourself the injection.   Injecting Lantus using a syringe   It's time to give yourself the Lantus injection.  If your doctor wants you to use a Lantus SoloStar pen, follow these steps.   Preparing the pen   Here's how to get your Lantus SoloStar pen ready for use.   Attaching a needle to the pen   Once the pen is at room temperature and you've prepared it, you're ready to attach the needle.   Testing the pen   Before you use the SoloStar pen, test it to make sure it's working properly. Don't worry about wasting the drug. It's important to test the pen to help ensure that it delivers the right amount of medication for your dose.   Setting the dose   Now that you know your pen is working correctly, set the dose your doctor recommended.   Choosing your injection area   Now you're ready to prepare the part of your body where you'll give yourself the injection.   Injecting Lantus using the Lantus SoloStar pen   It's time to give yourself an injection with the Lantus SoloStar pen.   Removing the needle   Now that you've given yourself the injection, you need to remove the needle from the pen.  You can take Lantus at any time, but it should be at the same time each day. Ask your doctor what time is best for you. They'll base the timing on how your blood sugar levels change throughout the day and night.   Medication reminders  can help make sure that you don't miss a dose.  You don't need to eat food when you inject Lantus.  Taking too much Lantus can increase your risk for serious side effects.  Symptoms of an overdose can include:  If you think you've taken too much of this drug, call your doctor. You can also call the American Association of Poison Control Centers at 800-222-1222 or use their  online tool .  But if your symptoms are severe, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room right away .  There aren't enough studies of Lantus use during human pregnancy to know exactly how safe it is.  However, according to the  American Diabetes Association , insulin therapy (such as Lantus) is the first-choice option for diabetes treatment during pregnancy. It's recommended for women who had diabetes before they were pregnant. Insulin therapy is also recommended for women who developed diabetes while pregnant (called gestational diabetes).  If you need treatment to help control your blood sugar levels during pregnancy, talk with your doctor. They'll recommend the right type of insulin for you.  If you're already taking insulin, such as Lantus, when you become pregnant, your doctor may recommend dosage changes. This can help keep your blood sugar levels in a safe range for you and your baby.  Lantus is generally considered safe to take while you're breastfeeding.  However, you may need a different dose of Lantus for a time after you give birth. This is due to changes in your body and changes in your sleep and mealtime schedules.  If you're considering breastfeeding while taking Lantus, talk with your doctor about the best dosage for you.  Here are answers to some frequently asked questions about Lantus.  You might. Lantus is a long-acting insulin that's meant work over the course of an entire day. Long-acting insulin is typically called basal or "background" insulin because it helps control blood sugar levels between meals and overnight while you sleep.  However, Lantus isn't typically used to control blood sugar spikes after meals. You may need a rapid-acting insulin, short-acting insulin, or intermediate-acting insulin to fine-tune your blood sugar level control. Many people who use a long-acting insulin such as Lantus will also need rapid-acting or short-acting insulin to control blood sugar levels after meals.  If you do take more than one type of insulin, don't mix Lantus in the same syringe with any other insulins. This could change how well the insulins work.  If you have any questions about when or how to take each type of insulin, talk with your doctor or pharmacist.  The best time to take Lantus depends on how your blood sugar levels change throughout the day.  In  clinical studies , blood sugar levels were reduced to a similar degree whether people took Lantus in the morning or evening.  Your doctor will monitor how your blood sugar levels change throughout the day. Then they'll recommend the best time for you to take Lantus.  It can. Hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) is one of the most common side effects of insulin products, including Lantus.  Some factors that can increase your risk for hypoglycemia are:  It's important to know the symptoms of low blood sugar, so you can treat it before it becomes serious. Severe hypoglycemia (very low blood sugar) can be life-threatening if not treated right away.  Some symptoms of low blood sugar include:  Talk with your doctor or pharmacist about creating a plan to prevent and manage low blood sugar.  No. Lantus isn't used to treat diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).  DKA is a serious complication of diabetes. It occurs when your blood sugar levels are very high but your insulin levels are low. Because insulin isn't available to move sugar into your cells, they can't use the sugar as fuel. Instead, your body starts breaking down fat into ketones (a certain type of protein) for energy. High levels of ketones make your blood more acidic, which can harm many organs in your body.  DKA treatment takes place in a hospital setting. Treatment involves using insulin to bring sugar into your cells. However, Lantus isn't the best type of insulin for this process because it takes too long to start working. Faster-acting insulins such as insulin aspart (Fiasp, Novolog), insulin glulisine (Apidra), or insulin lispro (Admelog, Humalog) are typically used as part of DKA treatment.  This drug comes with several warnings.  Before taking Lantus, talk with your doctor about your health history. Lantus may not be right for you if you have certain medical conditions. These include:  Note: For more information about the potential negative effects of Lantus, see the "Lantus side effects" section above.  When you get Lantus from the pharmacy, the pharmacist will add an expiration date to the label on the bottle. This date is typically one year from the date they dispensed the medication.  The expiration date helps guarantee the effectiveness of the medication during this time. The  current stance  of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is to avoid using expired medications. If you have unused medication that has gone past the expiration date, talk to your pharmacist about whether you might still be able to use it.  How long a medication remains good can depend on many factors, including how and where you store the medication.   Storing unopened vials   You can store unopened Lantus vials in your refrigerator until the expiration date listed on the package. You can also store them at room temperature for 28 days.   Storing opened vials   Once you open a Lantus vial, you can store it at room temperature or in the refrigerator for 28 days.   Storing unopened pens   You can store unopened Lantus SoloStar pens in the refrigerator until the expiration date listed on the package. You can also store them for 28 days at room temperature.   Storing opened pens   Once you open a Lantus SoloStar pen, you can store it for 28 days at room temperature. You shouldn't store opened Lantus SoloStar pens in the refrigerator.  You should never freeze Lantus vials and SoloStar pens. Also, keep them out of direct heat and light.  Once you've used a syringe or pen to inject Lantus, discard the needle right away. Put it in a hard container, such as a sharps disposal container. You can get an  FDA-approved sharps container  at your pharmacy, through medical supply companies, or online. Find a local program that will take your sharps disposal container when it's full.  If you don't have a sharps container, put used needles and empty pens in a puncture-resistant plastic container. Make sure the needles can't poke through the container.  Examples of containers that you can use include metal  coffee  cans and used laundry detergent bottles. Put a label on the container to warn people that there are needles inside. Be sure to keep a lid on the container at all times and store it away from children and pets.  If you no longer need to take Lantus and have leftover medication, it's important to dispose of it safely. This helps prevent others, including children and pets, from taking the drug by accident. It also helps keep the drug from harming the environment.  The  FDA website  provides several useful tips on medication disposal. You can also ask your pharmacist for information on how to dispose of your medication.  The following information is provided for clinicians and other healthcare professionals.  Lantus (insulin glargine) is indicated to improve blood glucose control in adults and children with type 1 diabetes and in adults with type 2 diabetes.  Lantus is a long-acting analog of human insulin engineered to be less soluble at physiological pH, causing crystallization at the injection site, a delay in absorption, and prolongation of action.  Lantus exerts its hypoglycemic effects by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and inhibiting hepatic gluconeogenesis. It also prevents fat and protein degradation while stimulating protein synthesis.  Following subcutaneous injection, absorption of Lantus is relatively constant over a 24-hour period. There is no pronounced peak concentration.  Lantus is partly metabolized in the subcutaneous depot to two active metabolites, which have similar activity to human insulin. Median time to end of pharmacological effect is 24 hours.  Lantus is contraindicated for use during hypoglycemic episodes. It's also contraindicated for people with a history of hypersensitivity to Lantus or any of the product's excipients.  Unopened Lantus vials and SoloStar pens should be stored at room temperature (&lt; 86°F or &lt; 30°C) for 28 days or in the refrigerator until the expiration date.  Opened vials can be stored at room temperature or in the refrigerator for 28 days.  Opened pens should be stored at room temperature for 28 days. Opened pens should not be refrigerated.  Do not freeze vials or pens at any time. Protect them from direct heat and light.   Disclaimer : Medical News Today has made every effort to make certain that all information is factually correct, comprehensive, and up-to-date. However, this article should not be used as a substitute for the knowledge and expertise of a licensed healthcare professional. You should always consult your doctor or other healthcare professional before taking any medication. The drug information contained herein is subject to change and is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. The absence of warnings or other information for a given drug does not indicate that the drug or drug combination is safe, effective, or appropriate for all patients or all specific uses.   Article last updated on Thu 30 May 2019.  Visit our  Diabetes  category page for the latest news on this subject, or  sign up to our newsletter  to receive the latest updates on Diabetes.   
 Alcohol. (2017).  http://www.diabetes.org/food-and-fitness/food/what-can-i-eat/making-healthy-food-choices/alcohol.html  
 Insulin basics. (2019).  http://www.diabetes.org/living-with-diabetes/treatment-and-care/medication/insulin/insulin-basics.html  
 American Diabetes Association. (2019). Management of diabetes in pregnancy: Standards of medical care in diabetes - 2019.  https://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/42/Supplement_1/S165  
 American Diabetes Association. (2019). Pharmacological approaches to glycemic treatment: Standards of medical care in diabetes - 2019.  https://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/42/Supplement_1/S90  
 Basaglar - insulin glargine injection, solution. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=0ad21db3-2b1c-4ed9-a687-bdd6a74d0aae  
 Be smart with sharps. (n.d.).  https://www.fda.gov/media/87634/download  
 Blevins TC,  et al . (2015). Efficacy and safety of LY2963016 insulin glargine compared with insulin glargine (Lantus) in patients with type 1 diabetes in a randomized controlled trial: The ELEMENT 1 study.  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/dom.12496  
 Don't be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm  
 GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com/  
 Gosmanov AR,  et al . (2014). Management of adult diabetic ketoacidosis.  https://www.dovepress.com/management-of-adult-diabetic-ketoacidosis-peer-reviewed-article-DMSO  
 Hilgenfeld R,  et al . (2014). The evolution of insulin glargine and its continuing contribution to diabetes care.  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs40265-014-0226-4  
 Holmes RS,  et al . (2018). Comparative effectiveness and harms of long-acting insulins for type 1 and type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/dom.13614  
 Insulin injection know-how. (n.d.).  https://www.diabeteseducator.org/docs/default-source/legacy-docs/_resources/pdf/general/Insulin_Injection_How_To_AADE.pdf  
 Lantus - insulin glargine injection, solution; Lantus SoloStar - insulin glargine injection, solution. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=d5e07a0c-7e14-4756-9152-9fea485d654a  
 Levemir - insulin detemir injection, solution. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=d38d65c1-25bf-401d-9c7e-a2c3222da8af  
 Rosenstock J,  et al . (2015). Similar efficacy and safety of LY2963016 insulin glargine and insulin glargine (Lantus) in patients with type 2 diabetes who were insulin-naïve or previously treated with insulin glargine: A randomized, double-blind controlled trial (the ELEMENT 2 study).  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/dom.12482  
 Tresiba - insulin degludec injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=456c5e87-3dfd-46fa-8ac0-c6128d4c97c6  
 Urakami T,  et al . (2017). A randomized crossover study of the efficacy and safety of switching from insulin glargine to insulin degludec in children with type 1 diabetes [Abstract].  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/dom.12482  
 White J,  et al . (2019). Biosimilar and follow-on insulin: The ins, outs, and interchangeability.  https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/8755122518802268     Alcohol. (2017).  http://www.diabetes.org/food-and-fitness/food/what-can-i-eat/making-healthy-food-choices/alcohol.html   Insulin basics. (2019).  http://www.diabetes.org/living-with-diabetes/treatment-and-care/medication/insulin/insulin-basics.html   American Diabetes Association. (2019). Management of diabetes in pregnancy: Standards of medical care in diabetes - 2019.  https://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/42/Supplement_1/S165   American Diabetes Association. (2019). Pharmacological approaches to glycemic treatment: Standards of medical care in diabetes - 2019.  https://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/42/Supplement_1/S90   Basaglar - insulin glargine injection, solution. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=0ad21db3-2b1c-4ed9-a687-bdd6a74d0aae   Be smart with sharps. (n.d.).  https://www.fda.gov/media/87634/download   Blevins TC,  et al . (2015). Efficacy and safety of LY2963016 insulin glargine compared with insulin glargine (Lantus) in patients with type 1 diabetes in a randomized controlled trial: The ELEMENT 1 study.  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/dom.12496   Don't be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm   GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com/   Gosmanov AR,  et al . (2014). Management of adult diabetic ketoacidosis.  https://www.dovepress.com/management-of-adult-diabetic-ketoacidosis-peer-reviewed-article-DMSO   Hilgenfeld R,  et al . (2014). The evolution of insulin glargine and its continuing contribution to diabetes care.  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs40265-014-0226-4   Holmes RS,  et al . (2018). Comparative effectiveness and harms of long-acting insulins for type 1 and type 2 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis [Abstract].  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/dom.13614   Insulin injection know-how. (n.d.).  https://www.diabeteseducator.org/docs/default-source/legacy-docs/_resources/pdf/general/Insulin_Injection_How_To_AADE.pdf   Lantus - insulin glargine injection, solution; Lantus SoloStar - insulin glargine injection, solution. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=d5e07a0c-7e14-4756-9152-9fea485d654a   Levemir - insulin detemir injection, solution. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=d38d65c1-25bf-401d-9c7e-a2c3222da8af   Rosenstock J,  et al . (2015). Similar efficacy and safety of LY2963016 insulin glargine and insulin glargine (Lantus) in patients with type 2 diabetes who were insulin-naïve or previously treated with insulin glargine: A randomized, double-blind controlled trial (the ELEMENT 2 study).  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/dom.12482   Tresiba - insulin degludec injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=456c5e87-3dfd-46fa-8ac0-c6128d4c97c6   Urakami T,  et al . (2017). A randomized crossover study of the efficacy and safety of switching from insulin glargine to insulin degludec in children with type 1 diabetes [Abstract].  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/dom.12482   White J,  et al . (2019). Biosimilar and follow-on insulin: The ins, outs, and interchangeability.  https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/8755122518802268   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Slowiczek, Lindsay. "Lantus (insulin glargine)."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 May. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325973.php&gt;    APA  Slowiczek, L. (2019, May 30). "Lantus (insulin glargine)."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  