 The arch is made up of three separate arches that form a triangle. Each arch is made up of bones, ligaments, and tendons.  There are many potential causes of pain in the arch of the foot. Keep reading for more information on these causes, as well as the possible treatments.  The two most common causes of pain in the arch of the foot involve injury and structural issues.  Structural issues typically refer to high or low arches or other abnormalities in the foot and surrounding area.  In both cases, several factors can trigger or aggravate these issues, including:  Causes of pain in the arch of the foot include:   Overpronation  refers to how a person's foot moves while walking, running, or jogging.  A person who overpronates strikes the ground with the outer portion of the heel first. As the person completes the step, the foot rolls too far onto the arch. The extra pressure causes the arch to flatten.  Long term, overpronation can damage the tendons, muscles, and ligaments. This damage can lead to pain in the arch, knee, hip, or back. It may also cause  hammertoe  and  calluses .  A person who overpronates often benefits from extra support when walking. Support can include stability shoes and prescription arch supports.   Plantar fasciitis  is a degenerative condition of the plantar fascia and a common causes of  heel pain . The plantar fascia is a ligament that connects the back of the foot to the front.  Common causes of plantar fasciitis include:  Anyone can get plantar fasciitis, but activities such as running can increase the risk.  If a person has plantar fasciitis, they often feel pain when waking up. The pain typically gets worse throughout the day with walking and standing. In addition to arch pain, a person may feel stiffness in the heel or ball of their foot.  People with plantar fasciitis may need to stop doing activities such as running to let the foot heal. They can also consider wearing support shoes or using inserts to help take pressure off the arch.  Cavus foot is a structural abnormality that causes a high arch. Causes of cavus foot include:  If a person has cavus foot, they may feel pain when walking or standing. They may also have reduced stability, which can lead to ankle sprains and injuries.  A person may have other issues related to cavus foot, including:  People with cavus foot can consider support shoes or inserts to help stabilize their feet and avoid pain and possible injury.  The posterior tibial tendon connects one of the calf muscles to the inner part of the foot. Posterior tibial tendon dysfunction (PTTD) occurs when this tendon is injured or inflamed. If the posterior tibial tendon cannot support the arch, a person may feel pain there as a result.  PTTD pain typically occurs in the inner part of the ankle and back of the calf. The pain usually occurs while running or walking briskly and goes away once a person stops.  An ankle brace or specially designed inserts can help correct PTTD.   Flat feet  can occur in children or adults. In many cases, flat feet cause no issues, but they can also cause a person to experience pain in the arch, other areas of the foot, legs, ankles, and back.  A person may not realize they have flat feet until symptoms occur. A doctor may recommend using supportive shoes or inserts to help provide additional support for the arch.  In some cases, home treatments and stretching are not enough to relieve pain. If this is the case, a doctor or podiatrist may recommend one or more of the following:  While undergoing treatment, a person should still consider home remedies and stretches to help alleviate the pain. A person should not attempt these if a doctor advises them not to move the foot.  Some home remedies include:  In addition, there are a few different techniques a person can do to help alleviate pain and make the arch less prone to injury. These include:  To perform this stretch:  When a person stretches their calves, they can relieve pain and pressure on the arch of the foot. To perform a calf stretch:  A person can use a small tennis ball or foam roller to perform a massaging stretch on the foot. This technique is easiest to do while sitting.  To use this technique, a person should:  The arch is responsible for several functions in the foot. Some things the arch does include:  A person may feel an injury to the arch directly in the area. It is also possible to feel pain or discomfort in other areas, including the:  In some cases, a person may feel the worst pain in the morning. However, most people will experience worse pain during activities, including standing, that directly involves the feet.  For occasional pain, resting, ice, and stretching are usually sufficient. However, if the pain does not go away after a few days, is severe, or frequently comes back, a person should talk to a doctor.  A doctor may refer a person to an orthopedic surgeon who specializes in the feet and ankles or a podiatrist, who is a foot specialist. They can examine the person's foot, how they walk, and other factors to determine what the underlying issue is.  An examination may include:  Once a doctor determines the underlying cause of the pain, they will recommend treatments that specifically target the underlying cause and help alleviate pain.  Arch pain is a common problem, especially among athletes. In many cases, a person can stretch, rest, and ice the arch of their foot until the pain goes away.  Problems with the arch of the foot can also cause pain in different parts of the body, including the ankle, heel, legs, knee, and back. It is essential to treat the problem early to ensure that foot problems do not lead to back or knee injuries.  If the pain persists, gets worse, or is chronic, a person should talk to their doctor about additional treatment options.    
 Adult acquired flatfoot. (2017).  https://orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/diseases--conditions/adult-acquired-flatfoot  
 Arch pain. (n.d.).  https://www.foothealthfacts.org/conditions/arch-pain  
 Flexible flatfoot. (n.d.).  https://www.foothealthfacts.org/conditions/flexible-flatfoot  
 Pediatric flatfoot. (n.d.).  https://www.foothealthfacts.org/conditions/pediatric-flatfoot  
 Plantar fasciitis. (2018).  https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/hw114458  
 Plantar fasciitis. (n.d.).  https://www.cedars-sinai.org/health-library/diseases-and-conditions/p/plantar-fasciitis.html     Adult acquired flatfoot. (2017).  https://orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/diseases--conditions/adult-acquired-flatfoot   Arch pain. (n.d.).  https://www.foothealthfacts.org/conditions/arch-pain   Flexible flatfoot. (n.d.).  https://www.foothealthfacts.org/conditions/flexible-flatfoot   Pediatric flatfoot. (n.d.).  https://www.foothealthfacts.org/conditions/pediatric-flatfoot   Plantar fasciitis. (2018).  https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/hw114458   Plantar fasciitis. (n.d.).  https://www.cedars-sinai.org/health-library/diseases-and-conditions/p/plantar-fasciitis.html   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "Causes and treatments for pain in the arch of the foot."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 6 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325953.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2019, August 6). "Causes and treatments for pain in the arch of the foot."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  