 Tecfidera (dimethyl fumarate) is a brand-name prescription medication. It's used to treat relapsing forms of  multiple sclerosis  (MS).  Tecfidera is classified as a disease-modifying therapy for MS. It reduces the risk of MS relapse by up to  49 percent  over two years. It also reduces the risk of having worsening physical disability by about  38 percent .  Tecfidera comes as a delayed-released oral capsule. It's available in two strengths: 120-mg capsules and 240-mg capsules.  Tecfidera is a brand-name drug. It's not currently available as a generic drug.  Tecfidera contains the drug dimethyl fumarate.  Tecfidera can cause mild or serious side effects. The following list contains some of the key side effects that may occur while taking Tecfidera. This list doesn't include all possible side effects.  For more information on the possible side effects of Tecfidera, or tips on how to deal with a troubling side effect, talk with your doctor or pharmacist.  The more common side effects of Tecfidera include:  These side effects may decrease or go away within a few weeks. If they're more severe or don't go away, talk to your doctor or pharmacist.  Call your doctor right away if you have serious side effects. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency. Serious side effects can include the following:  See below for information about each serious side effect.  Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) is a life-threatening infection of the brain caused by the JC virus. It usually only happens in people whose immune system isn't fully working. Very rarely, PML has occurred in people with MS who were taking Tecfidera. In these cases, the people who developed PML also had decreased white blood cell levels.  To help prevent PML, your doctor will do blood tests regularly during your treatment to check your white blood cell levels. If your levels get too low, your doctor may recommend that you stop taking Tecfidera.  Your doctor will also monitor you for symptoms of PML while you take the drug. Symptoms may include:  If you have these symptoms while taking Tecfidera, call your doctor right away. Your doctor will likely do tests to check whether you have PML, and they may stop your treatment with Tecfidera.  Flushing (reddening of your face or neck) is a common side effect of Tecfidera. It happens in up to  40 percent  of people who take the drug. Flushing effects typically occur soon after you start taking Tecfidera, and then improve or go away entirely over a period of several weeks.  In most cases, flushing is mild to moderate in severity and symptoms include:  For some, symptoms of flushing can become severe and intolerable. About  3 percent  of people who take Tecfidera end up stopping the drug due to severe flushing.  Taking Tecfidera with food can help reduce flushing. Taking an  aspirin  30 minutes before taking Tecfidera can also help.  Tecfidera can cause lymphopenia, a decreased level of white blood cells called lymphocytes. Lymphopenia can increase your risk of infections. Symptoms of lymphopenia can include:  Your doctor will do blood tests before and during your treatment with Tecfidera. If your lymphocyte levels become too low, your doctor may suggest that you stop taking Tecfidera for a set amount of time, or permanently.  Tecfidera can cause liver side effects. It may increase levels of certain liver enzymes that are measured by blood tests. This increase usually happens during the first six months of treatment.  For most people, these increases don't cause problems. But for a small number of people, they may become severe and indicate liver damage. Symptoms of liver damage can include:  Before and throughout your treatment with Tecfidera, your doctor will do blood tests to check your liver function. If your liver enzymes increase too much, your doctor may have you stop taking this drug.  Serious allergic reactions, including  anaphylaxis , can occur in some people who take Tecfidera. This can occur at any time during treatment. Symptoms of an allergic reaction can include:  If you have an allergic reaction, call your doctor or local poison control center right away. If your symptoms are severe, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room.  If you've had a serious allergic reaction to this drug in the past, you may not be able to take it again. Using the drug again could be fatal. If you've had a reaction to this medication before, talk to your doctor before taking it again.  About  8 percent  of people who take Tecfidera get a mild skin rash after taking Tecfidera for a few days. The rash may go away with continued use. If it doesn't go away or it becomes bothersome, talk to your doctor.  If a rash appears suddenly after you take the drug, it could be an allergic reaction. If you also have trouble breathing or swelling of your lips or tongue, this could be a severe anaphylactic reaction.  If you think you're having a severe allergic reaction to this drug, call 911.    Hair loss  isn't a side effect that has occurred in studies of Tecfidera. However, some people who take Tecfidera have had hair loss.  In one  report , a woman who started taking Tecfidera began to lose hair after taking the drug for two to three months. Her hair loss slowed after she continued taking the drug for two more months, and her hair began to grow back.  Weight gain or weight loss isn't a side effect that has occurred in studies of Tecfidera. However, some people who take the drug have had weight gain. Some others have had weight loss while taking Tecfidera. It's not clear if Tecfidera is the cause of weight gain or loss.  People who take Tecfidera can experience fatigue. In one study, fatigue happened in  17 percent  of people who took it. This side effect may decrease or go away with continued use of the drug.  About  18 percent  of people who take Tecfidera have stomach pain. This side effect is most common during the first month of treatment and usually decreases or goes away with continued use of the drug.  About  14 percent  of people who take Tecfidera have diarrhea. This side effect is most common during the first month of treatment and usually decreases or goes away with continued use.  Human studies haven't evaluated the effect of Tecfidera on sperm or male fertility. In animal studies, Tecfidera didn't affect fertility, but studies in animals don't always predict what will happen in humans.  Some people who take Tecfidera have  headaches . However, it's unclear if Tecfidera is the cause. In one study,  16 percent  of people who took Tecfidera had headaches, but headaches happened more often in people who took a  placebo  pill.  About  8 percent  of people who take Tecfidera have itchy skin. This effect may go away with continued use of the drug. If it doesn't go away or if it becomes bothersome, talk to your doctor.  Some people who take Tecfidera have a depressed mood. However, it's unclear if Tecfidera is the cause. In one study,  8 percent  of people who took Tecfidera had feelings of  depression , but this happened more often in people who took a placebo pill.  If you have symptoms of depression that become bothersome, talk with your doctor about ways to improve your mood.  In clinical studies, Tecfidera didn't increase the risk of  shingles . However, there's a  report  of shingles in a woman with multiple sclerosis who took Tecfidera.  In clinical studies, Tecfidera didn't increase the risk of  cancer . In fact, some researchers are  investigating  whether Tecfidera might help prevent or treat some cancers.  About  12 percent  of people who take Tecfidera have nausea. This effect may go away with continued use of the drug. If it doesn't go away or if it becomes bothersome, talk to your doctor.   Constipation  hasn't been reported in clinical studies of Tecfidera. However, people who take Tecfidera sometimes have constipation. It's not clear if this is a side effect of Tecfidera.  Bloating hasn't been reported in clinical studies of Tecfidera. However, people who take Tecfidera sometimes have bloating. It's not clear if this is a side effect of Tecfidera.   Insomnia  (trouble falling asleep or staying asleep) hasn't been reported in clinical studies of Tecfidera. However, people who take Tecfidera sometimes have insomnia. It's not clear if this is a side effect of the drug.  In clinical studies, Tecfidera didn't increase the risk of bruising. However, many people who have MS say that they often having bruising. The reason for this isn't clear. A few theories are listed below.  If you're concerned about bruising while taking Tecfidera, talk with your doctor. Your doctor may do blood tests to check for other causes.  Joint pain can occur in people who take Tecfidera. In one study,  12 percent  of people who took Tecfidera had joint pain. Another  report  described three people who had moderate to severe joint or muscle pain after starting Tecfidera.  This side effect may decrease or go away with continued use of the drug. Joint pain can also improve when Tecfidera is stopped.   Dry mouth  hasn't been reported in clinical studies of Tecfidera. However, people who take Tecfidera sometimes have dry mouth. It's not clear if this is a side effect of Tecfidera.  Eye-related side effects haven't been reported in clinical studies of Tecfidera. However, some people who take the drug have said that they've had symptoms such as:  It's not clear if these eye effects are caused by the drug or by something else. If you have these effects and they don't go away or they become bothersome, talk with your doctor.  The  flu  or flu-like symptoms have occurred in studies of people taking Tecfidera. In one such study,  6 percent  of people who took the drug had these effects, but the effects happened more often in people who took a placebo pill.  Studies evaluating the effects of Tecfidera have lasted from two to six years. In  one study  lasting six years, the most common side effects were:  If you're taking Tecfidera and have side effects that don't go away or become severe or bothersome, talk with your doctor. They may suggest ways to lessen or eliminate the side effects, or they may suggest that you stop taking the drug.  Tecfidera is approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treating multiple sclerosis (MS).  Tecfidera is approved for treating relapsing forms of MS, the most common forms of MS. In these forms, attacks of worsening or new symptoms occur (relapse), followed by periods of partial or complete recovery (remission).  Tecfidera reduces the risk of MS relapse by up to  49 percent  over two years. It also reduces the risk of having worsening physical disability by about  38 percent .  Tecfidera is used off-label to treat plaque  psoriasis . Off-label use is when a drug is approved to treat one condition but is used to treat a different condition.  In a clinical  study , about 33 percent of people taking Tecfidera had their plaques clear or almost completely clear after 16 weeks of treatment. About 38 percent of people taking the drug had a 75 percent improvement in an index of plaque severity and area affected.  Several medications are available to treat relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS). Examples of these medications include:  Note: Some of the drugs listed here are used off-label to treat relapsing forms of MS.  You may wonder how Tecfidera compares to other medications that are prescribed for similar uses. Below are comparisons between Tecfidera and several medications.  Tecfidera and Aubagio (teriflunomide) are both classified as disease-modifying therapies. They both decrease certain immune functions of the body, but they work in different ways.   Uses   Tecfidera and Aubagio are both FDA-approved for treating relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS).   Drug forms   Tecfidera comes as a delayed-release oral capsule that's taken twice daily. Aubagio comes as an oral tablet that's taken once daily.   Side effects and risks   Tecfidera and Aubagio have some similar side effects and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.   *  Aubagio  has  boxed warnings  from the FDA. These are the strongest warning that the FDA requires. A boxed warning alerts doctors and patients about drug effects that may be dangerous.    Effectiveness   Both Tecfidera and Aubagio are effective for treating MS. The effectiveness of these drugs hasn't been directly compared in clinical studies. However, in one  analysis , they were compared indirectly and were found to have similar benefits.   Costs   Tecfidera and Aubagio are only available as brand-name drugs. Generic versions of these drugs aren't available. Generic forms are typically less expensive than brand-name drugs.  Tecfidera generally costs a little bit more than Aubagio. However, the exact price you pay will depend on your insurance plan.  Tecfidera and Copaxone (glatiramer acetate) are both classified as disease-modifying therapies. They both decrease certain immune functions of the body, but they work in different ways.   Uses   Tecfidera and Copaxone are both FDA-approved for treating relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS).   Drug forms   One advantage of Tecfidera is that it's taken by mouth. It comes as a delayed-release oral capsule that's taken twice daily.  Copaxone must be injected. It comes as a self-injectable subcutaneous injection. It can be given at home either once daily or three times per week.   Side effects and risks   Tecfidera and Copaxone have some similar side effects and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.   Effectiveness   Both Tecfidera and Copaxone are effective for treating MS. The effectiveness of these drugs hasn't been directly compared in clinical studies. However, according to one  analysis , Tecfidera may be more effective than Copaxone for preventing relapse and slowing worsening of disability.   Costs   Tecfidera is only available as a brand-name drug. Copaxone is available as a brand-name drug. It's also available in a generic form called glatiramer acetate.  The generic form of Copaxone is much less expensive than Tecfidera. Brand-name Copaxone and Tecfidera generally cost about the same. The actual amount you pay will depend on your insurance plan.  Tecfidera and Ocrevus (ocrelizumab) are both classified as disease-modifying therapies. Both decrease certain immune functions of the body, but they work in different ways.   Uses   Tecfidera and Ocrevus are both FDA-approved for treating relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS). Ocrevus is also approved for treating progressive forms of MS.   Drug forms   An advantage of Tecfidera is that it can be taken by mouth. It comes as a delayed-release oral capsule that's taken twice daily.  Ocrevus must be injected using an intravenous (IV) infusion. It must be administered in a clinic or hospital. After the first two doses, Ocrevus is given every six months.   Side effects and risks   Tecfidera and Ocrevus have some similar side effects and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.   Effectiveness   Both Tecfidera and Ocrevus are effective for treating MS, but it's not clear if one works better than the other. The effectiveness of these drugs hasn't been directly compared in clinical studies.   Costs   Tecfidera and Ocrevus are available as brand-name medications. They're not available in generic forms, which can be less expensive than brand-name drugs.  Ocrevus may cost less than Tecfidera. The actual amount you pay will depend on your insurance plan.  Tecfidera and Tysabri (natalizumab) are both classified as disease-modifying therapies. Both drugs decrease certain immune functions of the body, but they work in different ways.   Uses   Tecfidera and Tysabri are both FDA-approved for treating relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS). Tysabri is also approved for treating  Crohn's disease .   Drug forms   One advantage of Tecfidera is that it's taken by mouth. Tecfidera comes as a delayed-release oral capsule that's taken twice daily.  Tysabri must be administered as an intravenous (IV) infusion that's given in a clinic or hospital. It's given once every month.   Side effects and risks   Tecfidera and Tysabri have some similar side effects and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.   * Both of these drugs have been linked with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML), but only  Tysabri  has a related  boxed warning  from the FDA. This is the strongest warning the FDA requires. A boxed warning alerts doctors and patients about drug effects that may be dangerous.    Effectiveness   Both Tecfidera and Tysabri are effective for treating MS. The effectiveness of these drugs hasn't been directly compared in clinical studies. However, according to one  analysis , Tysabri may be more effective than Tecfidera for preventing relapse.  It's important to note that due to its risk of PML, Tysabri is usually not a first-choice medication for MS.   Costs   Tecfidera and Tysabri are only available as brand-name drugs. Generic versions of these drugs aren't available. Generics typically cost less than brand-name medications.  Tecfidera generally costs more than Tysabri. The actual amount you pay will depend on your insurance plan.  Tecfidera and Gilenya (fingolimod) are both classified as disease-modifying therapies. Both decrease certain immune functions of the body, but they work in different ways.   Uses   Tecfidera and Gilenya are both FDA-approved for treating relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS).   Drug forms   Tecfidera comes as a delayed-release oral capsule that's taken twice daily. Gilenya comes as an oral capsule that's taken once daily.   Side effects and risks   Tecfidera and Gilenya have some similar side effects and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.   Effectiveness   Both Tecfidera and Gilenya are effective for treating MS. The effectiveness of these drugs hasn't been directly compared in clinical studies. However, according to one  analysis , Tecfidera and Gilenya work about equally well for preventing relapse.   Costs   Tecfidera and Gilenya are only available as brand-name drugs. Generic versions of these drugs aren't available. Generics typically cost less than brand-name medications.  Tecfidera and Gilenya generally cost about the same. The actual amount you pay will depend on your insurance plan.  Tecfidera and interferon (Avonex, Rebif) are both classified as disease-modifying therapies. Both decrease certain immune functions of the body, but they work in different ways.   Uses   Tecfidera and interferon (Avonex, Rebif) are each FDA-approved for treating relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS).   Drug forms   One advantage of Tecfidera is that it's taken by mouth. Tecfidera comes as a delayed-release oral capsule that's taken twice daily.  Avonex and Rebif are two different brand names of interferon beta-1a. Both forms must be injected. Rebif comes as a subcutaneous injection that's given under the skin three times per week. Avonex comes as an intramuscular injection that's given into a muscle once weekly. Both are self-administered at home.   Side effects and risks   Tecfidera and interferon have some similar side effects and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.   Effectiveness   Both Tecfidera and interferon are effective for treating MS. The effectiveness of these drugs hasn't been directly compared in clinical studies. However, according to one  analysis , Tecfidera may be more effective than interferon for preventing relapse and slowing worsening of disability.   Costs   Tecfidera and interferon (Rebif, Avonex) are only available as brand-name drugs. Generic versions of these drugs aren't available. Generics typically cost less than brand-name medications.  Tecfidera and interferon generally cost about the same. The actual amount you pay will depend on your insurance.  Tecfidera is an FDA-approved drug for treating relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis (MS). Several clinical  studies  have shown that it can prevent MS relapse and slow worsening of physical disability.  Protandim is a dietary supplement that contains several ingredients, including:  Some claim that Protandim works like Tecfidera works. Protandim is sometimes called a "natural Tecfidera."  However, Protandim has never been studied in people with MS. Therefore, there is no reliable clinical research that it works.  Note: If your doctor has prescribed Tecfidera for you, don't replace it with Protandim. If you would like to explore other treatment options, talk with your doctor.  The following information describes dosages that are commonly used or recommended.  However, be sure to take the dosage your doctor prescribes for you.  Your doctor will determine the best dosage to suit your needs.  When Tecfidera is started, the dosage is 120 mg twice a day for the first seven days. After this first week, the dosage is increased to 240 mg twice daily. This is the long-term maintenance dose.  For people who have bothersome side effects from Tecfidera, the maintenance dosage can be temporarily decreased to 120 mg twice daily. The higher maintenance dosage of 240 mg twice daily should be started again within four weeks.  If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it's almost time for your next dose, just take that one dose. Don't try to catch up by taking two doses at once.  Yes, this medication is intended to be taken long term.  Take Tecfidera exactly according to your doctor's instructions.  Tecfidera is taken twice daily. It's usually taken with the morning meal and the evening meal.  Tecfidera should be taken with food. This can help reduce the flushing side effect. Flushing can also be reduced by taking 325 mg of aspirin 30 minutes before taking Tecfidera.  Tecfidera shouldn't be crushed, or opened and sprinkled on food. Tecfidera capsules should be swallowed whole.  Animal studies show that Tecfidera may be harmful to a fetus and may not be safe to take during pregnancy. However, animal studies don't always predict what will happen in humans.  Studies haven't evaluated the effects of Tecfidera regarding pregnancy or birth defects in humans.  If you're pregnant or planning to become pregnant, talk with your doctor about whether you should take Tecfidera.  If you become pregnant while taking Tecfidera, you can take part in the Tecfidera Pregnancy Registry. A pregnancy registry helps gather information on how certain drugs can affect pregnancy. If you'd like to join the registry, ask your doctor, call 866-810-1462, or visit the registry's  website .  There haven't been enough studies to show whether Tecfidera appears in breast milk.  Some  experts  recommend avoiding breastfeeding while taking this drug. However, others don't. If you're taking Tecfidera and would like to breastfeed your child, talk with your doctor about the potential risks and benefits.  Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease. With this type of condition, the immune system, which fights disease, mistakes healthy cells for enemy invaders and attacks them. This can cause chronic  inflammation .  With MS, this chronic inflammation is thought to cause nerve damage, including the demyelination that causes many MS symptoms. Oxidative  stress  (OS) is also thought to cause this damage. OS is an imbalance of certain molecules in your body.  Tecfidera is thought to help treat MS by causing the body to produce a protein called Nrf2. This protein is thought to help regain the body's molecular balance. This effect, in turn, helps reduce the damage caused by inflammation and OS.  In addition, Tecfidera changes some of the body's immune cell functions to decrease certain inflammatory responses. It may also prevent the body from activating certain immune cells. These effects could also help reduce MS symptoms.  Tecfidera will begin to work in your body right away, but it can take several weeks to reach its full effect.  While it's working, you may not notice much improvement in your symptoms. This is because it's mainly intended to prevent relapses.  Tecfidera doesn't interact with alcohol. However, alcohol might worsen certain side effects of Tecfidera, such as:  Avoid drinking excessive amounts of alcohol while taking Tecfidera.  Tecfidera may interact with other medications. Below is a list of medications that may interact with Tecfidera. This list may not contain all drugs that may interact with Tecfidera.  Different drug interactions can cause different effects. For instance, some can interfere with how well a drug works, while others can cause increased side effects.  Before taking Tecfidera, be sure to tell your doctor and pharmacist about all prescription, over-the-counter, and other drugs you take. Also tell them about any  vitamins , herbs, and supplements you use. Sharing this information can help you avoid potential interactions.  If you have questions about drug interactions that may affect you, ask your doctor or pharmacist.  Taking Tecfidera with ocrelizumab can increase the risk of immunosuppression and resulting serious infections. Immunosuppression is when the immune system is weakened.  There are no known interactions between ibuprofen and Tecfidera.  There are no known interactions between aspirin and Tecfidera. Aspirin is commonly used 30 minutes before taking Tecfidera to prevent flushing.  Here are answers to some frequently asked questions about Tecfidera.  It's not exactly clear why Tecfidera causes flushing. However, it likely has to do with the dilation (widening) of blood vessels in the face where the flushing occurs.  You may not be able to entirely prevent flushing caused by Tecfidera, but there are two things you can do to help reduce it:  If these steps don't help and you still have bothersome flushing, talk with your doctor.  Some people who take Tecfidera say they feel fatigue. However, feelings of tiredness or sleepiness are not side effects that have been found in clinical studies of Tecfidera.  Tecfidera does affect the immune system. It reduces some immune system functions to decrease inflammatory responses. It may also reduce activation of certain immune cells.  However, Tecfidera isn't usually categorized as an immunosuppressant. It's sometimes called an immunomodulator, which means that it affects some functions of the immune system.  Tecfidera doesn't make your skin more sensitive to the sun like some drugs do. However, if you experience flushing from Tecfidera, sun exposure could worsen the flushing feeling.  Tecfidera has been found to reduce MS relapse by up to  49 percent  over two years. It's also been found to reduce the risk of having worsening physical disability by about  38 percent .  It's common for medications to be started at a lower dosage and then increased later. This allows your body to process a lower dosage as it adjusts to the medication.  For Tecfidera, you start with a lower dosage of 120 mg twice daily during the first seven days. After that, the dosage is increased to 240 mg twice daily, and this is the dosage you would stay on. However, if you have too many side effects with the higher dosage, your doctor may lower your dosage for a time.  Yes. Before you start taking Tecfidera, your doctor will do blood tests to check your blood cell counts and your liver function. These tests will likely be repeated during your treatment with the drug. For the first year of treatment, these tests are typically done at least every six months.  Taking too much of this medication can increase your risk of serious side effects.  Symptoms of an overdose can include:  If you think you've taken too much of this drug, call your doctor or seek guidance from the American Association of Poison Control Centers at 800-222-1222 or through their  online tool .  But if your symptoms are severe, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room right away.   Before taking Tecfidera, talk with your doctor about any medical conditions you have. Tecfidera may not be right for you if you have certain medical conditions. These conditions include:  When Tecfidera is dispensed from the pharmacy, the pharmacist will add an expiration date to the label on the bottle. This date is typically one year from the date the medication was dispensed.  The purpose of such expiration dates is to guarantee the effectiveness of the medication during this time. The  current stance  of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is to avoid using expired medications. However, an FDA  study  showed that many medications may still be good beyond the expiration date listed on the bottle.  How long a medication remains good can depend on many factors, including how and where the medication is stored. Tecfidera should be stored at room temperature in the original container and protected from light.  If you have unused medication that has gone past the expiration date, talk to your pharmacist about whether you might still be able to use it.  The following information is provided for clinicians and other healthcare professionals.  The mechanism of action of Tecfidera is complex and not fully understood. It works for multiple sclerosis (MS) through anti-inflammatory effects and  antioxidant  effects. Inflammation and oxidative stress are thought to be important pathological processes in patients with MS.  Tecfidera induces the nuclear 1 factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) antioxidant pathway, which protects against oxidative damage in the  central nervous system  and reduces nerve demyelination.  Tecfidera also inhibits multiple immune pathways related to toll-like receptors, which reduces inflammatory cytokine production. Tecfidera also reduces activation of immune T-cells.  After oral administration of Tecfidera, it's rapidly metabolized by esterases to its active metabolite, monomethyl fumarate (MMF). Therefore, dimethyl fumarate isn't quantifiable in the plasma.  The time to MMF maximum concentration (Tmax) is 2–2.5 hours.  Exhalation of carbon dioxide is responsible for elimination of 60 percent of the drug. Renal and fecal elimination are minor routes.  The half-life of MMF is about 1 hour.  Tecfidera is contraindicated in patients with a known hypersensitivity to dimethyl fumarate or any excipients.  Tecfidera should be stored at room temperature, 59°F to 86°F (15°C to 30°C). It should be stored in the original container and protected from light.  The full Tecfidera prescribing information can be found  here .   Disclaimer : MedicalNewsToday has made every effort to make certain that all information is factually correct, comprehensive, and up-to-date. However, this article should not be used as a substitute for the knowledge and expertise of a licensed healthcare professional. You should always consult your doctor or other healthcare professional before taking any medication. The drug information contained herein is subject to change and is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. The absence of warnings or other information for a given drug does not indicate that the drug or drug combination is safe, effective, or appropriate for all patients or all specific uses.    
 Al-Jaderi, Z.,  et al.  (2016). Utilization of dimethyl fumarate and related molecules for treatment of multiple sclerosis, cancer, and other diseases.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4956641/  
 Amato, M. P.,  et al.  (2015). Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth in patients with multiple sclerosis.  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs40263-015-0238-y  
 Applebaum, B. (2015). Natural supplement Protandim claims to improve MS symptoms.  http://moderndayms.com/2015/09/natural-supplement-protandim-claims-to-improve-ms-symptoms/  
 Aubagio - teriflunomide tablet, film coated. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=4650d12c-b9c8-4525-b07f-a2d773eca155  
 Avonex - interferon beta-1a; Avonex Pen - interferon beta-1a injection, solution; Avonex - interferon beta-1a injection, solution; Avonex - interferon beta-1a injection, powder, lyophilized, for solution. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=d70a39cc-de15-4c12-a1ec-8063b69ea0e1  
 Bernardini, L. R.,  et al.  (2016). Severe articular and musculoskeletal pain: An unexpected side effect of dimethyl-fumarate therapy for multiple sclerosis [Abstract].  https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0022-510X(16)30439-7  
 Chan, A.,  et al.  (2017). Comparative effectiveness of delayed-release dimethyl fumarate versus glatiramer acetate in multiple sclerosis patients: Results of a matching-adjusted indirect comparison.  https://www.futuremedicine.com/doi/10.2217/cer-2016-0085?  
 Clinical pharmacology. (2018). Tampa, FL: Elsevier.  http://www.clinicalpharmacology-ip.com/  
 Copaxone - glatiramer acetate injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=aa88f583-4f5f-433b-80b4-1f4c9fb28357  
 FDA drug safety communication: FDA warns about case of rare brain infection PML with MS drug Tecfidera (dimethyl fumarate). (2014).  https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm424625.htm  
 Fernández, Ó.,  et al.  (2017). Efficacy and safety of delayed-release dimethyl fumarate for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis in prior interferon users: An integrated analysis of DEFINE and CONFIRM.  https://www.clinicaltherapeutics.com/article/S0149-2918(17)30765-8/fulltext  
 Freedman, M. S.,  et al.  (2016). Comparing outcomes from clinical studies of oral disease-modifying therapies (dimethyl fumarate, fingolimod, and teriflunomide) in relapsing MS: Assessing absolute differences using a number of needed to treat analysis.  https://www.msard-journal.com/article/S2211-0348(16)30193-6/fulltext  
 Gilenya - fingolimod hcl capsule. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=cc9e1c8c-0e2b-44e2-878b-27057f786be9  
 Gold, R.,  et al.  (2012). Placebo-controlled phase 3 study of oral BG-12 for relapsing multiple sclerosis.  https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1114287?  
 Gold, R.,  et al.  (2016). Sustained effect of delayed-release dimethyl fumarate in newly diagnosed patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: 6-year interim results from an extension of the DEFINE and CONFIRM studies.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4919132/  
 Gold, R.,  et al.  (2017). Long-term effects of delayed-release dimethyl fumarate in multiple sclerosis: Interim analysis of ENDORSE, a randomized extension study.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5418934/  
 GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com/  
 A guide to drug safety terms at FDA. (2012).  https://www.fda.gov/downloads/forconsumers/consumerupdates/ucm107976.pdf  
 Hutchinson, M.,  et al.  (2014). Efficacy and safety of BG-12 (dimethyl fumarate) and other disease-modifying therapies for the treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: A systematic review and mixed treatment comparison [Abstract].  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1185/03007995.2013.863755?journalCode=icmo20  
 Kegel, M. (2016). How Tecfidera works to reduce MS relapses finally discovered, may lead to better treatments.  https://multiplesclerosisnewstoday.com/2016/09/27/how-tecfidera-works-in-relapsing-multiple-sclerosis-discovered-insights-make-new-treatments-possible  
 LactMed: Dimethyl fumarate. (n.d.).  http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/sis/search2/r?dbs+lactmed:@term+@DOCNO+1162  
 Losavio, F. A.,  et al.  (2016). Transient hair loss during treatment with dimethyl-fumarate for multiple sclerosis.  https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2211-0348(16)30025-6  
 Ma, B. B.,  et al.  (2016). Disseminated zoster with paresis in a multiple sclerosis patients treated with dimethyl fumarate.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4794808/  
 Makhani, N.,  et al.  (2016). Oral dimethyl fumarate in children with multiple sclerosis: A dual-center study [Abstract].  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/291387192_Oral_Dimethyl_Fumarate_in_Children_With_Multiple_Sclerosis_A_Dual-Center_Study  
 Medications. (n.d.).  https://www.nationalmssociety.org/Treating-MS/Medications  
 MS Coalition. (2017). The use of disease-modifying therapies in multiple sclerosis: Principles and current evidence.  https://www.nationalmssociety.org/NationalMSSociety/media/MSNationalFiles/Brochures/DMT_Consensus_MS_Coalition.pdf  
 Ocrevus - ocrelizumab injection. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=9da42362-3bb5-4b83-b4bb-b59fd4e55f0d  
 Rae-Grant, A.,  et al.  (2018). Practice guideline: Disease-modifying therapies for adults with multiple sclerosis.  https://download.lww.com/wolterskluwer_vitalstream_com/PermaLink/WNL/A/WNL_2018_04_19_RAEGRANT_NEUROLOGY2017835181R1_SDC3.pdf  
 Rebif - interferon beta-1a; Rebif Rebidose - interferon beta-1a; Rebif - interferon beta-1a injection, solution; Rebif Rebidose - interferon beta-1a injection solution. (2015).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=c6fcb5d2-8fcd-44fa-a838-b84ee5f44f0f  
 Tecfidera - dimethyl fumarate; Tecfidera - dimethyl fumarate capsule. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=665d7e74-036c-5f68-5b67-ab84b9b49151  
 Tysabri - natalizumab injection. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=c5fdde91-1989-4dd2-9129-4f3323ea2962  
 Xu, Z.,  et al.  (2015). Dimethyl fumarate for multiple sclerosis [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25900414     Al-Jaderi, Z.,  et al.  (2016). Utilization of dimethyl fumarate and related molecules for treatment of multiple sclerosis, cancer, and other diseases.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4956641/   Amato, M. P.,  et al.  (2015). Fertility, pregnancy and childbirth in patients with multiple sclerosis.  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs40263-015-0238-y   Applebaum, B. (2015). Natural supplement Protandim claims to improve MS symptoms.  http://moderndayms.com/2015/09/natural-supplement-protandim-claims-to-improve-ms-symptoms/   Aubagio - teriflunomide tablet, film coated. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=4650d12c-b9c8-4525-b07f-a2d773eca155   Avonex - interferon beta-1a; Avonex Pen - interferon beta-1a injection, solution; Avonex - interferon beta-1a injection, solution; Avonex - interferon beta-1a injection, powder, lyophilized, for solution. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=d70a39cc-de15-4c12-a1ec-8063b69ea0e1   Bernardini, L. R.,  et al.  (2016). Severe articular and musculoskeletal pain: An unexpected side effect of dimethyl-fumarate therapy for multiple sclerosis [Abstract].  https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0022-510X(16)30439-7   Chan, A.,  et al.  (2017). Comparative effectiveness of delayed-release dimethyl fumarate versus glatiramer acetate in multiple sclerosis patients: Results of a matching-adjusted indirect comparison.  https://www.futuremedicine.com/doi/10.2217/cer-2016-0085?   Clinical pharmacology. (2018). Tampa, FL: Elsevier.  http://www.clinicalpharmacology-ip.com/   Copaxone - glatiramer acetate injection, solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=aa88f583-4f5f-433b-80b4-1f4c9fb28357   FDA drug safety communication: FDA warns about case of rare brain infection PML with MS drug Tecfidera (dimethyl fumarate). (2014).  https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm424625.htm   Fernández, Ó.,  et al.  (2017). Efficacy and safety of delayed-release dimethyl fumarate for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis in prior interferon users: An integrated analysis of DEFINE and CONFIRM.  https://www.clinicaltherapeutics.com/article/S0149-2918(17)30765-8/fulltext   Freedman, M. S.,  et al.  (2016). Comparing outcomes from clinical studies of oral disease-modifying therapies (dimethyl fumarate, fingolimod, and teriflunomide) in relapsing MS: Assessing absolute differences using a number of needed to treat analysis.  https://www.msard-journal.com/article/S2211-0348(16)30193-6/fulltext   Gilenya - fingolimod hcl capsule. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=cc9e1c8c-0e2b-44e2-878b-27057f786be9   Gold, R.,  et al.  (2012). Placebo-controlled phase 3 study of oral BG-12 for relapsing multiple sclerosis.  https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1114287?   Gold, R.,  et al.  (2016). Sustained effect of delayed-release dimethyl fumarate in newly diagnosed patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: 6-year interim results from an extension of the DEFINE and CONFIRM studies.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4919132/   Gold, R.,  et al.  (2017). Long-term effects of delayed-release dimethyl fumarate in multiple sclerosis: Interim analysis of ENDORSE, a randomized extension study.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5418934/   GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com/   A guide to drug safety terms at FDA. (2012).  https://www.fda.gov/downloads/forconsumers/consumerupdates/ucm107976.pdf   Hutchinson, M.,  et al.  (2014). Efficacy and safety of BG-12 (dimethyl fumarate) and other disease-modifying therapies for the treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: A systematic review and mixed treatment comparison [Abstract].  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1185/03007995.2013.863755?journalCode=icmo20   Kegel, M. (2016). How Tecfidera works to reduce MS relapses finally discovered, may lead to better treatments.  https://multiplesclerosisnewstoday.com/2016/09/27/how-tecfidera-works-in-relapsing-multiple-sclerosis-discovered-insights-make-new-treatments-possible   LactMed: Dimethyl fumarate. (n.d.).  http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/sis/search2/r?dbs+lactmed:@term+@DOCNO+1162   Losavio, F. A.,  et al.  (2016). Transient hair loss during treatment with dimethyl-fumarate for multiple sclerosis.  https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2211-0348(16)30025-6   Ma, B. B.,  et al.  (2016). Disseminated zoster with paresis in a multiple sclerosis patients treated with dimethyl fumarate.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4794808/   Makhani, N.,  et al.  (2016). Oral dimethyl fumarate in children with multiple sclerosis: A dual-center study [Abstract].  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/291387192_Oral_Dimethyl_Fumarate_in_Children_With_Multiple_Sclerosis_A_Dual-Center_Study   Medications. (n.d.).  https://www.nationalmssociety.org/Treating-MS/Medications   MS Coalition. (2017). The use of disease-modifying therapies in multiple sclerosis: Principles and current evidence.  https://www.nationalmssociety.org/NationalMSSociety/media/MSNationalFiles/Brochures/DMT_Consensus_MS_Coalition.pdf   Ocrevus - ocrelizumab injection. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=9da42362-3bb5-4b83-b4bb-b59fd4e55f0d   Rae-Grant, A.,  et al.  (2018). Practice guideline: Disease-modifying therapies for adults with multiple sclerosis.  https://download.lww.com/wolterskluwer_vitalstream_com/PermaLink/WNL/A/WNL_2018_04_19_RAEGRANT_NEUROLOGY2017835181R1_SDC3.pdf   Rebif - interferon beta-1a; Rebif Rebidose - interferon beta-1a; Rebif - interferon beta-1a injection, solution; Rebif Rebidose - interferon beta-1a injection solution. (2015).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=c6fcb5d2-8fcd-44fa-a838-b84ee5f44f0f   Tecfidera - dimethyl fumarate; Tecfidera - dimethyl fumarate capsule. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=665d7e74-036c-5f68-5b67-ab84b9b49151   Tysabri - natalizumab injection. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=c5fdde91-1989-4dd2-9129-4f3323ea2962   Xu, Z.,  et al.  (2015). Dimethyl fumarate for multiple sclerosis [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25900414   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Network, MNT’s Medical. "Tecfidera (dimethyl fumarate)."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325954.php&gt;    APA  Network, M. (2019, August 31). "Tecfidera (dimethyl fumarate)."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  