 Ingrown hairs are most common in people with very curly hair. Shaving too close to the follicle can cause the hair to curl back into the skin and become an ingrown hair.  In general, ingrown hairs look like small red bumps on the skin that center on a hair follicle. These bumps can contain  pus , which may sometimes signify an infection that doctors call  folliculitis .  When a hair grows into the skin, it causes  inflammation , which presents as redness, along with some swelling, itching, and pain.  Ingrown hairs do not usually require a visit to the emergency room. However, they can be very uncomfortable.  In this article, we discuss ways to identify, treat, and prevent ingrown hairs on the penile shaft.  If possible, people should leave ingrown hairs alone to heal and refrain from scratching, shaving, or trying to pop them.  These actions can introduce bacteria into the hair follicle, which can lead to an infection.  People who wish to speed the healing process or prevent further ingrown hairs can try using over-the-counter (OTC) products.  OTC products to try include:  It is well-known that tea tree oil has antibacterial properties. People can stir a few drops of the oil into some water and then apply the mixture to the affected area using a cotton ball. However, there is no guarantee that this will work, and it may irritate the skin in some people.  People can attempt to remove an ingrown hair by using a sterile needle and inserting it under the hair loop to lift it out gently. They should follow the steps below:  It is important to note that a person is unlikely to be able to sterilize a needle completely at home. They also run the risk of introducing bacteria to the area and potentially worsening the infection. This risk is a particular concern in people who are prone to infections, such as those with  diabetes  that is not under control.  If a person feels uncertain about their ability to remove the ingrown hair safely on their own, they should visit a doctor, who will be able to perform the procedure in a sterile fashion.  Ingrown hairs usually heal without treatment and do not cause additional complications.  However, scratching or attempting to pop an ingrown hair can introduce bacteria to the area, leading to an infection.  Folliculitis occurs when a bacterial infection develops inside within the hair follicle.  Risk factors for folliculitis include:  An ingrown hair may be infectedhave become infected if it is:  If a person does not get treatment for an infected ingrown hair, it can develop into a painful, fluid-filled lump called a boil, or furuncle. An infected ingrown hair can leave scars on the skin and patches of discoloration called hyperpigmentation.  For mild cases of folliculitis, a doctor may recommend a short course of oral  antibiotics  and a cleanser, such as Hibiclens or a benzoyl peroxide wash. If the infection is deeper, such as in the case of a furuncle, then incision and drainage may be necessary in addition to the antibiotics.  People can prevent ingrown hairs on the penile shaft by:  If a person finds ingrown hairs particularly bothersome, they may wish to consider laser hair removal. As this procedure destroys the hair follicles, it is the most effective way to prevent ingrown hairs.  Ingrown hairs can develop anywhere on the skin, but they tend to occur in areas that people commonly shave, such as the legs, armpits, and pubic region. For some people, these areas will include the penile shaft.  An ingrown hair on the penis causes small red bumps that may feel itchy or painful. Ingrown hairs usually heal on their own. People should avoid rubbing or scratching the ingrown hair to prevent an infection of the hair follicle.  Using correct shaving techniques can help prevent ingrown hairs. These include:  An infected ingrown hair can develop into a boil, which is a painful, pus filled lump on the skin. Untreated  boils  may require professional medical treatment and can leave dark scars on the skin.    
 Acne-like breakouts could be folliculitis. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/bumps-and-growths/folliculitis  
 Mazzarello, V.,  et al.  (2018). Treatment of acne with a combination of propolis, tea tree oil, and  AAloe vera  compared to erythromycin cream: Two double-blind investigations.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6298394/     Acne-like breakouts could be folliculitis. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/bumps-and-growths/folliculitis   Mazzarello, V.,  et al.  (2018). Treatment of acne with a combination of propolis, tea tree oil, and  AAloe vera  compared to erythromycin cream: Two double-blind investigations.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6298394/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Eske, Jamie. "What to do about an ingrown hair on the penile shaft."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 7 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325979.php&gt;    APA  Eske, J. (2019, August 7). "What to do about an ingrown hair on the penile shaft."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  