 When a person becomes sexually aroused, the blood flow to the vagina increases. As a result, the person has a higher risk of bleeding from minor injuries, such as a scratch from a fingernail or irritation of the cervix.  If the bleeding is light, and there are no other symptoms, there is no need to panic.  In this article, we look at some of the reasons why a person might bleed after being fingered. We also explain when someone should see a doctor and what can help prevent this bleeding.  Some of the most common causes of bleeding during or after being fingered include:   Increased blood flow  to the vagina when a person becomes aroused causes the tissue to swell and change shape.  This increased blood flow also raises the risk of bleeding from a minor injury or irritation that affects the vagina's delicate tissue.  A woman might feel mild pain or burning ahead of light bleeding.  If the bleeding is heavy or the pain is intense or lasts for more than a few hours, the injury could be more serious.  The cervix is the lower part of the uterus, and it forms a narrow passageway between the uterus and the vagina. Its position changes during the menstrual cycle, rising higher or lower in the vagina. During the times when it is lower in the vagina, deep fingering may irritate it, causing light bleeding.  It is also possible for the cervix to become inflamed, which is a condition called cervicitis. Although many conditions may cause  cervicitis ,  sexually transmitted infections  (STIs) are the most common culprit.  A person with cervicitis may notice the following symptoms:  During pregnancy, more blood vessels develop in the cervix, which makes it  more likely  that a person will bleed from irritation. Very light bleeding from fingering during pregnancy is usually due to cervical irritation rather than a serious health issue.  However, it is important to discuss any bleeding during pregnancy with a healthcare professional.  Sometimes, bleeding after fingering or other sexual contact is a coincidence. The cause could be a monthly period or premenstrual spotting.  When a period begins, it takes some time for the blood to travel from the uterus, through the cervix, into the vagina, and out of the body. Sexual activity may lead a person to notice premenstrual spotting or period blood before they otherwise would, as their partner may contact the cervix or the menstrual blood.  Dry vaginal tissue can bleed from irritation after fingering. When this happens, the individual may find that sexual contact feels painful or uncomfortable, and their partner may report that their vagina feels dry.  Some common causes of vaginal dryness include:  a rushed approach to sex that does not allow enough time for the vagina to become lubricated  Various STIs  may cause bleeding  by damaging the vaginal tissue. This damage can make the tissue more sensitive, increasing the risk of bleeding after fingering.  STIs do not always cause symptoms. If a person's vaginal bleeding is due to an STI, this may be the only symptom that they experience. However, some people may also have other signs and symptoms, such as:  Other infections, such as yeast infections and  bacterial vaginosis , may cause a burning or itching sensation in the vagina or unusual vaginal discharge. Some people also experience bleeding after sexual contact.  A doctor can easily diagnose and treat vaginal infections, so it is best to schedule an appointment if any of these other symptoms occur.  Cervical polyps are growths on the cervix. They are usually small, but some grow larger, and a person or their partner may be able to feel them during sexual contact.  Most cervical polyps are not cancerous and cause no symptoms. For some people, irritation of cervical polyps during fingering or other sexual activities may cause them to bleed.  Doctors do not fully understand what causes cervical polyps, but they believe that various factors — including infections, problems with blood vessels, chronic  inflammation , and unusual responses to hormones — may play a role. Although a polyp is not an emergency, it is important for a doctor to examine the growth.  A serious injury to the vagina or cervix may cause severe bleeding. Without treatment, these injuries can lead to infections or chronic pain. In the most serious cases, such injuries can even be fatal.  Fingering alone is very unlikely to cause serious trauma. However, a violent sexual assault may cause severe traumatic injuries. A person should see a doctor following any significant injury to the vagina or for bleeding that does not stop.   Very rarely , bleeding after fingering may be a sign of  cancer  — usually  cervical cancer .  People with cervical cancer may experience pelvic pain, or they might notice vaginal bleeding after menopause. Attending regular cervical cancer screenings, including a Pap smear, can reduce a person's risk of developing cervical cancer.   Learn more about cervical cancer screening here .  A person who notices bleeding after being fingered should tell a doctor or another healthcare professional at their next medical appointment.  As long as the bleeding is light, does not get worse with each sex session, and does not accompany other symptoms, it is fine to wait until a regular checkup to discuss it.  However, a person should schedule an appointment with a doctor for any of the following:  If the person experiences any of the following, they should go to the emergency room:  To reduce the risk of bleeding during and after sexual contact, a person can try:  People can purchase lubricants in stores or  online .  Bleeding during fingering is common for some people, but it is important for a person to know their body and its typical symptoms.  Some people find that they bleed during sex before they get their period or if they are not sufficiently lubricated. For these individuals, this symptom is normal and unlikely to be a sign of a serious illness.  However, a change in this symptom pattern — such as bleeding throughout the cycle — may be an early warning sign of a problem.  It is impossible to determine the cause of bleeding based on this symptom alone. People who worry about bleeding or notice that their usual bleeding pattern has changed should see a doctor.  In many cases, a doctor may offer reassurance that the bleeding is not a cause for concern. However, if the bleeding is indicative of a more serious problem, early diagnosis and treatment are key.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Bleeding during pregnancy. (2016).  https://www.acog.org/Patients/FAQs/Bleeding-During-Pregnancy?IsMobileSet=false  
 Casey, P. M.,  et al.  (2017). Impact of contraception on female sexual function [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27622561  
 Cervical polyps. (n.d.).  https://www.bcm.edu/healthcare/care-centers/obstetrics-gynecology/conditions/cervical-polyps  
 Munarriz, R.,  et al.  (n.d.). Biology of female sexual function.  https://www.bumc.bu.edu/sexualmedicine/physicianinformation/biology-of-female-sexual-function/  
 Signs and symptoms of cervical cancer. (2016).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/cervical-cancer/detection-diagnosis-staging/signs-symptoms.html  
 STDs during pregnancy — CDC fact sheet (detailed). (2016).  https://www.cdc.gov/std/pregnancy/stdfact-pregnancy-detailed.htm  
 Vaginal bleeding after sex. (2019).  https://www.healthdirect.gov.au/vaginal-bleeding-after-sex  
 Vaginitis. (n.d.).  https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/health-and-wellness/vaginitis     Bleeding during pregnancy. (2016).  https://www.acog.org/Patients/FAQs/Bleeding-During-Pregnancy?IsMobileSet=false   Casey, P. M.,  et al.  (2017). Impact of contraception on female sexual function [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27622561   Cervical polyps. (n.d.).  https://www.bcm.edu/healthcare/care-centers/obstetrics-gynecology/conditions/cervical-polyps   Munarriz, R.,  et al.  (n.d.). Biology of female sexual function.  https://www.bumc.bu.edu/sexualmedicine/physicianinformation/biology-of-female-sexual-function/   Signs and symptoms of cervical cancer. (2016).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/cervical-cancer/detection-diagnosis-staging/signs-symptoms.html   STDs during pregnancy — CDC fact sheet (detailed). (2016).  https://www.cdc.gov/std/pregnancy/stdfact-pregnancy-detailed.htm   Vaginal bleeding after sex. (2019).  https://www.healthdirect.gov.au/vaginal-bleeding-after-sex   Vaginitis. (n.d.).  https://www.plannedparenthood.org/learn/health-and-wellness/vaginitis   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Villines, Zawn. "Why might I bleed after being fingered?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 30 Jul. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/325900.php&gt;    APA  Villines, Z. (2019, July 30). "Why might I bleed after being fingered?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  