 Ajovy is a brand-name prescription medication that's used to prevent  migraine  headaches in adults. It comes as a prefilled syringe. You can self-inject Ajovy, or receive Ajovy injections from a healthcare provider in your doctor's office. Ajovy can be injected monthly or quarterly (once every three months).  Ajovy contains the drug fremanezumab, which is a monoclonal antibody. A monoclonal antibody is a kind of drug that's created from immune system cells. It works by preventing some of your body's proteins from functioning.  Ajovy can be used to prevent both episodic and chronic migraine  headaches . In  clinical studies , nearly 48 percent of people with episodic migraine headaches who received Ajovy cut their number of migraine days in at least half. About 41 percent of people with chronic migraine headaches had similar results.  The  American Headache Society  recommends the use of Ajovy to prevent migraine headaches in adults who are unable to reduce their number of migraine days enough with other medications. They also recommend Ajovy for people who aren't able to take other migraine prevention medications because of side effects or drug interactions.  Ajovy is part of a new class of drugs known as calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) antagonists. These drugs are the first medications created to prevent migraine headaches.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  approved Ajovy in September 2018 . Ajovy was the second drug in the CGRP antagonist class that the FDA approved to help prevent migraine headaches.  There are also two other CGRP antagonists available. These drugs are called Emgality (galcanezumab) and Aimovig (erenumab). There's a fourth CGRP antagonist called eptinezumab that's also being studied. It's expected to be approved by the FDA in the future.  Ajovy is available only as a brand-name medication. It's not currently available in generic form.  Ajovy contains the drug fremanezumab, which is also called fremanezumab-vfrm. The reason "-vfrm" appears at the end of the name is to show that the drug is distinct from similar medications that may be created in the future. Other monoclonal antibodies are named in a similar way.  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves prescription drugs such as Ajovy to treat or prevent certain conditions.  The FDA has approved Ajovy to help prevent migraine headaches in adults. These headaches are severe. They're also the main symptom of migraine, which is a neurological condition. Sensitivity to light and sound, nausea, vomiting, and trouble speaking are other symptoms that can occur with a migraine headache.  Ajovy is approved to prevent both chronic migraine headaches and episodic migraine headaches. The  International Headache Society  states that people who have episodic migraine headaches experience fewer than 15 migraine or headache days each month. People who have chronic migraine headaches, on the other hand, experience 15 or more headache days each month over at least 3 months. And at least 8 of these days are migraine days.  In  clinical studies , nearly 48 percent of people with episodic migraine headaches who received Ajovy cut their number of migraine days in at least half. About 41 percent of people with chronic migraine headaches had similar results. In  another study , up to 35 percent of people with chronic migraine headaches lessened to episodic migraine headaches after three months of Ajovy treatment.  Ajovy may also be used off-label for other conditions. Off-label use is when a drug that's approved to treat one condition is prescribed to treat a different condition.   Ajovy for cluster headaches   Ajovy is not FDA-approved to prevent  cluster headaches , but it may be used off-label for this purpose.  Cluster headaches are painful headaches that occur in clusters (many headaches in a short time). These headaches can be chronic or episodic. People who have episodic cluster headaches have longer periods of being headache-free between clusters than people who have chronic cluster headaches.  A  clinical study  of Ajovy for chronic cluster headaches was stopped before the planned end-date because the drug was not effective in that study.  A  clinical study  to test Ajovy in preventing episodic cluster headaches is currently ongoing. And a  long-term study  is being done to test the safety of using Ajovy to prevent episodic (and chronic) cluster headaches. However, it's still too early to know if Ajovy will be useful in preventing episodic cluster headaches.   Ajovy for vestibular headaches   Ajovy is not FDA-approved to treat or prevent vestibular headaches. Vestibular headaches are different from typical headaches in that they're not painful most of the time. Instead, people who experience vestibular headaches may feel dizzy or have  vertigo . These symptoms can last from seconds to hours.  Doctors may prescribe Ajovy for vestibular headaches, but the drug is not being tested in clinical studies of people with this condition. Currently, it's not known if Ajovy works to help prevent or treat vestibular headaches.  Ajovy can cause mild or serious side effects. The following list contains some of the key side effects that may occur while taking Ajovy. This list does not include all possible side effects.  For more information on the possible side effects of Ajovy, or tips on how to deal with a troubling side effect, talk with your doctor or pharmacist.  The more common side effects of Ajovy are injection site reactions. This can include the following effects at the site where you inject the drug:  Injection site reactions are usually not severe or lasting. Many of these side effects may disappear within a couple of days or a few weeks. Talk with your doctor or pharmacist if your side effects are more severe or they don't go away.  It's not common to have serious side effects from Ajovy, but it's possible. The main serious side effect of Ajovy is a severe allergic reaction to the drug. See below for details.  As with most drugs, some people can experience an allergic reaction after they take Ajovy. Symptoms of a mild allergic reaction may include:  Severe allergic reactions to Ajovy are rare. Possible symptoms of a severe allergic reaction include:  If you have a severe allergic reaction to Ajovy, call your doctor right away. If your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency, call 911.   Clinical studies  of Ajovy did not report  fatigue  (low energy) as a side effect of the drug. But fatigue is often a symptom that people experience before, during, or after migraine headaches.  A  clinical study  of people with migraine headaches showed that fatigue was more likely to occur in people who had more intense headaches.  If fatigue is a problem for you, ask your doctor how you can increase your energy levels.  Ajovy is a recently approved medication in a new class of drugs. As a result, there's very little long-term research on Ajovy's safety, and little known about its long-term effects. The longest  clinical study (PS30)  of Ajovy lasted one year, and people in the study did not report any serious side effects.  Injection site reaction was the most common side effect reported in the year-long study. People reported the following effects in the area where the injection was given:  There are other drugs available that can help prevent migraine headaches. Some may be a better fit for you than others. If you'd like to find an alternative to Ajovy, talk with your doctor. They can help you learn about other medications that might be right for you.  Here are some examples of other drugs that the FDA has approved to help prevent migraine headaches:  Here are some examples of other drugs that may be used off-label for migraine headache prevention:  Ajovy is a new type of drug called a calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) antagonist. In 2018, the FDA approved Ajovy to prevent migraine headaches, along with two other CGRP antagonists: Emgality and Aimovig. A fourth drug (eptinezumab) is expected to be approved soon.   How they work   The three CGRP antagonists that are currently available work in slightly different ways to help prevent migraine headaches.  CGRP is a protein in your body. It's been linked with vasodilation (widening of blood vessels) and  inflammation  in the brain, which may result in migraine headache pain. To cause these effects in the brain, CGRP needs to bind (attach) to its receptors. Receptors are molecules on the walls of your brain cells.  Ajovy and Emgality work by attaching to the CGRP. This prevents the CGRP from attaching to its receptors. Aimovig, on the other hand, works by attaching to the receptors themselves. This keeps the CGRP from attaching to them.  By preventing CGRP from attaching to its receptor, these three drugs help prevent vasodilation and inflammation. As a result, they can help prevent migraine headaches.   Side by side   This chart compares some information about Aimovig, Ajovy, and Emgality. These drugs are the three CGRP antagonists that are currently approved to help prevent migraine headaches. To learn more about how Ajovy compares with these drugs, refer to the next section ("Ajovy vs. other drugs").   *Prices can vary depending on your location, the pharmacy used, your insurance coverage, and manufacturer assistance programs.   You may wonder how Ajovy compares to other medications that are prescribed for similar uses. Below are comparisons between Ajovy and several medications.  Ajovy contains the drug fremanezumab, which is a monoclonal antibody. Aimovig contains erenumab, which is also a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies are drugs that have been made from immune system cells. They halt the activity of certain proteins in your body.  Ajovy and Aimovig work in slightly different ways. However, they both halt the activity of a protein called calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). CGRP causes vasodilation (widening of blood vessels) and inflammation in the brain. These effects may result in migraine headaches.  By blocking CGRP, Ajovy and Aimovig help prevent vasodilation and inflammation. This may help prevent migraine headaches.   Uses   Ajovy and Aimovig are both FDA-approved to prevent migraine headaches in adults.   Forms and administration   The drugs Ajovy and Aimovig both come in the form of an injection that's given under your skin (subcutaneous). You can inject the drugs yourself at home. Both of the drugs can be self- injected into three areas: the front of your thighs, the back of your upper arms, or your belly.  Ajovy comes in the form of a syringe that's prefilled with a single dose. Ajovy can be given as one injection of 225 mg once a month. As an alternative, it can be given as three injections of 675 mg that are administered quarterly (once every three months).  Aimovig comes in the form of an autoinjector that's prefilled with a single dose. It's usually given as a 70-mg injection once a month. But a 140-mg monthly dose may be better for some people.   Side effects and risks   Ajovy and Aimovig work in similar ways and therefore cause some of the same side effects. They also cause some differing side effects.    More common side effects    These lists contain examples of more common side effects that can occur with Ajovy, with Aimovig, or with both drugs (when taken individually).    Serious side effects    The primary serious side effect for both Ajovy and Aimovig is a severe allergic reaction. Such a reaction isn't common, but it is possible. (For more information, see "Allergic reaction" in the "Ajovy side effects" section above).    Immune reaction    In clinical trials for both drugs, a small percentage of people experienced an immune reaction. This reaction caused their bodies to develop antibodies against Ajovy or Aimovig.  Antibodies are proteins in the immune system that attack foreign substances in your body. Your body can create antibodies to any foreign matter. This includes monoclonal antibodies. If your body creates antibodies to Ajovy or Aimovig, the medication may not work for you anymore.  In ongoing  clinical studies , fewer than 2 percent of people developed antibodies to Ajovy. In clinical trials for Aimovig, more than 6 percent of people developed antibodies to the drug.  However, because Ajovy and Aimovig were approved in 2018, it's still too early to know how common this effect might be and how it might affect how people use these drugs in the future.   Effectiveness   Ajovy and Aimovig are both effective at preventing migraine headaches, but they haven't been directly compared in clinical trials.  However,  migraine treatment guidelines  recommend either drug as an option for certain people. These include people who have not been able to reduce their monthly migraine days enough with other medications. They also include people who can't tolerate other medications because of side effects or drug interactions.    Episodic migraine headaches    Separate studies of Ajovy and Aimovig showed that both medications were effective for preventing episodic migraine headaches.    Chronic migraine headaches    Separate studies of Ajovy and Aimovig also showed both medications were effective for preventing chronic migraine headaches.   Costs   Ajovy and Aimovig are both brand-name medications. There are no generic forms of either drug available. Brand-name medications generally cost more than generic forms.  Based on estimates from  GoodRx.com , Ajovy and Aimovig cost roughly the same amount. The actual price you would pay for either drug depends on your insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  Ajovy contains fremanezumab, which is a monoclonal antibody. Emgality contains galcanezumab, which is also a monoclonal antibody. A monoclonal antibody is a kind of drug created from immune system cells. It halts the activity of certain proteins in your body.  Ajovy and Emgality both stop the activity of calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). CGRP is a protein in your body. It causes vasodilation (widening of blood vessels) and inflammation in the brain, which may result in migraine headaches.  By stopping CGRP from working, Ajovy and Emgality help prevent vasodilation and inflammation in the brain. This may help prevent migraine headaches.   Uses   Ajovy and Emgality are both FDA-approved to prevent migraine headaches in adults.   Forms and administration   Ajovy comes in the form of a syringe that's prefilled with a single dose. Emgality comes in the form of a single-dose prefilled syringe or pen.  Both of the drugs are injected under your skin (subcutaneous). You can self-inject Ajovy and Emgality at home.  Ajovy can be self-injected using one of two different schedules. It can be given as a single injection of 225 mg once per month, or as three separate injections (for a total of 675 mg) once every three months. Your doctor will choose the right schedule for you.  Emgality is given as a single injection of 120 mg, once per month. (The very first month's dose is a two-injection dose totaling 240 mg.)  Both Ajovy and Emgality can be injected into three possible areas: the front of your thighs, the back of your upper arms, or your belly. In addition, Emgality can be injected into your buttocks.   Side effects and risks   Ajovy and Emgality are very similar drugs and cause similar common and serious side effects.    More common side effects    These lists contain examples of more common side effects that can occur with Ajovy, with Emgality, or with both drugs (when taken individually).    Serious side effects    A severe allergic reaction is the main serious side effect for Ajovy and Emgality. It's not common to have such a reaction, but it is possible. (For more information, see "Allergic reaction" in the "Ajovy side effects" section above).    Immune reaction    In separate clinical trials for the drugs Ajovy and Emgality, a small percentage of people experienced an immune reaction. This immune reaction caused their bodies to create antibodies against the drugs.  Antibodies are immune system proteins that attack foreign matter in your body. Your body can create antibodies to any foreign substance. This includes monoclonal antibodies such as Ajovy and Emgality.  If your body creates antibodies to either Ajovy or Emgality, that drug may no longer work for you.  In an ongoing  clinical study , less than 2 percent of people taking Ajovy developed antibodies to the drug. In  clinical studies  that lasted up to six months, 4.8 percent of people taking Emgality developed antibodies to the drug.  However, it's still too soon to know how common this effect could be because Ajovy and Emgality were approved in 2018. It's also too soon to know how it could affect how people use these two medications in the future.   Effectiveness   Ajovy and Emgality are both FDA-approved to prevent migraine headaches, but they have not been directly compared in clinical studies.  However, Ajovy and Emgality are each recommended by  treatment guidelines  for people who cannot take other medications because of side effects or drug interactions. They're also recommended for people who can't reduce their number of monthly migraine headaches enough with other drugs.    Episodic migraine headaches    Separate studies of Ajovy and Emgality showed effectiveness in preventing episodic migraine headaches.    Chronic migraine headaches    Separate studies of Ajovy and Emgality showed that they were both effective for preventing chronic migraine headaches.   Costs   Ajovy and Emgality are both brand-name medications. There are no generic forms of either drugs available at this time. Brand-name medications generally cost more than generics.  According to estimates from  GoodRx.com , Emgality may cost more than Ajovy. The actual price you would pay for either drug depends on your insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  Ajovy contains fremanezumab, which is a monoclonal antibody. A monoclonal antibody is a kind of drug created from immune system cells. Ajovy helps prevent migraine headaches by halting the activity of certain proteins that trigger migraines.  The main drug ingredient in Botox is onabotulinumtoxinA. This drug is part of a class of drugs known as neurotoxins.  Botox  works by temporarily paralyzing the muscles into which it's injected. This effect on the muscles keeps pain signals from being switched on. It's thought that this action helps prevent migraine headaches before they start.   Uses   The FDA has approved Ajovy to prevent chronic or episodic migraine headaches in adults.  Botox has been approved to prevent chronic migraine headaches in adults. Botox has also been approved to treat many conditions, including:   Forms and administration   Ajovy comes as a prefilled single-dose syringe. It's given as an injection under your skin (subcutaneous) that you can give yourself at home, or have a healthcare provider give you at your doctor's office.  Ajovy can be given on one of two different schedules: one 225-mg injection once per month, or three separate injections (total of 675 mg) once every three months. Your doctor will choose the right schedule for you.  Ajovy can be injected into three possible areas: the front of your thighs, the back of your upper arms, or your belly.  Botox is also given as an injection, but it's always given in a doctor's office. It's injected into a muscle (intramuscular), usually every 12 weeks.  The sites where Botox is typically injected include on your forehead, above and near your ears, near your hairline at the base of your neck, and on the back of your neck and shoulders. At each visit, your doctor will usually give you 31 small injections into these areas.   Side effects and risks   Ajovy and Botox are both used to prevent migraine headaches, but they work in different ways in the body. Therefore, they have some similar side effects, and some different.    More common side effects    These lists contain examples of serious side effects that can occur with Ajovy, with Botox, or with both drugs (when taken individually).    Serious side effects    These lists contain examples of serious side effects that can occur with Ajovy, with Xultophy, or with both drugs (when taken individually).   *Botox has a boxed warning from the FDA for spread of paralysis to nearby muscles following injection. A boxed warning is the strongest warning the FDA requires. It alerts doctors and patients about drug effects that may be dangerous.    Effectiveness   Chronic migraine headaches are the only condition that both Ajovy and Botox are used to prevent.   Treatment guidelines  recommend Ajovy as a possible option for people who can't decrease their number of migraine headaches enough with other medications. Ajovy is also recommended for people who aren't able to tolerate other drugs because of their side effects or drug interactions.  The  American Academy of Neurology  recommends Botox as a treatment option for people with chronic migraine headaches.  Clinical studies have not directly compared the effectiveness of Ajovy and Botox. But separate studies showed both Ajovy and Botox to be effective in helping prevent chronic migraine headaches.   Costs   Ajovy and Botox are both brand-name medications. There are no generic forms of either drug available at this time.  According to estimates from  GoodRx.com , Ajovy may cost more than Botox. The actual price you would pay for either drug depends on your dose, insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  Ajovy contains fremanezumab, which is a monoclonal antibody. A monoclonal antibody is a type of drug created from immune system cells. Ajovy helps prevent migraine headaches by halting the activity of proteins that are thought to cause migraine headaches.  Topamax contains the drug topiramate. This is a type of anti-epileptic drug. It's not well understood how topiramate works in preventing migraine headaches. It may work by decreasing the action of the brain's overactive nerve cells that can cause migraine headaches.   Uses   Both Ajovy and Topamax are FDA-approved to prevent migraine headaches. Ajovy is approved for use in adults, while Topamax is approved for use in children and adults aged 12 and older.  Topamax is also approved to treat  epilepsy .   Forms and administration   Ajovy comes as a prefilled single-dose syringe. It's given as an injection under your skin (subcutaneous) that you can give yourself at home, or have a healthcare provider give you at your doctor's office.  Ajovy can be given on one of two different schedules: one 225-mg injection once per month, or three separate injections (total of 675 mg) once every three months. Your doctor will choose the right schedule for you.  Topamax comes in the form of an oral capsule or a tablet. The typical dosage is 50 mg twice a day. But your doctor may first start you on a lower dose, and then increase your dosage to the usual amount over a few weeks.   Side effects and risks   Ajovy and Topamax work in different ways in the body and therefore have different side effects. Some of the common and serious side effects of both drugs are listed below. These lists do not include all possible side effects.    More common side effects    These lists contain examples of serious side effects that can occur with Ajovy, with Topamax, or with both drugs (when taken individually).    Serious side effects    These lists contain examples of serious side effects that can occur with Ajovy, with Topamax, or with both drugs (when taken individually).   Effectiveness   The only purpose both Ajovy and Topamax are FDA-approved for is migraine headache prevention. While topirate is FDA-approved to prevent both chronic and episodic migraine headaches,  treatment guidelines  recommend it as an option for people with episodic migraine headaches.  The  American Headache Society  recommends Ajovy for people with episodic migraine or chronic migraine headaches who cannot take other medications because of side effects or drug interactions. Ajovy is also recommended for people who cannot reduce their number of migraine headaches enough with other medications.  Clinical studies haven't directly compared the effectiveness of Ajovy and Topamax in preventing migraine headaches. However, the two drugs have been studied separately.    Episodic migraine headaches    Separate studies of Ajovy and Topamax showed that both were effective in helping to prevent episodic migraine headaches.    Chronic migraine headaches    Separate studies of the drugs showed that both Ajovy and Topamax were effective in preventing chronic migraine headaches.   Costs   Ajovy and Topamax are both brand-name medications. Brand-name medications usually cost more than generic medications. Ajovy is not available in generic form, but Topamax comes in a generic form called topiramate.  According to estimates on  GoodRx.com , Topamax may cost more or less than Ajovy, depending on your dose. And topiramate, the generic form of Topamax, will cost less than either Topamax or Ajovy.  The actual price you would pay for any of these drugs depends on your dose, your insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  Ajovy contains the drug fremanezumab, which is a monoclonal antibody. A monoclonal antibody is a type of drug developed from immune system cells in a lab. Ajovy works to prevent migraine headaches by blocking the activity of certain proteins that cause migraine headaches.  Sumatriptan belongs to a class of medication called triptans. Triptans increase levels of a chemical called  serotonin  in your brain. Increased serotonin levels can help stop a migraine headache.   Uses   Ajovy is FDA-approved to prevent migraine headaches in adults.  Sumatriptan, on the other hand, is approved to treat moderate-to-severe migraine headaches in adults at the time they're happening. It's not used to prevent migraine headaches before they occur.   Forms and administration   Ajovy comes as a prefilled single-dose syringe. It's given as an injection under your skin (subcutaneous) that you can give yourself at home, or have a healthcare provider give you at your doctor's office.  Ajovy can be given on one of two different schedules: one 225-mg injection once per month, or three separate injections (total of 675 mg) once every three months. Your doctor will choose the right schedule for you.  Sumatriptan comes in the following forms:  There's no recommended dosing schedule for sumatriptan. Instead, it's taken at the beginning of a migraine headache. A second dose may be recommended two hours later, if the first dose doesn't help improve migraine symptoms.   Side effects and risks   Ajovy and sumatriptan work in different ways and therefore have different side effects. Some of the common and serious side effects of both drugs are listed below. This list does not include all possible side effects.    More common side effects    These lists contain examples of serious side effects that can occur with Ajovy, with sumatriptan, or with both drugs (when taken individually).    Serious side effects    These lists contain examples of serious side effects that can occur with Ajovy, with sumatriptan, or with both drugs (when taken individually).   Effectiveness   Ajovy and sumatriptan are not used for the same purpose and have not been compared in clinical studies. Ajovy is effective at preventing migraine headaches before they happen, while sumatriptan is effective at stopping a migraine headache that has already started.  The  American Headache Society  recommends sumatriptan as an option for adults who visit the emergency department for a migraine attack. Ajovy is recommended for people who have tried other drugs but found that those drugs couldn't reduce the number of migraines days enough, or that they caused side effects or drug interactions.   Costs   Ajovy and sumatriptan are both available as brand-name medications. Sumatriptan is also available in a generic form, while Ajovy is not. Generic drugs typically cost less than brand-name medications.  According to estimates from  GoodRx.com , Ajovy may cost more or less than sumatriptan, depending on which dosage form (tablet, injectable, nasal spray, nasal powder) of sumatriptan your doctor prescribes for you.  The actual cost you would pay for any of these drugs depends on your insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use. For sumatriptan, it would also depend on the drug form used, your dose, and how often you use the drug.  As with all medications, prices for Ajovy can vary. To find current prices for Ajovy in your area, check out GoodRx.com.        var _grxdn = "ajovy";(function(d,t){var g=d.createElement(t),s=d.getElementsByTagName(t)[0];g.src="//s3.amazonaws.com/assets.goodrx.com/static/widgets/fair.min.js";s.parentNode.insertBefore(g,s)}(document,"script"));   The cost you find on  GoodRx.com  is what you would pay without insurance. Your actual cost will depend on your insurance coverage, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  If you need financial support to pay for Ajovy, help is available.  Teva Pharmaceuticals, the manufacturer of Ajovy, has a savings offer that can help you pay less for Ajovy. For more information and to find out if you're eligible, visit the program website.  The following information describes the usual dosages for Ajovy.  However, be sure to take the dosage your doctor prescribes for you.  Your doctor will determine the best dosing schedule for you.  Ajovy comes in a single-dose prefilled syringe. Each syringe contains 225 mg of fremanezumab in 1.5 mL of solution.  Ajovy is given as an injection under your skin (subcutaneous). You can self-inject the drug at home, or a healthcare provider can give you the injection at your doctor's office.  There are two recommended dosage schedules:  You and your doctor will determine the best dosing schedule for you, based on your preferences and lifestyle.  If you forget or miss a dose, administer the dose as soon as you remember. After that, resume the normal recommended schedule.  For example, if you're on a monthly schedule, plan the next dose for four weeks after your makeup dose. If you're on a quarterly schedule, administer the next dose 12 weeks after your makeup dose.  If you and your doctor determine that Ajovy is safe and effective for you, you may use the drug long-term to prevent migraine headaches.  Ajovy is an injection that's given under the skin (subcutaneous) once a month or once every three months. You can either administer the injection yourself at home, or have a healthcare provider give you the injections at your doctor's office. The first time you get a prescription for Ajovy, your healthcare provider can explain how to inject the medication yourself.  Ajovy comes as a single-dose, 225-mg prefilled syringe. Each syringe contains only one dose and is meant to be used once and then discarded.  Below is information on how to use the prefilled syringe. For other information, video, and images of injection instructions, see the  manufacturer's website .  Your doctor will prescribe either 225 mg once per month, or 675 mg once every three months (quarterly). If you're prescribed 225 mg monthly, you will give yourself one injection. If you're prescribed 675 mg quarterly, you'll give yourself three separate injections one after another.   Preparing to inject    Injecting Ajovy prefilled syringe   Ajovy should be taken once every month or once every three months (quarterly), depending on what your doctor prescribes. It can be taken at any time of the day.  If you miss a dose, take Ajovy as soon as you remember. The next dose should be one month or three months after you take that one, depending on your recommended dosing schedule. A medication reminder tool can help you remember to take Ajovy on schedule.  Ajovy can be taken with or without food.  Ajovy is a monoclonal antibody. This type of drug is a special immune system protein that's made in a lab. Ajovy works by halting the activity of a protein called calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP). CGRP is involved in vasodilation (widening of blood vessels) and inflammation in your brain.  CGRP is believed to play a key role in causing migraine headaches. In fact, when people begin to get a migraine headache, they have high levels of CGRP in their bloodstream. Ajovy helps keep a migraine headache from starting by halting the activity of CGRP.  Most medications target (act on) numerous chemicals or parts of cells in your body. But Ajovy and other monoclonal antibodies only target one substance in the body. As a result, there may be fewer drug interactions and side effects with Ajovy. This may make it a good choice for people who can't take other drugs because of side effects or drug interactions.  Ajovy may also be a good choice for people who have tried other drugs, but the drugs didn't do enough to reduce their number of migraine days.  It may take a few weeks for any migraine changes that Ajovy causes to become noticeable. And it may take several months for Ajovy to be fully effective.  The results of clinical studies showed that many people who took Ajovy experienced fewer migraine days within one month of taking their first dose. Over several months, the number of migraine days continued to decrease for people in the study.  There is no interaction between Ajovy and alcohol.  However, for some people, drinking alcohol while taking Ajovy may seem to make the drug less effective. This is because alcohol is a migraine trigger for many people, and even small amounts of alcohol can cause a migraine headache for them.  If you find that alcohol causes more painful or more frequent migraine headaches, you should avoid drinks that contain alcohol.  Many medications can interact with other drugs. These interactions can cause varying effects. For example, some drugs can cause problems with how well a different medication works. Other drugs can increase the severity or number of side effects.  But Ajovy doesn't usually cause drug interactions because of how the body processes it.  Enzymes in the liver metabolize (break down) many drugs, supplements, and herbs. But the liver generally doesn't break down monoclonal antibodies such as Ajovy. Instead, cells throughout the body break down these drugs.  Ajovy doesn't usually interact with other medications because it's broken down separately from them. But if you're concerned about how Ajovy might interact with other medications that you take, discuss your concerns with your doctor.  There aren't many drug interactions associated with Ajovy. However, it's still a smart idea to tell your doctor and pharmacist about any prescription, over-the-counter, and other medications you take. And be sure to tell them if you take any  vitamins , supplements, or herbs.  It isn't known if Ajovy is safe to use during pregnancy. When Ajovy was given to pregnant females in animal studies, no risk was shown to the pregnancy. But the results of  animal studies  don't always predict how a drug might affect humans.  If you're pregnant or thinking about becoming pregnant, talk with your doctor. They can help determine if Ajovy is a good choice for you. You may need to wait to use Ajovy until you're no longer pregnant.  It's unknown whether Ajovy passes into human breast milk. Therefore, it's unclear whether Ajovy is safe to use while breastfeeding.  If you're thinking about having Ajovy treatment while you're breastfeeding, talk with your doctor about the possible benefits and risks. If you start taking Ajovy, you may have to stop breastfeeding.  Here are answers to some frequently asked questions about Ajovy.  No, Ajovy is not a treatment for migraine headaches. Ajovy helps prevent migraine headaches before they start.  Ajovy differs from most other migraine drugs because it's one of the first medications created to help prevent migraine headaches. Ajovy is part of a new class of drugs called calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) antagonists.  Most other medications used to prevent migraine headaches were developed for different purposes, such as treating seizures, depression, or  high blood pressure . Many of these drugs are used off-label to help prevent migraine headaches.  Ajovy also differs from most other migraine medications in that it's injected once a month or once every three months. Most other drugs used to prevent migraine headaches come as tablets that you need to take once each day.  One alternative drug is Botox. Botox is also an injection, but you receive it once every three months in your doctor's office. You can inject Ajovy yourself at home or have a healthcare provider give you the injection at your doctor's office.  Also, Ajovy is a monoclonal antibody, which is a kind of drug created from immune system cells. The liver doesn't break down these drugs, as it does with most other drugs used to prevent migraine headaches. This means that Ajovy and other monoclonal antibodies have fewer drug interactions than other medications that help prevent migraine headaches.  No, Ajovy does not help cure migraine headaches. Currently, there are no drugs available that can cure migraine headaches. The migraine drugs that are available can help prevent or treat migraine headaches.  That depends. Everyone's response to Ajovy is different. If the drug reduces the number of your migraine headaches down to a manageable amount, it's possible that you may be able to stop using other preventive medications. But when you start taking Ajovy, your doctor will probably prescribe it together with other preventive drugs.  A  clinical study  found that Ajovy is safe and effective for use with other preventive medications. Other drugs that your doctor may prescribe with Ajovy include topiramate (Topamax), propranolol (Inderal), and certain antidepressants. Ajovy can also be used with onabotulinumtoxinA (Botox).  After you try Ajovy for two to three months, your doctor will probably talk with you to see how well the drug works for you. At that point, the two of you may decide that you should stop taking the other preventive medications, or that you should reduce your dosage for those drugs.  Yes. Ajovy can be used safely with Botox for people who don't have enough of a reduction in migraine headaches with use of either of the medications used alone.  People who have migraine headaches with aura were included in Ajovy  clinical studies . However, the studies were not designed to test whether Ajovy improves migraine headaches with aura specifically. Therefore, it's not clear whether the people with auras had positive results with Ajovy.  Injecting multiple doses of Ajovy can increase your risk of injection site reactions. If you're allergic or hypersensitive to Ajovy, you may be at risk for a more serious reaction.  Symptoms of an overdose can include:  If you think you've taken too much of this drug, call your doctor or seek guidance from the American Association of Poison Control Centers at 800-222-1222 or through their  online tool .  But if your symptoms are severe, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room right away.   Before taking Ajovy, talk with your doctor about your health history. You should not take Ajovy if you have a history of serious hypersensitivity reactions to Ajovy or any of its ingredients. A serious hypersensitivity reaction can cause symptoms such as:  When Ajovy is dispensed from the pharmacy, the pharmacist will add an expiration date to the label on the container. This date is typically one year from the date the medication was dispensed.  The purpose of such expiration dates is to guarantee the effectiveness of the medication during this time. The  current stance  of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is to avoid using expired medications.  How long a medication remains good can depend on many factors, including how and where the medication is stored.  Ajovy syringes should be stored in the refrigerator in the original container to protect them from light. They can be safely stored in the refrigerator for up to 24 months, or until the expiration date listed on the container. Once taken out of the refrigerator, each syringe must be used within 24 hours.  If you have unused medication that has gone past the expiration date, talk to your pharmacist about whether you might still be able to use it.  The following information is provided for clinicians and other healthcare professionals.  Ajovy (fremanezumab) is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds to the calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) ligand and prevents the CGRP ligand from activating the receptor.  Time to maximum concentration is five to seven days following subcutaneous injection. Steady state concentration is achieved by approximately six months after monthly or quarterly administration.  Ajovy is degraded to small peptides and amino acids via catabolism. Metabolism does not occur via cytochrome P450 pathways. Elimination half-life is approximately 31 days.  Ajovy is contraindicated in patients with a history of hypersensitivity reaction to the drug or any of its excipients.  Ajovy should be stored in the refrigerator at 36⁰F to 46⁰F (2⁰C to 8⁰C). Store in the original container to protect from light. Ajovy can be kept at room temperature (up to 77⁰F/25⁰C) for up to 24 hours. Once stored at room temperature, do not place back in the refrigerator. Do not freeze or shake. Let Ajovy sit at room temperature for 30 minutes prior to administration.   Disclaimer:  Medical News Today has made every effort to make certain that all information is factually correct, comprehensive, and up-to-date. However, this article should not be used as a substitute for the knowledge and expertise of a licensed healthcare professional. You should always consult your doctor or other healthcare professional before taking any medication. The drug information contained herein is subject to change and is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. The absence of warnings or other information for a given drug does not indicate that the drug or drug combination is safe, effective, or appropriate for all patients or all specific uses.    
 Aimovig - erenumab-aoee injection. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=b998ed05-94b0-47fd-b28f-cddd1e128fd8  
 Ajovy - fremanezumab-vfrm injection. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=98e344ea-5916-4947-b6f2-4a76ccc04b6b  
 Ashina M, et al. (2018). Long-term safety and tolerability of erenumab: Three-plus year results from an ongoing open-label extension study in episodic migraine.  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/head.13306  
 A study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of TEV-48125 (fremanezumab) for the prevention of episodic cluster headache (ECH). (2018).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02945046  
 A study to explore the long-term safety of TEV-48125 (fremanezumab) for the prevention of cluster headache (ENFORCE). (2019).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03107052  
 Botox - onabotulinumtxina injection, powder, lyophilized, for solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=33d066a9-34ff-4a1a-b38b-d10983df3300#_5_6_Dysphagia_and  
 Botulinum neurotoxin for treating blepharospasm, cervical dystonia, adult spasticity, and headache. (2016). https://www.aan.com/Guidelines/home/GetGuidelineContent/736A study comparing the efficacy and safety of TEV-48125 (fremanezumab) for the prevention of chronic cluster headaches (CCH). (2018).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02964338  
 Cohen JM, et al. (2017). Fremanezumab as add-on treatment for patients treated with other migraine preventive medicines.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28862758  
 Cohen J, et al. (2018). Reversion of patients with chronic migraine to an episodic migraine classification with fremanezumab treatment. [ABSTRACT]  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00325481.2018.1512253  
 Deen M, et al., (2017). Blocking CGRP in migraine patients – A review of pros and cons.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5612904/  
 Don’t be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm  
 Emgality - galcanezumab injection, solution. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=33a147be-233a-40e8-a55e-e40936e28db0  
 Goadsby P, et al. (2018). Fremanezumab long-term efficacy and safety: Interim results of a one-year study. [ABSTRACT]  https://headachejournal.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/head.13306  
 GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com/  
 The international classification of headache disorders, 3rd edition. (2018).  http://www.ihs-headache.org/binary_data/3245_ichd-3-cephalalgia-2018-issue-1.pdf  
 Lyon RC, et al. (2006). Stability profiles of drug products extended beyond labeled expiration dates [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16721796?dopt=Abstract  
 Orr SL, et al. (2016). Management of adults with acute migraine in the emergency department: The American Headache Society evidence assessment of parenteral pharmacotherapies.  https://headachejournal.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/head.12835  
 Ryman JT, et al. (2017). Pharmacokinetics of monoclonal antibodies.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5613179/  
 Silberstein SD, et al. (2012). Evidence-based guideline update: Pharmacological treatment for episodic migraine prevention in adults.  http://n.neurology.org/content/78/17/1337.full  
 Seo JG, et al. (2018). Significance of fatigue in patients with migraine. [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29396068  
 Teva Medical Information, personal communication, January 18, 2019. 
 The American Headache Society position statement on integrating new migraine treatments into clinical practice. (2018).  https://headachejournal.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/head.13456  
 Topamax - topiramate tablet, coated. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=21628112-0c47-11df-95b3-498d55d89593  
 Zlotnik Y, et al (2014). Alcohol consumption and hangover patterns among migraine sufferers.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4064176/     Aimovig - erenumab-aoee injection. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=b998ed05-94b0-47fd-b28f-cddd1e128fd8   Ajovy - fremanezumab-vfrm injection. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=98e344ea-5916-4947-b6f2-4a76ccc04b6b   Ashina M, et al. (2018). Long-term safety and tolerability of erenumab: Three-plus year results from an ongoing open-label extension study in episodic migraine.  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/head.13306   A study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of TEV-48125 (fremanezumab) for the prevention of episodic cluster headache (ECH). (2018).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02945046   A study to explore the long-term safety of TEV-48125 (fremanezumab) for the prevention of cluster headache (ENFORCE). (2019).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03107052   Botox - onabotulinumtxina injection, powder, lyophilized, for solution. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=33d066a9-34ff-4a1a-b38b-d10983df3300#_5_6_Dysphagia_and   Botulinum neurotoxin for treating blepharospasm, cervical dystonia, adult spasticity, and headache. (2016). https://www.aan.com/Guidelines/home/GetGuidelineContent/736A study comparing the efficacy and safety of TEV-48125 (fremanezumab) for the prevention of chronic cluster headaches (CCH). (2018).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02964338   Cohen JM, et al. (2017). Fremanezumab as add-on treatment for patients treated with other migraine preventive medicines.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28862758   Cohen J, et al. (2018). Reversion of patients with chronic migraine to an episodic migraine classification with fremanezumab treatment. [ABSTRACT]  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00325481.2018.1512253   Deen M, et al., (2017). Blocking CGRP in migraine patients – A review of pros and cons.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5612904/   Don’t be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm   Emgality - galcanezumab injection, solution. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=33a147be-233a-40e8-a55e-e40936e28db0   Goadsby P, et al. (2018). Fremanezumab long-term efficacy and safety: Interim results of a one-year study. [ABSTRACT]  https://headachejournal.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/head.13306   GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com/   The international classification of headache disorders, 3rd edition. (2018).  http://www.ihs-headache.org/binary_data/3245_ichd-3-cephalalgia-2018-issue-1.pdf   Lyon RC, et al. (2006). Stability profiles of drug products extended beyond labeled expiration dates [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16721796?dopt=Abstract   Orr SL, et al. (2016). Management of adults with acute migraine in the emergency department: The American Headache Society evidence assessment of parenteral pharmacotherapies.  https://headachejournal.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/head.12835   Ryman JT, et al. (2017). Pharmacokinetics of monoclonal antibodies.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5613179/   Silberstein SD, et al. (2012). Evidence-based guideline update: Pharmacological treatment for episodic migraine prevention in adults.  http://n.neurology.org/content/78/17/1337.full   Seo JG, et al. (2018). Significance of fatigue in patients with migraine. [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29396068   Teva Medical Information, personal communication, January 18, 2019.  The American Headache Society position statement on integrating new migraine treatments into clinical practice. (2018).  https://headachejournal.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/head.13456   Topamax - topiramate tablet, coated. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=21628112-0c47-11df-95b3-498d55d89593   Zlotnik Y, et al (2014). Alcohol consumption and hangover patterns among migraine sufferers.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4064176/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Slowiczek, Lindsay. "Ajovy (fremanezumab-vfrm)."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326054.php&gt;    APA  Slowiczek, L. (2019, August 31). "Ajovy (fremanezumab-vfrm)."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  