  Headaches  are common neurological conditions. In fact, the  National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke  estimate that nearly 90% of adults will experience a headache at some point in their life.  Headache pain can range from mild to severe and may last for several hours. Although resting and taking over-the-counter (OTC) pain relievers can treat most headaches, some people experience headaches that last for longer than a day.  In this article, we discuss what causes headaches that do not go away, when to see a doctor, and how to get relief.   Migraine , head injuries, and medication misuse can cause head pain that lasts for several hours or days.  Types of lingering headache can include:  Migraine is a type of headache.   Intractable migraine , also known as status migrainosus, is a severe migraine headache that lasts for  longer than 72 hours .  The defining characteristic of this type of migraine is its duration. Intractable migraine causes the same symptoms of a typical migraine, but the pain does not improve with standard migraine treatment.  Migraine episodes usually follow a predictable pattern. People can experience prodromes, or auras — which can manifest as visual, physical, auditory symptoms — before the onset of an intense, throbbing headache on one or both sides of the head.  Other symptoms of migraine include:  Typical migraine treatments, such as sleep and medication, may not be able to stop an episode of intractable migraine.   Learn how to tell the difference between headache and migraine here .  People who regularly take OTC or prescription pain relief drugs for their headaches can develop medication overuse headaches, otherwise known as rebound headaches.  Rebound headaches tend to occur on a recurring basis. The  International Headache Society (IHS)  describe a rebound headache as one that occurs on 15 or more days per month in people with a preexisting primary headache disorder and a history of medication overuse.  The symptoms vary from person to person, but they usually follow the same pattern as the preexisting primary headache.  Rebound headaches usually develop in the morning, after waking. Although pain relievers can reduce headache pain, the relief is temporary. It often returns once the medication wears off.   Cervicogenic headaches  are secondary headaches that result from structural problems in the head, neck, and spine.  These structural issues may be due to:  Typically, people with cervicogenic headaches experience pain that begins in the neck and back of the head and spreads to the front of the head.  Cervicogenic headaches can worsen over time, potentially resulting in damage to the  central nervous system .  Some cervicogenic headaches recur regularly, while others linger until a person receives treatment.  A  traumatic brain injury (TBI) , or  concussion , can lead to many long term complications, such as the development of new or worsening headaches.  TBIs usually develop after a person sustains a blunt force or penetrating injury to the head. This can occur from:  Persistent headaches are among the most common symptoms following a mild TBI, according to a recent article in the journal   NeuroRehabilitation  .  Moderate or severe TBIs can cause lingering headaches that do not go away or worsen over time.  Additional TBI symptoms may include:  People should seek immediate medical care if they experience a head injury, even if they do not notice any symptoms right away.  Stoke is a serious neurological condition that results from a sudden interruption in blood flow to the brain, such as blood clots or a ruptured blood vessel.  Up to  23% of people  develop a persistent headache following a  stroke .  Post-stroke headaches  often develop  in the eyes or on the side of the head where the stroke occurred.  According to the IHS, people can experience headaches that persist for  longer than 3 months  after recovering from a stroke.  People may want to contact their doctor if they experience the same type of headache many times in 1 month, or if their headaches last for longer than a day.  See a doctor for a headache that never goes away, and for a constant headache that keeps occurring in the same area of the head.  People should seek immediate medical attention if they experience the following:  The  American Migraine Foundation provide guidelines  on headache "red flags," which indicate when a person should see a doctor.  People can use a combination of medical treatments and lifestyle changes to treat a lingering headache. Some potential treatment options are as follows:  A wide variety of OTC and prescription medications can help reduce headache symptoms.  People should only take medication as indicated by the manufacturer or a doctor. Overusing mediation, even OTC pain relievers, can cause rebound headaches.  Common types of medication to treat or prevent lingering headaches include:  Botulinum toxin, or Botox, injections offer a safe and effective treatment for people who have chronic migraine headaches that do not respond to traditional medication.  Although most studies used  12-week treatment intervals , the effects of this treatment vary from person to person.   Cognitive behavioral therapy  is a form of psychotherapy that focuses on addressing behaviors and thoughts that may negatively impact a person's mental and physical health.  With the help of a trained  mental health  practitioner, people can develop effective strategies to manage their symptoms and prevent future headaches.  This mind-body technique uses electrical sensors to monitor brain waves, body temperature, heart rate, and muscle tension.  Using the information gained from one or more biofeedback session, people can gain a greater awareness of how their body responds to various things.  For example, a person might learn that the muscles in the head and neck tighten in response to  stress , which may contribute to their headaches.  Over time, people can learn to control their physical responses to reduce the intensity or duration of their headache. Some people may even be able to prevent headaches altogether.  Factors such as  sleep deprivation , caffeine or alcohol consumption, and  dehydration  can cause frequent headaches. Smoking tobacco can also cause headaches.  A doctor might suggest making the following lifestyle changes to help a person manage their symptoms and prevent headaches in the future:  A lingering headache that lasts for several hours or days can be debilitating and significantly reduce a person's ability to function.  People who have a headache that does not respond to typical treatment methods, such as resting and taking OTC pain relievers, may want to consider discussing other treatment options with their doctor.  A variety of medical treatments and lifestyle changes can help people manage their symptoms and prevent headaches in the future.    
 Escher, C. M.,  et al.  (2017). Botulinum toxin in the management of chronic migraine: Clinical evidence and experience.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5367647/  
 Headache: Hope through research. (2019).  https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/Patient-Caregiver-Education/Hope-Through-Research/Headache-Hope-Through-Research  
 Lai, J.,  et al.  (2018). A narrative review of persistent post-stroke headache – A new entry in the International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition [Abstract].  https://headachejournal.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/head.13382  
 Mediation-overuse headache (MOH). (n.d.).  https://ichd-3.org/8-headache-attributed-to-a-substance-or-its-withdrawal/8-2-medication-overuse-headache-moh/  
 Persistent headache attributed to past ischaemic stroke (cerebral infarction). (n.d.).  https://ichd-3.org/6-headache-attributed-to-cranial-or-cervical-vascular-disorder/6-1-headache-attributed-to-ischaemic-stroke-or-transient-ischaemic-attack/6-1-1-headache-attributed-to-ischaemic-stroke-cerebral-infarction/6-1-1-2-persistent-headache-attributed-past-ischaemic-stroke-cerebral-infarction/  
 Schwedt, T. J. (2015). Headache “red flags”: When to see your doctor.  https://americanmigrainefoundation.org/resource-library/headache-red-flags-when-to-see-your-doctor/  
 Silverberg, N. D. (2019). Behavioral treatment for post-traumatic headache after mild traumatic brain injury: Rationale and case series [Abstract].  https://content.iospress.com/articles/neurorehabilitation/nre192708  
 Status migrainosus. (n.d.).  https://ichd-3.org/1-migraine/1-4-complications-of-migraine/1-4-1-status-migrainosus/     Escher, C. M.,  et al.  (2017). Botulinum toxin in the management of chronic migraine: Clinical evidence and experience.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5367647/   Headache: Hope through research. (2019).  https://www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/Patient-Caregiver-Education/Hope-Through-Research/Headache-Hope-Through-Research   Lai, J.,  et al.  (2018). A narrative review of persistent post-stroke headache – A new entry in the International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition [Abstract].  https://headachejournal.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/head.13382   Mediation-overuse headache (MOH). (n.d.).  https://ichd-3.org/8-headache-attributed-to-a-substance-or-its-withdrawal/8-2-medication-overuse-headache-moh/   Persistent headache attributed to past ischaemic stroke (cerebral infarction). (n.d.).  https://ichd-3.org/6-headache-attributed-to-cranial-or-cervical-vascular-disorder/6-1-headache-attributed-to-ischaemic-stroke-or-transient-ischaemic-attack/6-1-1-headache-attributed-to-ischaemic-stroke-cerebral-infarction/6-1-1-2-persistent-headache-attributed-past-ischaemic-stroke-cerebral-infarction/   Schwedt, T. J. (2015). Headache “red flags”: When to see your doctor.  https://americanmigrainefoundation.org/resource-library/headache-red-flags-when-to-see-your-doctor/   Silverberg, N. D. (2019). Behavioral treatment for post-traumatic headache after mild traumatic brain injury: Rationale and case series [Abstract].  https://content.iospress.com/articles/neurorehabilitation/nre192708   Status migrainosus. (n.d.).  https://ichd-3.org/1-migraine/1-4-complications-of-migraine/1-4-1-status-migrainosus/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Eske, Jamie. "What causes a persistent headache?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 19 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326091.php&gt;    APA  Eske, J. (2019, August 19). "What causes a persistent headache?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  