 Afinitor is a brand-name prescription medication that's used to treat certain types of  cancers , tumors, and seizures. It contains the drug everolimus.  Afinitor is a type of drug called a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor. mTORs are targeted therapies that work by "targeting" and attacking cancer cells. Afinitor is not considered  chemotherapy , which acts on all cells in the body that are growing quickly, not just cancer cells.  Afinitor is available in two forms:  Afinitor is approved to treat several types of cancers and tumors:  Afinitor Disperz is approved to treat:  Both Afinitor and Afinitor Disperz are approved to treat:  Afinitor is available only as a brand-name medication. It doesn't currently have a generic form.  Afinitor contains the drug everolimus. Everolimus is also available as the brand-name drug Zortress, which is used to prevent organ rejection after an organ transplant.  Afinitor can cause mild or serious side effects. The following list contains some of the key side effects that may occur while taking Afinitor. This list does not include all possible side effects.  For more information on possible side effects of Afinitor, talk with your doctor or pharmacist. They can also give you tips on how to deal with a bothersome side effect.  The more common side effects of Afinitor can include:  Most of these side effects may go away within a few days or a couple of weeks. If they're more severe or don't go away, talk with your doctor or pharmacist.  Serious side effects from Afinitor can occur. Call your doctor right away if you have serious side effects. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency. Serious side effects can include the following:  See the "Side effect details" section below for symptoms of these conditions.  You may wonder how often certain side effects occur with this drug. Here's some detail on certain side effects this drug may cause.   Allergic reaction   As with most drugs, some people can have an allergic reaction after taking Afinitor. In  clinical trials , 3% of people who took Afinitor had an allergic reaction. Symptoms of a mild allergic reaction can include:  A more severe allergic reaction is rare, but possible. In  clinical trials , up to 1% of people taking Afinitor had a severe allergic reaction. Symptoms of a severe allergic reaction can include:  Call your doctor right away if you have a severe allergic reaction to Afinitor. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.   Rash   Rash is one of the most common side effects of Afinitor. In  clinical studies , rash occurred in up to 59% of people using Afinitor. You may be having an allergic reaction to Afinitor if:  Call your doctor right away if you have a severe allergic reaction to Afinitor. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.   Pneumonitis   Afinitor is a type of drug called a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor. A possible side effect of this type of drug is noninfectious pneumonitis. This is  inflammation  (swelling) of the lungs that's not caused by an infection. In  clinical studies , up to 19% of people who took Afinitor had noninfectious pneumonitis.  Symptoms of pneumonitis can include:  If you start having symptoms of pneumonitis, call your doctor right away. Your doctor may change your dose of Afinitor or have you stop taking it.   Hair loss    Hair loss  typically doesn't occur with use of Afinitor alone. However, it can occur when Afinitor is used with a drug called exemestane.  Hair loss is common in people who take exemestane. In one  clinical study , 15% of people who took exemestane alone had hair loss.  In another  study , 10% of people treated with Afinitor and exemestane for breast cancer had hair loss.  It's important to note that hair loss was only seen when Afinitor was given with exemestane. People who took Afinitor alone didn't experience hair loss.  Typically, hair loss from use of exemestane isn't permanent. Your hair should start to grow back weeks after your treatment ends. If you're concerned about hair loss, talk with your doctor.   Infections   Drugs that treat cancer, such as Afinitor, can weaken your body's immune system. This can put you at increased risk for infections. In  clinical studies , up to 58% of people who took Afinitor had an infection, and up to 10% had a severe infection.  Symptoms of severe infections can include:  If you start having symptoms of an infection while taking Afinitor, talk with your doctor. They may change your dosage or have you stop taking the medication. They may need to prescribe medication to treat your infection. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.   Kidney failure   There have been reports of kidney failure in people treated with Afinitor. In  clinical studies , up to 2% of people had high levels of serum creatinine, which measures your kidney health. Also, 1% had proteinuria (high levels of protein in urine), which may be a sign of kidney damage.  Also in these studies, 3% of people with kidney cancer developed kidney failure. And nearly 3% of people with  pancreatic cancer  had severe kidney failure.  Before and during your treatment with Afinitor, your doctor will track how well your kidneys are working. This is very important if you're at risk for kidney disease.  Symptoms of kidney failure can include:  Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.  If you have a history of kidney problems, talk with your doctor before taking Afinitor.   Myelosuppression   Myelosuppression is a common side effect of taking Afinitor. With this condition, bone marrow makes fewer blood cells. This can decrease the number of your red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.  In  clinical studies , as many as 86% of people who took Afinitor had  anemia  (low red blood cell count). Severe anemia, which requires medical treatment such as a blood transfusion, occurred in up to 15% of people who took Afinitor.  Symptoms of anemia can include:  In  clinical studies , up to 54% of people who took Afinitor had thrombocytopenia (a low platelet count). Up to 3% of those cases were severe. Severely low platelet counts put you at increased risk for having a bleed that requires medical treatment.  Symptoms of a low platelet count can include:  If you have a low white blood cell count (leukopenia), you may also develop infections. This is especially true if you have a low count of a certain type of white blood cell (neutropenia). In  clinical trials , up to 46% of people who took Afinitor developed neutropenia. Up to 9% of cases were severe. Your risk of developing a serious infection is greater if your neutropenia is severe.  Symptoms of an infection can include:  If you have symptoms of an infection while taking Afinitor, talk with your doctor. They may want to change your dose or stop taking the medication. They may also prescribe medication to treat the infection. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.   Metabolic syndrome   Metabolic syndrome is a common side effect of taking Afinitor. With this condition, your blood sugar,  cholesterol , and triglyceride levels can spike while taking the drug.  In  clinical studies , hyperglycemia (high blood sugar) was reported in up to 75% of people who took Afinitor. High cholesterol levels were reported in up to 86% of people. And high triglyceride levels were reported in up to 73% of people.  High cholesterol and high triglyceride levels don't normally cause symptoms. But they can increase your risk for chronic (long-term) diseases, such as  heart disease , over time.  Symptoms of high blood sugar can include:  Your doctor should monitor your blood sugar, cholesterol, and triglycerides levels before and during your Afinitor treatment. If you have  diabetes , you'll need to check your blood sugar levels more often.  Infections, including serious infections, may be more common in people of all ages during Afinitor treatment. Two  clinical studies  looked at children who took Afinitor. Children younger than age 6 years had higher rates of infection than children older than age 6.  One  study  looked at Afinitor use in children with certain conditions. These conditions were the genetic disorder tuberous sclerosis and a type of benign (not cancerous) brain tumor called subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA).  In this study, infections occurred in:  And serious infections occurred in:  In another  study , children with tuberous-sclerosis-related partial seizures took Afinitor in addition to other antiseizure drugs.  The Afinitor dosage your doctor prescribes will depend on several factors. These may include:  The following information describes dosages that are commonly used or recommended.  However, be sure to take the dosage your doctor prescribes for you . Your doctor will determine the best dosage to suit your needs.  Afinitor comes in two forms:  For advanced hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer, the recommended starting dosage of Afinitor is 10 mg per day. If side effects become severe or your condition worsens, your doctor may change your dosage.  For advanced renal cell carcinoma (kidney cancer), the recommended starting dosage of Afinitor is 10 mg per day. If side effects become severe or your condition worsens, your doctor may change your dosage.  For neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreas, lung, or stomach/gut, the recommended starting dosage of Afinitor is 10 mg per day. If side effects become severe or your condition worsens, your doctor may change the dosage.  For renal angiomyolipoma, a type of benign (not cancerous) kidney tumor, the recommended starting dosage of Afinitor is 10 mg per day. If side effects become severe or your condition worsens, your doctor may change the dosage.  For subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA), a type of benign (not cancerous) brain tumor, the recommended starting dose of Afinitor is 4.5 mg per square meter of body surface area (BSA).  Your doctor will calculate your BSA and determine your dosage. They'll round it to the nearest dose to match a strength the drug comes in.  If side effects become severe or your condition worsens, your doctor may change the dosage.  For partial seizures (also called focal onset seizures), the recommended starting dose of Afinitor Disperz is 5 mg per square meter of BSA.  Your doctor will calculate your BSA and determine your dosage. They'll round it to the nearest dose to match a strength the drug comes in.  If side effects become severe or your condition worsens, your doctor may change the dosage.  For either SEGA or partial seizures in children, the recommended dosage of Afinitor or Afinitor Disperz is based on BSA. Your doctor will calculate your child's BSA and determine the dosage. They'll round it to the nearest dose to match a strength the drug comes in.  If side effects become severe or your child's condition worsens, your doctor may change the dosage.  If you miss a dose of Afinitor, you can take it if it is within six hours or your normal scheduled dose. If more than six hours have passed, skip the dose and take the next dose at its normal time. Do not take two doses to make up for a missed dose. If you have questions about missing dose, talk with your doctor about what to do.  Afinitor is meant to be used as a long-term treatment. If you and your doctor determine that Afinitor is safe and effective for you, you'll likely take it long term. If the side effects become severe or if your condition worsens, your doctor may have you stop taking Afinitor.  As with all medications, the cost of Afinitor can vary. To find current prices for Afinitor in your area, check out  GoodRx.com :  The cost you find on GoodRx.com is what you may pay without insurance. The actual price you'll pay depends on your insurance coverage and the pharmacy you use.  Do you need financial support to pay for Afinitor? Or do you need help understanding your insurance coverage? Help is available.  Novartis, the manufacturer of Afinitor, offers a program called the Novartis Oncology Universal Co-Pay Program. For more information and to find out if you're eligible for support, call 877-577-7756. Or you can visit the  program website .  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves prescription drugs such as Afinitor to treat certain conditions. Afinitor is FDA-approved to treat a range of cancers, tumors, and seizures.  Afinitor may be prescribed for advanced hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer in women who have gone through menopause and who have already tried treatment with the drugs letrozole (Femara) or anastrozole (Arimidex). Afinitor for breast cancer is to be used with the anticancer drug exemestane (Aromasin).  In a  clinical study , women who took Afinitor and exemestane had a response rate of 12.6%. A response rate is the percentage of people whose cancer decreases or disappears with treatment. Response rate is another term for success rate. Women who took only exemestane had a 1.7% response rate.  The study also found that taking Afinitor and exemestane more than doubled the time people lived without their breast cancer getting worse. This was compared to people who took only exemestane.  Afinitor may be prescribed for advanced renal cell carcinoma (kidney cancer) in adults who have already tried the anticancer drugs sunitinib (Sutent) or sorafenib (Nexavar).  In a  clinical study , people with kidney cancer who took Afinitor had a response rate of 2%. That's the percentage of people whose cancer decreased or disappeared with treatment. This was compared to a 0% response rate in people who received only supportive care (no cancer medication).  The study also found that taking Afinitor more than doubled the amount of time people lived without their kidney cancer getting worse. This was compared to people who received only supportive care (no cancer treatment).  Afinitor may be prescribed for certain types of neuroendocrine tumors that have progressed in adults and that can't be treated by surgery.  Neuroendocrine tumors can be cancerous or benign (not cancerous). They may release hormones into your blood that affect a number of your body's functions. Therefore, symptoms of these tumors can vary depending on where the tumor is located and what hormones are being released. Afinitor is specifically approved for neuroendocrine tumors in the pancreas, lung, or stomach and gut.  In two  clinical studies  of people with neuroendocrine tumors, taking Afinitor more than doubled the amount of time people lived without their tumors getting worse. This was compared to people who received only supportive care (no cancer medication).  People with neuroendocrine tumors in the lung or stomach and gut had a response rate of 2%. That's the percentage of people whose cancer decreased or disappeared with treatment. This was compared to people who received only supportive care, who had a response rate of 1%.  Afinitor isn't FDA-approved to treat neuroendocrine tumors called functioning carcinoid tumors. This type of tumor actively makes hormones.  Afinitor may be prescribed to treat renal angiomyolipoma in adults with the genetic disorder tuberous sclerosis (TS). Renal angiomyolipoma is a type of benign (not cancerous) kidney tumor.  In a  clinical study  of adults with kidney tumors, 41.8% of people had the size of their tumors reduced by at least 50%. This was compared to a 0% response rate in people who received only supportive care (no cancer medication).  Both Afinitor and Afinitor Disperz are approved to treat subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA), a benign (not cancerous) brain tumor. They're approved for this use in:  In a  clinical study  in adults with SEGA, 35% of people who took Afinitor had the size of their tumor reduced by at least 50%. In comparison, there was a 0% response rate in people who received only supportive care (no cancer medication).  In another  study , at six months, 32% of people who took Afinitor had the size of their tumor reduced by at least 50%.  Afinitor Disperz is approved for use with antiseizure drugs to treat partial seizures (also called focal onset seizures) in:  In a  clinical study  of people with tuberous sclerosis (TS) and partial seizures, Afinitor Disperz was taken along with antiseizure drugs. This drug combination reduced the number of seizures that people had by at least 50% for 28.2% to 40% of the people. Half of the people who took Afinitor Disperz had their number of seizures reduced by at least 29.3% to 39.6%.  Afinitor and Afinitor Disperz are approved to treat subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA), a benign (not cancerous) brain tumor in children ages 1 year and older who have tuberous sclerosis. Tuberous sclerosis is a genetic disorder.  Afinitor Disperz is also approved for use with antiseizure drugs to treat partial seizures (also called focal onset seizures) in children ages 2 years and older who have tuberous sclerosis.  Afinitor can be used alone or with certain other drugs.  For most cancers, Afinitor is typically used by itself. But for advanced hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer, Afinitor is prescribed with the anticancer drug exemestane (Aromasin). Both Afinitor and Aromasin have been approved for this use by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  Some drugs may be used off-label for other conditions. Off-label use is when a drug that's approved to treat one condition is used to treat a different condition.  Examples of other cancer drugs that are used off-label with Afinitor include:  Combining drugs, and adding more drugs to your treatment plan, can increase the number and severity of side effects you have.  For example, kidney failure is a possible serious side effect of both Afinitor and levatinib. Both of these drugs also have warnings for people undergoing surgery because the drugs can delay surgery healing time. Using Afinitor and levatinib together is likely to increase your risk for kidney failure or trouble healing after surgery.  If you're concerned about how certain drug combinations might affect you, talk with your doctor.  Afinitor Disperz is approved to be used along with antiseizure medications to treat partial seizures (also called focal onset seizures) associated with the genetic disorder tuberous sclerosis (TS).  Examples of antiseizure drugs that may be used with Afinitor include:  Using Afinitor Disperz with certain antiseizure drugs, such as phenytoin, can decrease how well Afinitor Disperz works. The antiseizure drugs can make Afinitor Disperz break down more than usual in your body. This lessens the amount of Afinitor Disperz in your system.  If you're taking an antiseizure drug, tell your doctor. They may need to increase your Afinitor dose or recommend other treatment options.  There are no known interactions between Afinitor and alcohol. However, alcohol may interact with certain other chemotherapy medications.  Talk with your doctor about the risks of drinking alcohol with Afinitor.  Afinitor can interact with several other medications. It can also interact with certain supplements as well as certain foods.  Different interactions can cause different effects. For instance, some can interfere with how well a drug works, while others can increase the risk of side effects.  Below are lists of medications that can interact with Afinitor. These lists do not contain all drugs that may interact with Afinitor.  Before taking Afinitor, be sure to tell your doctor and pharmacist about all prescription, over-the-counter, and other drugs you take. Also tell them about any  vitamins , herbs, and supplements you use. Sharing this information can help you avoid potential drug interactions.  If you have questions about drug interactions that may affect you, ask your doctor or pharmacist.   Drugs that increase or decrease how well Afinitor works   Some medications interact with how Afinitor is broken down within your body. This can increase or decrease the level of Afinitor, affecting how well it works. If you take any of these medications, tell your doctor. They may need to change your dosage.  Examples of these drugs include:   ACE inhibitors   Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors are  blood pressure  medications. Their side effects include angioedema (a type of swelling caused by an allergic reaction). Angioedema is also a possible side effect of taking Afinitor. Taking an ACE inhibitor with Afinitor may increase your risk of developing angioedema.  Symptoms of angioedema can include:  Angioedema may be severe, especially if swelling occurs in your throat. If you have any symptoms of angioedema, call your doctor right away. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.  Examples of ACE inhibitor drugs include:  If you develop angioedema, your doctor will probably have you stop taking both Afinitor and any ACE inhibitors.  Live vaccines haven't been studied in people being treated with Afinitor. Due to the increased risk of infection, avoid getting live vaccines while taking Afinitor. Also avoid close contact with people who recently received a live vaccine.  If you have questions about Afinitor and vaccinations, talk with your doctor.  Taking St. John's wort with Afinitor may make Afinitor work less well. If you take the supplement, talk with your doctor. They may want you to stop taking the supplement and will recommend another treatment option.  Avoid eating grapefruit or drinking grapefruit juice while taking Afinitor. The fruit or juice can increase the amount of the drug in your body to dangerous levels. Talk with your doctor if you have any concerns.  Other drugs are available that can treat your condition. Some may be better suited for you than others. If you're interested in finding an alternative to Afinitor, talk with your doctor. They can tell you about other medications that may work well for you.  Other drugs besides Afinitor that may be used to treat the same type of breast cancer in women who have gone through menopause include:  Other drugs besides Afinitor that may be used to treat advanced renal cell carcinoma (kidney cancer) include:  Other drugs besides Afinitor that may be used to treat neuroendocrine tumors include:  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) hasn't approved other medications besides Afinitor to treat renal angiomyolipoma in people with tuberous sclerosis. Renal angiomyolipomas are benign (not cancerous) kidney tumors.  Sirolimus may be used off-label to treat benign (not cancerous) kidney tumors in people with tuberous sclerosis. Sirolimus is in the same class of drugs as Afinitor. Sirolimus has been  studied  in people with kidney tumors and tuberous sclerosis. However, the studies were small in size, and more studies are needed confirm how well the drug works.  The FDA hasn't approved other medications besides Afinitor and Afinitor Disperz to treat subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA). This is a benign (not cancerous) brain tumor in people with tuberous sclerosis.  The FDA hasn't approved other medications besides Afinitor Disperz to treat partial seizures (also called focal onset seizures) related to tuberous sclerosis in adults and children ages 2 years and older.  You may wonder how Afinitor compares to other medications that are prescribed for similar uses. Here we look at how Afinitor and Ibrance are alike and different.  Afinitor contains the drug everolimus. It's a type of drug called a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor.  Ibrance contains the drug palbociclib. It's a type of drug called a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 4 and 6 inhibitor.  Both Afinitor and Ibrance are targeted therapies, which work by "targeting" and attacking certain parts of cancer cells. However, the two drugs affect different enzymes (proteins that aid chemical changes in your body). Afinitor targets mTOR enzymes, while Ibrance targets CDK 4 and 6 enzymes. By blocking these enzymes, the two drugs prevent cancer cells from growing and spreading.  Afinitor and Ibrance are both similar and different in how they treat cancer, tumors, and seizures.   Breast cancer   The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved both Afinitor and Ibrance to treat advanced hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer in women. However, the two drugs differ in some ways regarding their use in treating breast cancer.  Afinitor is approved for use with the anticancer drug exemestane (Aromasin) in women after menopause. The women must have already tried letrozole (Femara) or anastrozole (Arimidex), both anticancer drugs.  Ibrance is also approved to treat metastatic (advanced) breast cancer. This is breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. Ibrance is to be used with fulvestrant (Faslodex) in women whose cancer got worse after they tried endocrine (hormone) therapies including:  Ibrance is also approved as the starting therapy for advanced or metastatic breast cancer in either women who have gone through menopause or men. Ibrance is to be used with an aromatase inhibitor (AI). AIs are a type of hormone therapy that blocks the production of  estrogen .   Other cancers and tumors   While Ibrance is only approved to treat breast cancer, Afinitor is approved to treat other cancers and tumors including:   Partial seizures   Afinitor Disperz is approved for use with antiseizure drugs to treat partial seizures (also called focal onset seizures) in:  Afinitor is available in two forms:  Ibrance comes as a capsule that you swallow. The drug is available in three strengths:  Afinitor and Ibrance can cause similar side effects. Below are examples of these side effects.   More common side effects   These lists contain examples of more common side effects that can occur with Afinitor, with Ibrance, or with both drugs (when taken individually).   Serious side effects   These lists contain examples of serious side effects that can occur with Afinitor, with Ibrance, or with both drugs (when taken individually).  These drugs haven't been directly compared in head-to-head clinical studies. But researchers have found both  Afinitor  and  Ibrance  to be effective in treating advanced hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer in women who have:  Afinitor and Ibrance are both brand-name drugs. They don't currently have generic forms. Brand-name medications usually cost more than generics.  According to estimates on  GoodRx.com , Afinitor is more expensive than Ibrance. The actual price you'll pay for either drug will depend on your insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  Take Afinitor as your doctor or healthcare provider instructs.  Swallow Afinitor tablets whole. Don't chew, split, or crush them.  For a helpful video on how to take Afinitor Disperz, visit the drug's  website .  You must prepare Afinitor Disperz tablets as an oral suspension. This means you'll dissolve them in water, which you will then swallow.   Preparing the suspension in a syringe   If you have trouble drinking from a glass, you may want to use an oral syringe to take Afinitor.    Preparing the suspension    To prepare the suspension in a syringe, follow these steps:    Taking the dose    Now that you've prepared the suspension, you're ready to take the dose. Follow these steps:   Preparing the suspension in a small drinking glass   You don't have to use an oral syringe to take Afinitor. You can also prepare the suspension in a small glass. Follow these steps:  Take Afinitor once a day at the same time each day.  People may take Afinitor for different lengths of time. This is based on how they well their body tolerates the drug. It's also based on whether the disease progresses, and when that progression occurs.  You can take Afinitor with or without food.  No. You shouldn't crush, split, or chew Afinitor or Afinitor Disperz tablets.  Afinitor is used to treat many types of cancer and tumors. It's also used to treat partial seizures (also called focal onset seizures) for people with the genetic disorder tuberous sclerosis.  Afinitor is a type of drug called a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor. An mTOR is a protein (enzyme) that helps cells grow and divide. mTOR inhibitors work by inhibiting (stopping) cancer cells from getting bigger and spreading.  Afinitor also helps treat tuberous sclerosis-related seizures, but how it does this isn't completely understood. Tuberous sclerosis seizures are thought to be caused in part by inflammation from tumors. One theory is that blocking mTOR reduces inflammation between nerve cells in the brain, which could help reduce seizures.  The effectiveness of cancer drugs is usually measured by a response rate. Response rates can be monitored by different types of tests. You and your doctor will create a plan to monitor your treatment and response. If the drug works, it may take a few weeks or longer to notice a response to the drug.  You shouldn't take Afinitor if you're planning on becoming pregnant or are currently pregnant. In  animal studies , Afinitor was harmful to the fetus when the mother was given the drug.  Women should use  contraception  (birth control) during Afinitor treatment and for eight weeks after their last dose. Men should also use birth control during treatment and for four weeks after their last dose.  It isn't known if Afinitor passes into human breast milk.  Animal studies  have shown that Afinitor passes into breast milk at a high level. However, animal studies don't always predict what will occur in humans.  Because the effects are not known, it is recommended that women not breastfeed during treatment with Afinitor and for two weeks after their last dose.  If you have any concerns about breastfeeding and taking Afinitor, talk with your doctor.  Here are answers to some frequently asked questions about Afinitor.  No, Afinitor isn't a type of chemotherapy. Afinitor is a type of drug called a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor, which is considered a targeted therapy. Targeted therapy works by "targeting" and attacking cancer cells.  Chemotherapy medications are different than targeted therapies. Chemotherapy drugs act on all cells in the body that are growing quickly, not just cancer cells. Chemotherapy medications usually kill the growing cells and affect more cells in the body than targeted therapy does.  To help keep your mouth healthy and free from sores, practice good dental hygiene. Brush your teeth twice a day and floss once a day. Also, eat a healthy diet and look for any changes in your mouth. If you notice any mouth problems, tell your doctor.  You can also try using an alcohol-free mouthwash while being treated with Afinitor. This may help reduce your risk for mouth sores.  According to a  2017 review , researchers are looking at several ways to help prevent mouth sores in people using Afinitor or other drugs from the same class. Studies haven't yet proven that these methods are effective, but possible options include:  If you want to help prevent mouth sores, talk with your doctor. They can suggest the best options for you.  Maybe. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved Afinitor to treat advanced hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer in women who have gone through menopause.  In theory, Afinitor could be used to treat this cancer in women who haven't yet gone through menopause. However, there's no evidence available yet that the drug would work.  If you haven't yet reached menopause and want to learn more about Afinitor, talk with your doctor.  Afinitor and Zortress are both prescription medications that contain the drug everolimus. However, they're used for different purposes and prescribed at different doses.  Afinitor is approved to treat many types of cancers and tumors, and is prescribed at higher doses. Zortress is approved at much lower doses to help prevent organ rejection in people who have had a kidney or liver transplant.  Yes and no. Afinitor is approved to treat nonfunctional types of carcinoid tumors of the pancreas, lungs, and stomach or gut. Nonfunctional tumors don't produce hormones. (Another name for carcinoid tumors is neuroendocrine tumors. These are tumors that grow in and around nerve cells and cells that make hormones.)  Afinitor isn't approved to treat functional carcinoid tumors. These are tumors that actively release hormones.  Before taking Afinitor, talk with your doctor about your health history. In some cases, Afinitor may not be right for you based on your health history. Talk with your doctor if any of the following applies to you:  Using more than the recommended dose of Afinitor can lead to serious and life-threatening side effects.  Symptoms of taking too much Afinitor can include:  If you think you've taken too much of Afinitor, call your doctor. You can also call the American Association of Poison Control Centers at 800-222-1222 or use their  online tool .  But if your symptoms are severe, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room right away .  When you get Afinitor from the pharmacy, the pharmacist will add an expiration date to the label on the bottle. This date is typically one year from the date they dispensed the medication.  The expiration date helps guarantee the effectiveness of the medication during this time. The  current stance  of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is to avoid using expired medications. If you have unused medication that has gone past the expiration date, talk to your pharmacist about whether you might still be able to use it.  How long a medication remains good can depend on many factors, including how and where you store the medication.  Store Afinitor tablets at room temperature in their original container. Be sure to protect them from light and moisture.  If you no longer need to take Afinitor and have leftover medication, it's important to dispose of it safely. This helps prevent others, including children and pets, from taking the drug by accident. It also helps keep the drug from harming the environment.  The  FDA website  provides several useful tips on medication disposal. You can also ask your pharmacist for information on how to dispose of your medication.  The following information is provided for clinicians and other healthcare professionals.  Afinitor is a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor approved for the treatment of:  Afinitor is not approved for the treatment of functional carcinoid tumors.  Afinitor and Afinitor Disperz are approved for adult and pediatric patients ages 1 year and older with TSC-associated subependymal giant cell astrocytoma (SEGA) that requires treatment but cannot be curatively removed.  Afinitor Disperz is approved for the adjunctive treatment of TSC-associated partial seizures (focal onset seizures) in adult and pediatric patients ages 2 years and older.  Afinitor inhibits mTOR, a kinase enzyme. In cancer and tuberous sclerosis, the mTOR pathway is not properly regulated, leading to cancer or tumor growth. Afinitor blocks mTOR and interferes with various mechanisms including protein synthesis and cell growth.  The mechanism of action between mTOR inhibition and TSC-related seizures is not well understood. Other seizure disorders have been connected to mTOR dysregulation. Thus, inhibition of mTOR may be a novel mechanism for the management of seizures.  Peak concentration occurs one to two hours after administration. Once-daily dosing of Afinitor reaches steady-state within two weeks.  Afinitor is a CYP3A4 substrate and is metabolized in the liver. It is eliminated primarily through the feces. The average half-life of Afinitor is about 30 hours.  Afinitor is contraindicated in people with have severe allergic reactions to everolimus or drugs within the same class.  Afinitor tablets should be stored at room temperature in their original container. They should be protected from light and moisture. Anticancer medications should be handled and discarded properly.   Disclaimer : Medical News Today has made every effort to make certain that all information is factually correct, comprehensive, and up-to-date. However, this article should not be used as a substitute for the knowledge and expertise of a licensed healthcare professional. You should always consult your doctor or other healthcare professional before taking any medication. The drug information contained herein is subject to change and is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. The absence of warnings or other information for a given drug does not indicate that the drug or drug combination is safe, effective, or appropriate for all patients or all specific uses.    
 Afinitor - everolimus tablet; Afinitor Disperz - everolimus tablet, for suspension. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=2150f73a-179b-4afc-b8ce-67c85cc72f04  
 Aromasin - exemestane tablet. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=cf066b7a-032a-416c-8d40-15ba581423e3  
 Baselga J, et al. (2018). Everolimus in postmenopausal hormone-receptor–positive advanced breast cancer.  https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1109653  
 Chemotherapy for breast cancer. (2017).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/treatment/chemotherapy-for-breast-cancer.html  
 Chemotherapy for kidney cancer. (2017).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/kidney-cancer/treating/chemotherapy.html  
 Dabora SL, et al. (2011). Multicenter phase 2 trial of sirolimus for tuberous sclerosis: Kidney angiomyolipomas and other tumors regress and VEGF- D levels decrease.  https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0023379  
 Don't be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm  
 GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com/  
 Ibrance (palbociclib) capsules, for oral use. (2019).  https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2019/207103s008lbl.pdf  
 Immunotherapy for kidney cancer. (2019).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/kidney-cancer/treating/immunotherapy.html  
 Li M, et al. (2019). Efficacy and safety of mTOR inhibitors (rapamycin and its analogues) for tuberous sclerosis complex: A meta-analysis.  https://ojrd.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13023-019-1012-x  
 Ostendorf AP, et al. (2015). mTOR inhibition in epilepsy: rationale and clinical perspectives [Abstract].  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs40263-014-0223-x  
 Sepsis: What are the signs and symptoms? (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/sepsis/signs-symptoms.html  
 Shinohara E. (2018). All about carcinoid (neuroendocrine) tumors.  https://www.oncolink.org/cancers/carcinoid-neuroendocrine-tumors/all-about-carcinoid-neuroendocrine-tumors  
 Staves KL, et al. (2017). Prevention and treatment options for mTOR inhibitor-associated stomatitis.  https://www.mdedge.com/hematology-oncology/article/137232/patient-survivor-care/prevention-and-treatment-options-mtor  
 Targeted therapy for breast cancer. (2018).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/treatment/targeted-therapy-for-breast-cancer.html  
 Targeted therapies for kidney cancer. (2019).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/kidney-cancer/treating/targeted-therapy.html  
 Types of blood pressure medications. (2017).  https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/high-blood-pressure/changes-you-can-make-to-manage-high-blood-pressure/types-of-blood-pressure-medications  
 Wong, M. (2013). mTOR as a potential treatment target for epilepsy.  https://www.futuremedicine.com/doi/10.2217/fnl.12.45  
 Zhang B, et al. (2015). Inflammatory mechanisms contribute to the neurological manifestations of tuberous sclerosis complex.  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0969996115001722?via%3Dihub     Afinitor - everolimus tablet; Afinitor Disperz - everolimus tablet, for suspension. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=2150f73a-179b-4afc-b8ce-67c85cc72f04   Aromasin - exemestane tablet. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=cf066b7a-032a-416c-8d40-15ba581423e3   Baselga J, et al. (2018). Everolimus in postmenopausal hormone-receptor–positive advanced breast cancer.  https://www.nejm.org/doi/10.1056/NEJMoa1109653   Chemotherapy for breast cancer. (2017).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/treatment/chemotherapy-for-breast-cancer.html   Chemotherapy for kidney cancer. (2017).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/kidney-cancer/treating/chemotherapy.html   Dabora SL, et al. (2011). Multicenter phase 2 trial of sirolimus for tuberous sclerosis: Kidney angiomyolipomas and other tumors regress and VEGF- D levels decrease.  https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0023379   Don't be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm   GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com/   Ibrance (palbociclib) capsules, for oral use. (2019).  https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2019/207103s008lbl.pdf   Immunotherapy for kidney cancer. (2019).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/kidney-cancer/treating/immunotherapy.html   Li M, et al. (2019). Efficacy and safety of mTOR inhibitors (rapamycin and its analogues) for tuberous sclerosis complex: A meta-analysis.  https://ojrd.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13023-019-1012-x   Ostendorf AP, et al. (2015). mTOR inhibition in epilepsy: rationale and clinical perspectives [Abstract].  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs40263-014-0223-x   Sepsis: What are the signs and symptoms? (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/sepsis/signs-symptoms.html   Shinohara E. (2018). All about carcinoid (neuroendocrine) tumors.  https://www.oncolink.org/cancers/carcinoid-neuroendocrine-tumors/all-about-carcinoid-neuroendocrine-tumors   Staves KL, et al. (2017). Prevention and treatment options for mTOR inhibitor-associated stomatitis.  https://www.mdedge.com/hematology-oncology/article/137232/patient-survivor-care/prevention-and-treatment-options-mtor   Targeted therapy for breast cancer. (2018).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/breast-cancer/treatment/targeted-therapy-for-breast-cancer.html   Targeted therapies for kidney cancer. (2019).  https://www.cancer.org/cancer/kidney-cancer/treating/targeted-therapy.html   Types of blood pressure medications. (2017).  https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/high-blood-pressure/changes-you-can-make-to-manage-high-blood-pressure/types-of-blood-pressure-medications   Wong, M. (2013). mTOR as a potential treatment target for epilepsy.  https://www.futuremedicine.com/doi/10.2217/fnl.12.45   Zhang B, et al. (2015). Inflammatory mechanisms contribute to the neurological manifestations of tuberous sclerosis complex.  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0969996115001722?via%3Dihub   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Nguyen, Victor. "Afinitor (everolimus)."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326055.php&gt;    APA  Nguyen, V. (2019, August 31). "Afinitor (everolimus)."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  