 Epidiolex is a brand-name prescription drug. It's used to treat seizures caused by two forms of epilepsy: Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome. These rare but severe conditions usually appear in early childhood or infancy.  Epidiolex contains the drug cannabidiol (CBD). It comes as a liquid solution that's taken by mouth. Epidiolex is approved for use in adults and children ages 2 and older.  In  clinical studies , Epidiolex reduced the number of seizures in people taking the drug. During these studies, most people were taking Epidiolex in combination with at least two other  epilepsy  drugs. The studies showed that:  Epidiolex was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in June 2018. It was the first drug approved to treat Dravet syndrome.  Epidiolex contains cannabidiol (CBD), which comes from marijuana (cannabis). Epidiolex is the first FDA-approved drug made from cannabis.  You may wonder if Epidiolex will act like marijuana in your or your child's body. Marijuana contains two main drugs: tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and cannabidiol (CBD). These drugs have different effects on the body. THC can make you feel "high" or euphoric. CBD doesn't make you feel that way.  Epidiolex contains only CBD. It doesn't contain any THC.  Yes, Epidiolex is a controlled substance. This means it can cause dependence, and its use is regulated by the federal government.  Epidiolex is classified as a  schedule five (V)  prescription drug. Drugs with a higher classification (such as schedule five drugs) have a lower risk of being misused than drugs with a lower classification (such as schedule one drugs). This means that Epidiolex has a low risk of being misused.  Epidiolex is available only as a brand-name medication. It's not currently available in generic form.  Epidiolex contains the active ingredient cannabidiol.  As with all medications, the cost of Epidiolex can vary. To find current prices for Epidiolex in your area, check out  WellRx.com .  The cost you find on WellRx.com is what you may pay without insurance. The actual price you'll pay depends on your insurance coverage and the pharmacy you use.  If you need financial support to pay for Epidiolex, or if you need help understanding your insurance coverage, help is available.  Greenwich Biosciences, the manufacturer of Epidiolex, offers a program called Epidiolex CoPay Savings Program. For more information and to find out if you're eligible for support, call 833-426-4243 or visit the  program website .  Epidiolex can cause mild or serious side effects. The following list contains some of the key side effects that may occur while taking Epidiolex. This list does not include all possible side effects.  For more information on the possible side effects of Epidiolex, or tips on how to deal with a troubling side effect, talk with your doctor or pharmacist.  The more common side effects of Epidiolex can include:  Most of these side effects may go away within a few days or a couple of weeks. If they're more severe or don't go away, talk to your doctor or pharmacist.  Serious side effects from Epidiolex aren't common, but they can occur. Call your doctor right away if you have serious side effects. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.  Serious side effects, explained in more detail below in "Side effect details," include the following:  You may wonder how often certain side effects occur with this drug. Here's some detail on certain side effects this drug may cause.   Allergic reaction   As with most drugs, some people can have an allergic reaction after taking Epidiolex. Symptoms of a mild allergic reaction can include:  A more severe allergic reaction is rare but possible. Symptoms of a severe allergic reaction can include:  Call your doctor right away if you or your child has a severe allergic reaction to Epidiolex. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.   Drowsiness   Drowsiness was a common side effect in people taking Epidiolex during  clinical studies . Up to 25% of people taking the drug felt unusually sleepy.  During  clinical trials , about 12% of people taking Epidiolex had fatigue (low energy levels). And between 3% and 6% of people taking the drug felt sedated during  clinical studies . Symptoms of sedation can include:  People taking higher doses of Epidiolex felt drowsy, fatigued, or sedated more often than people taking lower doses of Epidiolex.  Talk with your doctor if you or your child has any of these side effects after taking Epidiolex. They may need to change your dose or have you try a different medication.  Avoid using machinery (such as driving a car) while taking Epidiolex until you know how the drug will affect you.   Sleep problems   In  clinical studies , between 5% and 11% of people taking Epidiolex had the following sleep problems:  Sleep problems were more common in people taking lower doses of Epidiolex than in people taking higher doses of the drug.  If you or your child has trouble sleeping while using Epidiolex, talk with your doctor about ways to improve your sleep.   Diarrhea   In  clinical studies , between 9% and 20% of people who took Epidiolex had diarrhea. People taking higher doses of Epidiolex had diarrhea more often than people taking lower doses of the drug.  If you or your child has diarrhea while using Epidiolex, talk with your doctor. They can recommend ways to help relieve this side effect.   Liver damage   Liver damage has occurred in people taking Epidiolex. In  clinical studies , almost 16% of people taking the drug had high blood levels of liver enzymes. High levels of liver enzymes in the blood can mean there is a problem with the liver.  Symptoms of liver problems can include:  In  clinical studies , people taking higher doses of Epidiolex had liver problems more often than people taking lower doses of the drug. Liver damage was the most common reason for people stopping use of Epidiolex during clinical studies.  If you have liver disease, you may have a higher risk of having liver damage while taking Epidiolex. Be sure to review your medical history with your doctor before starting Epidiolex.  Your doctor may test your liver function before and during your Epidiolex treatment. If you develop liver damage during treatment, you may need to stop taking the drug. Let your doctor know if you have any symptoms of liver problems during your treatment with Epidiolex.   Suicidal thoughts and behavior   Epidiolex and other anti-epilepsy medications can increase the risk of suicidal thoughts and behavior. Other medications used to treat epilepsy (anti-epilepsy drugs) also increase this risk.  An  analysis  by the FDA looked at several studies done in people using anti-epilepsy drugs. Eleven different drugs were studied.  This analysis found that people treated for epilepsy had an increased risk of suicidal thoughts and behavior. The risk in people taking anti-epilepsy drugs was 80% higher than the risk in people who were not taking these drugs. The risk was increased after just one week of taking the medications.  These studies were done before Epidiolex became available. It's not known for sure how often people taking Epidiolex have suicidal thoughts or behavior.  During treatment with Epidiolex, your doctor will monitor you or your child closely for signs of new or worsening  depression  or unusual mood changes. Talk with your doctor right away if you notice these signs in yourself or your child, or if you have thoughts of harming yourself.   Weight loss   Weight loss was reported during  clinical studies  of Epidiolex. People taking higher doses of Epidiolex noticed more weight loss than people taking lower doses.  After almost four months of treatment:  Loss of appetite is a possible side effect of Epidiolex. Between 16% and 22% of people taking Epidiolex had decreased appetite during  clinical studies . Weight loss in people taking Epidiolex could result from lack of appetite.  If you're concerned about weight loss while taking Epidiolex, talk with your doctor about ways to help you or your child maintain a healthy weight.  The Epidiolex dosage your doctor prescribes will depend on several factors. These include:  Typically, your doctor will start you or your child on a low dosage and adjust it over time to reach the dosage that works best. They'll ultimately prescribe the smallest dosage that provides the desired effect.  The following information describes dosages that are commonly used or recommended.  However, be sure to take the dosage your doctor prescribes . Your doctor will determine the best dosage to suit your or your child's needs.  Epidiolex comes as a strawberry-flavored liquid solution that's taken by mouth. It's available in a 100-mL bottle. Each mL of Epidiolex solution contains 100 mg of active drug.  You or your child will take the liquid solution using a plastic oral syringe. You use this device to measure the amount of medication, and to release the solution into your or your child's mouth. This drug can be taken using a 1-mL or a 5-mL syringe. Your pharmacist will give you the right-sized syringe for your prescribed dose of Epidiolex.  Epidiolex is prescribed in doses of milligrams (mg) of medication per kilogram (kg) of body weight. One kilogram of body weight is equal to 2.2 pounds of body weight. Your dosage will be written as mg/kg.  Recommended (standard) dosages for people with seizures caused by Lennox-Gastaut syndrome or Dravet syndrome are listed below.  Your doctor may increase your dosage after you or your child takes the starting dose for one week. Dosages are increased depending on how well the drug is tolerated and if it's working well.  Your doctor may prescribe a different dosage depending on several factors, including whether you have liver disease. If you have questions about the dosage that's right for you, talk with your doctor  If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it's almost time for your next dose, skip your missed dose. Just take your next dose at the regular time.  If you are not sure about whether you should take a missed dose, call your doctor's office.  Don't take more than one dose of Epidiolex at the same time. Doing this can increase your risk of serious side effects.  Epidiolex is meant to be used as a long-term treatment. If you and your doctor determine that Epidiolex seems to be safe and effective, you or your child will likely take it long term.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves prescription drugs such as Epidiolex to treat certain conditions. Epidiolex may also be used off-label for other conditions. Off-label use is when a drug that's approved to treat one condition is used to treat a different condition.  Epidiolex is FDA-approved to treat seizures caused by two rare and severe forms of epilepsy:  These syndromes can be very difficult to treat. People with these forms of epilepsy often need more than one medication to reduce the number of seizures they have.  Epidiolex is approved for use in adults and children ages 2 and older with these conditions.  Epidiolex is the first FDA-approved drug made with cannabidiol (CBD). It's only approved to treat seizures caused by Dravet syndrome and Lennox-Gastaut syndrome.  Many studies are looking at other ways CBD could be used for medical treatment. Some of these possible uses are described below.   Epidiolex for pain   Epidiolex isn't approved to treat pain.  Animal studies  have shown that CBD may help relieve pain. However, fewer studies have looked at the safety and effectiveness of CBD for treating pain in humans. For more information, see the "Epidiolex for treating pain" section below.   Epidiolex for anxiety   Epidiolex isn't approved to treat  anxiety . However,  several studies  have shown that CBD may improve anxiety by reducing anxious feelings during stressful times.  Epidiolex hasn't been proven safe or effective for treating anxiety. Only use Epidiolex as directed by your doctor.   Epidiolex for autism   Epidiolex isn't approved to treat  autism . Only a few studies have looked at using CBD to treat autism. In one  clinical study  of children with autism, CBD reduced symptoms of:  Epidiolex hasn't been proven safe or effective for treating autism. Only use Epidiolex as directed by your doctor.   Epidiolex for schizophrenia   Epidiolex isn't approved to treat  schizophrenia . In several small  studies , CBD reduced schizophrenia symptoms in some people. However, other  studies  haven't shown an improvement in symptoms after treatment with CBD.  Epidiolex hasn't been proven safe or effective for treating schizophrenia. Only use Epidiolex as directed by your doctor.   Epidiolex for migraine   Epidiolex is not approved to treat or prevent  migraine . Few studies have looked at the use of CBD for migraine treatment.  In some  clinical studies , CBD helped to reduce the number of migraine  headaches  in people using the drug. In these studies, CBD was used in combination with tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).  Similar to CBD, THC is a compound that comes from marijuana. THC can cause you to feel "high" or euphoric. These effects aren't caused by CBD.  Epidiolex hasn't been proven safe or effective for treating migraine. Only use Epidiolex as directed by your doctor.   Epidiolex for infantile spasms   Epidiolex isn't approved to treat infantile spasms. Only one small  clinical study  looked at using CBD to treat this condition. For almost all of the infants in the study, CBD didn't improve their symptoms.  Epidiolex hasn't been proven safe or effective for treating infantile spasms. Only use Epidiolex as directed by your doctor.   Epidiolex for tuberous sclerosis   Epidiolex isn't approved to treat tuberous sclerosis. However, in one small  clinical study , the following results were seen in people with this condition:  People in this study taking CBD in combination with a seizure drug called clobazam had even fewer seizures during treatment.  Epidiolex hasn't been proven safe or effective for treating tuberous sclerosis. Only use Epidiolex as directed by your doctor.   Epidiolex for multiple sclerosis   Epidiolex isn't approved to treat  multiple sclerosis  (MS). There isn't much known about using CBD alone to treat MS.  Several studies have looked at using a combination of CBD and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) to treat MS. Similar to CBD, THC comes from marijuana. However, THC can cause you to feel "high" or euphoric. These side effects aren't caused by CBD.  In  studies  of people with MS taking CBD and THC, some symptoms improved during treatment. Symptoms that improved included:  Epidiolex hasn't been proven safe or effective for treating MS. Only use Epidiolex as directed by your doctor.  Epidiolex is FDA-approved for use in children to treat seizures caused by Lennox-Gastaut syndrome or Dravet syndrome. It can be given to children ages 2 years and older.  Epidiolex isn't FDA-approved to treat pain. Epidiolex is made from cannabidiol (CBD). This compound is a drug that comes from marijuana (cannabis). CBD has been studied as a treatment for pain in both animals and humans.  The exact way that CBD reduces pain isn't known. It's thought that CBD blocks certain pain signals traveling through the body's nerves. This may help to reduce the pain you actually feel. CBD also helps to stop  inflammation  that can happen after nerves are irritated by pain.  Several  animal studies  have looked at using CBD to treat pain. In these studies, CBD reduced pain in animals that had nerve pain caused by  chemotherapy  (a type of  cancer  treatment) or joint pain caused by  arthritis .  One small  study  looked at using CBD to treat people with pain caused by nerve disease or nerve damage. People in this study were given either CBD, THC (a drug that also comes from cannabis), CBD together with THC, or a  placebo  (no treatment). The results showed the following:   Many other studies  have found that the combination of CBD and THC helps to reduce pain caused by some diseases and injuries. More research is needed to know if CBD treatment alone reduces pain.  Epidiolex is FDA-approved to treat seizures caused by two forms of epilepsy: Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome. These rare but severe conditions usually appear in early childhood or infancy.  Before Epidiolex was approved, it was tested in clinical trials. Its active ingredient, cannabidiol, is currently being tested in clinical trials for other uses.  In  clinical trials , people with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome who were treated with Epidiolex had fewer seizures than people who did not take the drug. During the 14-week study:  Another  clinical trial  lasting 14 weeks looked at people with Dravet syndrome. This trial included children and teenagers. People who took Epidiolex had 26% fewer seizures than people who did not take the drug. The dosage of Epidiolex given in this trial was 20 mg/kg daily.  All of the people in both of these clinical trials were taking Epidiolex in combination with other epilepsy drugs. Examples of epilepsy medications given include:  Cannabidiol (the active drug in Epidiolex) is currently being tested in clinical trials as a treatment option for other conditions. Research is being done for the following conditions:  Many ongoing studies for other conditions are also being done. If you'd like to participate in a study, look for clinical trials in your area at  clinicaltrials.gov .  Other drugs are available that can treat your condition. Some may be better suited for you than others. If you're interested in finding an alternative to Epidiolex, talk to your doctor to learn more about other medications that may work well for you.   Note : Some of the drugs listed here are used off-label to treat these specific conditions.   Treatment guidelines  recommend the following drugs to treat Lennox-Gastaut syndrome:  Some  experts  recommend the following drugs to treat Dravet syndrome:  Epidiolex is commonly prescribed with other drugs when used to treat seizures. Many of the drugs listed above can be used in combination with Epidiolex. Your doctor will recommend which drugs can be used together based on your condition.  Epidiolex is FDA-approved to treat seizures caused by two forms of epilepsy: Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome. It's the only drug containing cannabidiol (CBD) that's approved for medical use by the FDA.  The quality, safety, and effectiveness of a drug can be ensured by FDA-approval. Because Epidiolex has been approved by the FDA, you can be assured that the drug:  Other products made with CBD are available to purchase, but they haven't been approved by the FDA. This means that the FDA can't guarantee that those products have a safe amount of CBD. It also means the effectiveness of those products hasn't been tested.  One  study  looked at products containing CBD that were not FDA-approved. The study found that only 31% of those products contained the amount of CBD listed on their label. Of the remaining 69% of products:  The labels for these products didn't state that they contained tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). However, about 21% of the products did contain THC. This chemical is found in marijuana (cannabis). THC can make you feel "high" or euphoric.  Certain U.S. states have laws that require products containing CBD to be tested before they're sold. States that haven't made marijuana (cannabis) legal for medical or recreational use don't have these laws. This means that products containing CBD might not be tested before they're sold in some areas of the United States.  Be sure you're familiar with state laws before you purchase any products containing CBD. This will help you make sure that you buy products from safe and reputable companies that have had their products tested.  You may wonder how Epidiolex compares to other products made from cannabis. Here we look at how Epidiolex and Charlotte's Web are alike and different.  Epidiolex contains the drug cannabidiol (CBD). This drug comes from marijuana (cannabis). CBD doesn't make you feel "high" or euphoric.  Charlotte's Web refers to many different products that contain chemicals from hemp plants. These drugs could include CBD and small amounts of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). You can feel "high" or euphoric after using THC.  Charlotte's Web may also contain other chemicals depending on the type of product and where it is purchased. It's not known if these other chemicals are safe for use in people.  Epidiolex is FDA-approved to treat seizures caused by two forms of epilepsy: Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome. These rare but severe conditions usually appear in early childhood or infancy.  Epidiolex can be used to treat adults and children ages 2 years and older.  Charlotte's Web products are not FDA-approved to treat medical conditions.  By law , makers of Charlotte's Web can't claim that the product treats or cures any disease.  Charlotte's Web products are sometimes used to help support health and well-being. Some people use these products to help increase calmness, improve focus, or reduce  stress . It's important to remember that the safety and effectiveness of Charlotte's Web have not been proven.  Epidiolex comes as a strawberry-flavored liquid solution. It contains 100 mg of CBD per milliliter (mL) of solution. Epidiolex is taken by mouth twice daily.  Charlotte's Web products are available as oral capsules, oils, creams, and balms. Products come in many different doses, ranging from 6 mg to 60 mg of CBD per mL of product.  Epidiolex is an FDA-approved drug. This means that side effects caused by Epidiolex have been reported in clinical studies. It also means that Epidiolex has been proven safe and effective to treat certain conditions.  Charlotte's Web products haven't been studied in clinical trials. Side effects of Charlotte's Web haven't been reported and aren't known for sure.  Because of this, it's not possible to compare the side effects of Epidiolex and Charlotte's Web.  Charlotte's Web hasn't been studied in clinical trials. Because of this, it's not possible to compare the effectiveness of Charlotte's Web to the effectiveness of Epidiolex.  Epidiolex is a brand-name drug. There are currently no generic forms available. Brand-name medications usually cost more than generics. To find out about cost for Epidiolex in your area, visit  WellRx.com .  Charlotte's Web is available as a variety of products. Prices vary for the different products.  Epidiolex is an FDA-approved drug used for medical treatment. It may be covered by  health insurance . Charlotte's Web is not an FDA-approved medical treatment. It's not covered by health insurance.  In addition to Charlotte's Web (above), other medications are also used to treat conditions similar to those treated by Epidiolex. Below are comparisons between Epidiolex and several medications.  Epidiolex contains the drug cannabidiol (CBD). Valproic acid is a generic drug. It's also available as the brand-name drug Depakene.   Uses   Epidiolex and valproic acid are both used to treat epilepsy (a disorder that causes seizures). However, they are FDA-approved to treat different forms of epilepsy.  Epidiolex is approved to treat seizure disorders caused by Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome. It's approved for use in adults and children ages 2 years and older.  Valproic acid is approved to treat:  Valproic acid can be used alone or with other seizure medications.   Drug forms and administration   Epidiolex is a strawberry-flavored liquid solution, taken by mouth twice daily.  Valproic acid comes as capsules that are taken by mouth, one to three times daily. It's also available as a syrup that can be taken by mouth, or as an injection given in the hospital.   Side effects and risks   Epidiolex and valproic acid both work to treat seizures. They can cause some similar side effects and some different side effects. Below are examples of these side effects.    More common side effects    These lists contain examples of more common side effects that can occur with Epidiolex, with valproic acid, or with both drugs (when taken individually).    Serious side effects    These lists contain examples of serious side effects that can occur with Epidiolex, with valproic acid, or with both drugs (when taken individually).   Effectiveness   In separate studies,  Epidiolex  and  valproic acid  reduced the number of seizures in people taking each drug. However, there aren't any studies that have directly compared Epidiolex to valproic acid.   Costs   Epidiolex is a brand-name drug. There are currently no generic forms of Epidiolex available. Brand-name medications usually cost more than generic drugs.  Valproic acid is available in a brand-name form (Depakene) and in a generic form.  According to estimates on  WellRx.com , Epidiolex generally costs more than Depakene or its generic form (valproic acid). The actual price you'll pay for any drug will depend on your dosage, insurance plan, location, and the pharmacy you use.  Epidiolex contains the drug cannabidiol (CBD). This drug comes from marijuana (cannabis). CBD doesn't make you feel "high" or euphoric.  Topiramate is a generic drug. It's also available in brand-name forms (Topamax, Qudexy XR, Trokendi XR).   Uses   Epidiolex and topiramate are both used to treat epilepsy (a disorder that causes seizures). They are both FDA-approved to treat Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, but also have other unique uses.  Epidiolex is approved to treat seizure disorders caused by Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome. It's approved to treat adults and children ages 2 years and older.  Topiramate is FDA-approved to treat epilepsy, used alone or in combination with other seizure drugs. It's also approved to treat Lennox-Gastaut syndrome when used in combination with other epilepsy drugs. It can be used in adults and children ages 2 years and older. Topiramate is also approved to prevent migraines in people ages 12 years and older.   Drug forms and administration   Epidiolex comes as a strawberry-flavored liquid solution, taken twice daily by mouth.  Topiramate comes in tablets and capsules that are taken by mouth. Dosing schedules differ depending on the condition you're taking topiramate to treat. It's typically taken twice a day.   Side effects and risks   Epidiolex and topiramate work in different ways to treat seizures. They can cause similar and different side effects. Below are examples of these side effects.    More common side effects    These lists contain examples of more common side effects that can occur with Epidiolex, with topiramate, or with both drugs (when taken individually).    Serious side effects    These lists contain examples of serious side effects that can occur with Epidiolex, with topiramate, or with both drugs (when taken individually).   Effectiveness   Epidiolex and topiramate are both used to treat Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. They're also each used to treat other conditions.   Epidiolex  and  topiramate  haven't been compared directly to each other in clinical studies. However, in separate studies, both drugs reduced the number of seizures in people taking them for treatment.   Costs   Epidiolex is a brand-name drug. There are currently no generic forms of Epidiolex available. Brand-name medications usually cost more than generic drugs.  Topiramate is a generic drug. It's also available as several brand-name drugs (Topamax, Qudexy XR, Trokendi XR).  According to estimates on  WellRx.com , Epidiolex generally costs more than the brand-name or generic forms of topiramate. The actual price you'll pay for any drug will depend on your insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  Epidiolex and alcohol don't interact with each other. But they can both cause similar effects in your body, including:  Drinking alcohol while taking Epidiolex can worsen these side effects. To reduce your risk of having these effects, you should avoid drinking alcohol while using Epidiolex.  If you have trouble avoiding alcohol, talk with your doctor.  Epidiolex can interact with several other medications. It can also interact with certain supplements as well as certain foods.  Different interactions can cause different effects. For instance, some can interfere with how well a drug works, while others can cause increased side effects.  Below is a list of medications that can interact with Epidiolex. This list does not contain all drugs that may interact with Epidiolex.  Before taking Epidiolex, be sure to tell your doctor and pharmacist about all prescription, over-the-counter, and other drugs you take. Also tell them about any  vitamins , herbs, and supplements you use. Sharing this information can help you avoid potential interactions.  If you have questions about drug interactions that may affect you, ask your doctor or pharmacist.  
 Certain seizure medications 
  Taking Epidiolex with certain seizure medications can increase the risk of side effects and change how the medications work.  Some examples of interactions with seizure medications include:  There may be other seizure medications in addition to these that can interact with Epidiolex. Be sure to tell your doctor and pharmacist about all of the medications you are taking for seizure control. This will help prevent dangerous side effects and make sure the drugs are as effective as possible.  
 Certain antiviral medications 
  Taking Epidiolex with certain antiviral medications can change levels of either drug in the body. This can make the medications more or less effective. It can also increase the risk of side effects.  Examples of antiviral drugs that may interact with Epidiolex include:  Many of these drugs are part of combination tablets (tablets made from more than one drug). Be sure to tell your doctor or pharmacist about all of the antiviral medications you are taking. This will help make sure the drugs are as effective as possible and will help you avoid dangerous side effects.  
 Certain antifungal medications 
  Taking Epidiolex with certain antifungal medications can increase the risk of side effects. Examples of these antifungal drugs include:  Talk with your doctor or pharmacist about all antifungal medications you take. They can make sure the drugs won't interact with Epidiolex. This will help you decrease your risk of certain side effects.  Taking Epidiolex with certain herbs or supplements, such as St. John's wort, can lower Epidiolex levels in your body. This may reduce how effective Epidiolex is in treating seizures.  Other herbs and supplements can make you feel extra drowsy or sleepy if they're taken with Epidiolex. Examples of these include:  Talk with your doctor about any herbs or supplements you take. They may recommend that you stop taking certain products that cause drowsiness and products that affect how well Epidiolex works for you.  Eating meals with large amounts of fat or  calories  can increase the amount of Epidiolex that your body absorbs. This can increase your risk of side effects, such as drowsiness, diarrhea, rash, and trouble sleeping.  It's important to eat similar amounts of fat and calories at each meal. This will help keep a stable level of Epidiolex in your body and reduce your risk of side effects. If you have questions about your diet, talk with your doctor.  You or your child should take Epidiolex according to your doctor or healthcare provider's instructions.  Epidiolex is taken twice daily. It's best to take the doses about 12 hours apart.  Epidiolex can be taken with or without food.  Keep in mind, eating foods high in calories or fat can increase the amount of Epidiolex that the body absorbs. This can increase the risk of side effects.  Try to eat similar amounts of fat and calories at each meal. This will help keep the level of Epidiolex consistent in your or your child's body.  Epidiolex comes with two reusable plastic oral syringes. You'll use these syringes to measure the exact dose of medication you're prescribed, and to take the medication into your or your child's mouth.  You'll be given two syringes so that you have an extra syringe in case you misplace one. You shouldn't take Epidiolex with syringes from another medication. Be sure to only use the syringes that come with Epidiolex.  Two different syringe sizes are available: 5 mL and 1 mL. Your pharmacist will give you the right one for your or your child's dose of Epidiolex.  Don't use a household measuring device (such as a teaspoon) to measure the Epidiolex dose. These devices don't always measure the exact amount you need. If you lose the syringes that come with Epidiolex, ask your pharmacist for new ones.  When using a new bottle of Epidiolex, follow these steps:  Epidiolex is approved to treat seizures caused by two forms of epilepsy: Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and Dravet syndrome.  Epidiolex contains the drug cannabidiol (CBD), which comes from marijuana (cannabis). Unlike THC, another compound in marijuana, CBD doesn't make you feel "high" or euphoric.  It's not known exactly how Epidiolex reduces the number of seizures people have. During a seizure, the brain sends abnormal electrical signals. Epidiolex may work on certain pathways in the brain to prevent these signals from starting and spreading.  Epidiolex typically starts working within days to weeks. In  clinical studies , many people had fewer seizures within four weeks of starting treatment with Epidiolex.  It isn't known if Epidiolex is safe to use during pregnancy.  Animal studies  have shown harm to a growing fetus when the pregnant mother took Epidiolex. However, animal studies don't always predict what will happen in humans.  If you are pregnant or may become pregnant, talk with your doctor about the benefits and risks of taking Epidiolex in pregnancy.  If you take Epidiolex during pregnancy, you're encouraged to enroll in a pregnancy registry. The North American Antiepileptic Drug Pregnancy Registry studies how pregnant woman and their babies are affected by epilepsy drugs.  Contact the registry at 888-233-2334 or visit the  registry's website .  It's not known if Epidiolex passes into breast milk. If you are breastfeeding and considering taking Epidiolex, talk with your doctor. You can discuss the risks and benefits of using Epidiolex while breastfeeding.  Epidiolex is a controlled substance. This means it can cause dependence, and its use is regulated by the federal government.  Epidiolex is classified as a  schedule five (V)  prescription drug. Drugs with a higher classification (such as schedule five drugs) have a lower risk of being misused than drugs with a lower classification (such as schedule one drugs). This means that Epidiolex has a low risk of being misused.  Epidiolex is the only FDA-approved medication made from CBD. All other drugs made with CBD are classified as  schedule one (I)  drugs. They're not approved by the FDA for medical treatment. However, in some U.S. states, it's legal to use these products for medical use.  If you travel to other U.S. states and use Epidiolex, it helps to be familiar with the legal status of CBD in those states. Epidiolex is legal for use in all states if you have a prescription for it. However, CBD products other than Epidiolex are illegal in many states.  The U.S. government has special rules in place for all controlled substances. These rules help ensure safety when controlled drugs are prescribed and dispensed. If you'd like to know more about how controlled substances are handled, talk with your doctor or pharmacist.  All controlled substances, including Epidiolex, need to be stored in a safe, secure place. Carefully storing this drug will help prevent it from being used accidentally by other people (or pets). It will also help prevent anyone from trying to misuse the drug.  Here are answers to some frequently asked questions about Epidiolex.  Epidiolex is classified as a  schedule five (V)  prescription drug. Drugs with a higher classification (such as schedule five drugs) have a lower risk of being misused than drugs with a lower classification (such as schedule one drugs). This means that Epidiolex has a low risk of being misused.  Epidiolex is the only FDA-approved medication made from cannabidiol (CBD). The quality, safety, and effectiveness of a drug can be ensured by FDA-approval. Because Epidiolex has been approved by the FDA, you can be assured that the drug:  All other drugs made with CBD are classified as  schedule one (I)  drugs. These drugs are not approved by the federal government for medical treatment. However, in some U.S. states, it's legal to use these products for medical use.  No, Epidiolex doesn't make you feel "high" or euphoric.  Epidiolex contains a drug called cannabidiol (CBD). This drug comes from marijuana (cannabis). It doesn't make you feel intoxicated. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is a drug that also comes from marijuana (cannabis). THC can make you feel "high."  Epidiolex doesn't contain any THC. It only contains CBD.  Yes, it's legal to use Epidiolex if your doctor has prescribed it for you or your child. Epidiolex is an FDA-approved drug, just like any other medication that your doctor prescribes.  Yes, you can use Epidiolex if you're on a ketogenic diet. But you should talk with your doctor about how your diet can affect the medication. Eating meals high in fat can increase the amount of Epidiolex that your body absorbs. This can increase the level of Epidiolex in your system.  In  clinical studies , Epidiolex levels were increased up to five times when the drug was taken with a high-fat meal.  Higher levels of Epidiolex in the body can increase your risk of side effects. These can include:  If you're on a ketogenic diet, your doctor will monitor your side effects. They may recommend a different dose of Epidiolex or changes in your diet.  In total, 1,756 people took Epidiolex during  clinical studies . About 1% of people in the clinical studies died.  Epidiolex was not found to be the cause of death in these people. Many of those who died had several complicated diseases. Some of these diseases increase the risk of death.  Also, the number of deaths in these studies was similar to the number of deaths in people who have either Lennox-Gastaut syndrome or Dravet syndrome.  Before taking Epidiolex, talk with your doctor about any medical conditions you have. Epidiolex may not be right for you if you have certain conditions. These include:  Taking too much Epidiolex can increase your risk of serious side effects.  Symptoms of an overdose can include:  If you think you've taken too much of this drug, call your doctor or seek guidance from the American Association of Poison Control Centers at 800-222-1222 or through their  online tool .  If your symptoms are severe, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room right away .  When you get Epidiolex from the pharmacy, the pharmacist will add an expiration date to the label on the bottle. This date is typically one year from the date they dispensed the medication.  The expiration date helps guarantee the effectiveness of the medication during this time. The  current stance  of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is to avoid using expired medications. If you have unused medication that has gone past the expiration date, talk to your pharmacist about whether you might still be able to use it.  How long a medication remains good can depend on many factors, including how and where you store the medication.  Epidiolex solution should be stored at room temperature. Make sure to keep the bottle standing upright and the lid tightly closed. Do not freeze the medication.  You can use Epidiolex for 12 weeks (three months) after the bottle is first opened. Discard any medication that's left over after the bottle has been open for 12 weeks.  If you no longer need to take Epidiolex and have leftover medication, it's important to dispose of it safely. This helps prevent others, including children and pets, from taking the drug by accident. It also helps keep the drug from harming the environment.  The  FDA website  provides several useful tips on medication disposal. You can also ask your pharmacist for information on how to dispose of your medication.  The following information is provided for clinicians and other healthcare professionals.  Epidiolex (cannabidiol) is FDA-approved for the following indications:  It is approved for use in people ages 2 years and older.  The mechanism of action of Epidiolex in treating epilepsy is not clear. However, it appears that the anticonvulsant activity of Epidiolex is not related to interaction with cannabinoid receptors in the body.  At steady state, Epidiolex reaches maximum concentration in 2.5 to 5 hours. High-calorie or high-fat meals increase maximum concentration 5-fold, compared to concentration after administration in a fasted state.  Protein binding of the parent drug and metabolites is greater than 94%.  Epidiolex is extensively metabolized by the liver. Metabolism occurs via CYP2C19, CYP3A4, UGT1A7, UGT1A9, and UGT2B7. Moderate to severe hepatic impairment increases blood plasma levels 2.5-fold to 5.2-fold.  The half-life of Epidiolex is between 56 and 61 hours. Elimination occurs primarily in the feces, with significantly less excretion in the urine.  Epidiolex is contraindicated in patients with a history of hypersensitivity to cannabidiol or any of the components of Epidiolex.  Epidiolex is contraindicated in patients with a history of hypersensitivity reaction to sesame seed oil.  Epidiolex is classified by the federal government as a schedule five (V) drug, which has the lowest abuse and  addiction  potential compared to other drug schedules.  In  clinical studies , there were no reports of abuse or dependence.  As with all anti-epileptic drugs, abrupt withdrawal should be avoided due to potential for increased seizure frequency and status epilepticus. Gradual titration is recommended.  Store Epidiolex in an upright position and at room temperature (68째F to 78째F, or 20째C to 25.6째C) with the cap tightly closed. Do not freeze. Discard any unused solution 12 weeks after first opening.   Disclaimer : Medical News Today has made every effort to make certain that all information is factually correct, comprehensive, and up-to-date. However, this article should not be used as a substitute for the knowledge and expertise of a licensed healthcare professional. You should always consult your doctor or other healthcare professional before taking any medication. The drug information contained herein is subject to change and is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. The absence of warnings or other information for a given drug does not indicate that the drug or drug combination is safe, effective, or appropriate for all patients or all specific uses.    
 2018-19 NCAA banned drug list. (2018).  http://www.ncaa.org/2018-19-ncaa-banned-drugs-list  
 Asadi-Pooya AA. (2018). Lennox-Gastaut syndrome: A comprehensive review [Abstract].  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10072-017-3188-y  
 Barchel D, et al. (2019). Oral cannabidiol use in children with autism spectrum disorder to treat related symptoms and co-morbidities.  https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphar.2018.01521/full  
 Baron EP. (2018). Medicinal properties of cannabinoids, terpenes, and flavonoids in cannabis, and benefits in migraine, headache, and pain: An update on current evidence and cannabis science [Abstract].  https://headachejournal.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/head.13345  
 Boggs DL, et al. (2018). The effects of cannabidiol (CBD) on cognition and symptoms in outpatients with chronic schizophrenia: A randomized controlled trial [Abstract].  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00213-018-4885-9  
 Bonn-Miller MO, et al. (2017). Labeling accuracy of cannabidiol extracts sold online.  https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2661569  
 Cannabidiol as an adjunctive treatment for bipolar depression (CBDBD). (2018).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03310593?term=epidiolex  
 Cannabidiol as a treatment for AUD comorbid with PTSD. (2019).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03248167?term=epidiolex  
 Cannabidiol usage as an adjunct therapy for Crohn's disease. (2018).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03467620?term=epidiolex  
 CBD Treatment in Hand Osteoarthritis and Psoriatic Arthritis. (NordCAN). (2019).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03693833?term=epidiolex  
 Charlotte's Web. (n.d.).  https://www.charlottesweb.com/  
 Controlled substance schedules: Marijuana. (n.d.).  https://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/schedules/  
 Cross JH, et al. (2017). Expert opinion on the management of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome: Treatment algorithms and practical considerations.  https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fneur.2017.00505/full  
 Depakene - valproic acid solution; Depakene - valproic acid capsule, liquid filled. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=6b4331f5-4475-417a-6a9d-09c2f8334235  
 Don't be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm  
 Dravet Syndrome. (2018).  https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/dravet-syndrome-spectrum/  
 Epidiolex - cannabidiol solution. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=8bf27097-4870-43fb-94f0-f3d0871d1eec  
 FDA briefing document: Peripheral and Central Nervous System Drugs Advisory Committee meeting. NDA 210365: Cannabidiol. (2018).  https://www.fda.gov/downloads/advisorycommittees/committeesmeetingmaterials/drugs/peripheralandcentralnervoussystemdrugsadvisorycommittee/ucm604736.pdf  
 Food and Drug Administration. (2018). Statement by FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlied, M.D., on the importance of conducting proper research to prove safe and effective medical uses for the active chemicals in marijuana and its components [Press release].  https://www.fda.gov/newsevents/newsroom/pressannouncements/ucm611047.htm  
 Fraguas-Sanchez AI, et al. (2018). Medical use of cannabinoids [Abstract].  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs40265-018-0996-1  
 Hess EJ, et al. (2016). Cannabidiol as a new treatment for drug-resistant epilepsy in tuberous sclerosis complex.  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/epi.13499  
 Hussain SA. (2018). Treatment of infantile spasms.  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/epi4.12264  
 Kanner AM, et al. (2018). Practice guideline update summary: Efficacy and tolerability of the new antiepileptic drugs II: Treatment-resistant epilepsy: Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the American Epilepsy Society.  https://n.neurology.org/content/91/2/82  
 Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. (2017).  https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/lennox-gastaut-syndrome/  
 Statistical review and evaluation. Antiepileptic drugs and suicidality. (2008).  https://www.fda.gov/files/drugs/published/Statistical-Review-and-Evaluation--Antiepileptic-Drugs-and-Suicidality.pdf  
 A study of tolerability and efficacy of cannabidiol on motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease. (2019).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03582137?term=epidiolex  
 Sublingual cannabidiol for anxiety. (2018).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02548559?term=epidiolex  
 Topiramate - topiramate capsule, coated pellets. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=6f9d59e3-d10d-48f3-af01-83ba3e1e3a2b  
 Urits I, et al. (2019). An update of current cannabis-based pharmaceuticals in pain medicine.  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs40122-019-0114-4  
 Verrotti A, et al. (2018). The pharmacological management of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and critical review.  https://www.seizure-journal.com/article/S1059-1311(18)30550-8/fulltext  
 Wade DT, et al. (2003). A preliminary controlled study to determine whether whole-plant cannabis extracts can improve intractable neurogenic symptoms [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12617376  
 WellRx. (n.d.).  https://www.wellrx.com/  
 What is Dravet syndrome? (n.d.).  https://www.dravetfoundation.org/what-is-dravet-syndrome/  
 White CM. (2019). A review of human studies assessing cannabidiol's (CBD) therapeutic actions and potential [Abstract].  https://accp1.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/jcph.1387  
 Wirrell EC, et al. (2017). Optimizing the diagnosis and management of Dravet syndrome: Recommendations from a North American consensus panel.  https://www.scholars.northwestern.edu/en/publications/optimizing-the-diagnosis-and-management-of-dravet-syndrome-recomm     2018-19 NCAA banned drug list. (2018).  http://www.ncaa.org/2018-19-ncaa-banned-drugs-list   Asadi-Pooya AA. (2018). Lennox-Gastaut syndrome: A comprehensive review [Abstract].  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10072-017-3188-y   Barchel D, et al. (2019). Oral cannabidiol use in children with autism spectrum disorder to treat related symptoms and co-morbidities.  https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphar.2018.01521/full   Baron EP. (2018). Medicinal properties of cannabinoids, terpenes, and flavonoids in cannabis, and benefits in migraine, headache, and pain: An update on current evidence and cannabis science [Abstract].  https://headachejournal.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/head.13345   Boggs DL, et al. (2018). The effects of cannabidiol (CBD) on cognition and symptoms in outpatients with chronic schizophrenia: A randomized controlled trial [Abstract].  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00213-018-4885-9   Bonn-Miller MO, et al. (2017). Labeling accuracy of cannabidiol extracts sold online.  https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2661569   Cannabidiol as an adjunctive treatment for bipolar depression (CBDBD). (2018).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03310593?term=epidiolex   Cannabidiol as a treatment for AUD comorbid with PTSD. (2019).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03248167?term=epidiolex   Cannabidiol usage as an adjunct therapy for Crohn's disease. (2018).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03467620?term=epidiolex   CBD Treatment in Hand Osteoarthritis and Psoriatic Arthritis. (NordCAN). (2019).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03693833?term=epidiolex   Charlotte's Web. (n.d.).  https://www.charlottesweb.com/   Controlled substance schedules: Marijuana. (n.d.).  https://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/schedules/   Cross JH, et al. (2017). Expert opinion on the management of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome: Treatment algorithms and practical considerations.  https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fneur.2017.00505/full   Depakene - valproic acid solution; Depakene - valproic acid capsule, liquid filled. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=6b4331f5-4475-417a-6a9d-09c2f8334235   Don't be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm   Dravet Syndrome. (2018).  https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/dravet-syndrome-spectrum/   Epidiolex - cannabidiol solution. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=8bf27097-4870-43fb-94f0-f3d0871d1eec   FDA briefing document: Peripheral and Central Nervous System Drugs Advisory Committee meeting. NDA 210365: Cannabidiol. (2018).  https://www.fda.gov/downloads/advisorycommittees/committeesmeetingmaterials/drugs/peripheralandcentralnervoussystemdrugsadvisorycommittee/ucm604736.pdf   Food and Drug Administration. (2018). Statement by FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlied, M.D., on the importance of conducting proper research to prove safe and effective medical uses for the active chemicals in marijuana and its components [Press release].  https://www.fda.gov/newsevents/newsroom/pressannouncements/ucm611047.htm   Fraguas-Sanchez AI, et al. (2018). Medical use of cannabinoids [Abstract].  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs40265-018-0996-1   Hess EJ, et al. (2016). Cannabidiol as a new treatment for drug-resistant epilepsy in tuberous sclerosis complex.  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/epi.13499   Hussain SA. (2018). Treatment of infantile spasms.  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/epi4.12264   Kanner AM, et al. (2018). Practice guideline update summary: Efficacy and tolerability of the new antiepileptic drugs II: Treatment-resistant epilepsy: Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the American Epilepsy Society.  https://n.neurology.org/content/91/2/82   Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. (2017).  https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/lennox-gastaut-syndrome/   Statistical review and evaluation. Antiepileptic drugs and suicidality. (2008).  https://www.fda.gov/files/drugs/published/Statistical-Review-and-Evaluation--Antiepileptic-Drugs-and-Suicidality.pdf   A study of tolerability and efficacy of cannabidiol on motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease. (2019).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03582137?term=epidiolex   Sublingual cannabidiol for anxiety. (2018).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02548559?term=epidiolex   Topiramate - topiramate capsule, coated pellets. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=6f9d59e3-d10d-48f3-af01-83ba3e1e3a2b   Urits I, et al. (2019). An update of current cannabis-based pharmaceuticals in pain medicine.  https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs40122-019-0114-4   Verrotti A, et al. (2018). The pharmacological management of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and critical review.  https://www.seizure-journal.com/article/S1059-1311(18)30550-8/fulltext   Wade DT, et al. (2003). A preliminary controlled study to determine whether whole-plant cannabis extracts can improve intractable neurogenic symptoms [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12617376   WellRx. (n.d.).  https://www.wellrx.com/   What is Dravet syndrome? (n.d.).  https://www.dravetfoundation.org/what-is-dravet-syndrome/   White CM. (2019). A review of human studies assessing cannabidiol's (CBD) therapeutic actions and potential [Abstract].  https://accp1.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/jcph.1387   Wirrell EC, et al. (2017). Optimizing the diagnosis and management of Dravet syndrome: Recommendations from a North American consensus panel.  https://www.scholars.northwestern.edu/en/publications/optimizing-the-diagnosis-and-management-of-dravet-syndrome-recomm   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Slowiczek, Lindsay. "Epidiolex (cannabidiol)."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326061.php&gt;    APA  Slowiczek, L. (2019, August 31). "Epidiolex (cannabidiol)."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  