 Jardiance is a brand-name prescription medication that's prescribed for people with  type 2 diabetes . It's used to:  Jardiance contains the drug empagliflozin. It belongs to a class of drugs called sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors. Jardiance comes as a tablet that's taken by mouth once daily.  In  clinical studies , Jardiance improved blood sugar levels in adults with  diabetes . After 24 weeks of treatment, people taking Jardiance had the following results:  Jardiance is also effective when taken in combination with other diabetes medications. It can be taken with drugs such as metformin,  insulin , pioglitazone, and glipizide.  In a three-year  clinical study , Jardiance helped reduce the risk of cardiovascular death by 38 percent in people with both type 2 diabetes and heart disease. In this study, people took Jardiance in combination with other treatment for diabetes and heart disease.  Jardiance is available only as a brand-name medication. It's not currently available in generic form.  Jardiance contains the drug empagliflozin.  Jardiance can cause mild or serious side effects. The following list contains some of the key side effects that may occur while taking Jardiance. This list does not include all possible side effects.  For more information on the possible side effects of Jardiance, or tips on how to deal with a troubling side effect, talk with your doctor or pharmacist.  The more common side effects of Jardiance can include:  If you have symptoms of these infections, call your doctor. You may need treatment with over-the-counter or prescription medications.  Serious side effects from Jardiance aren't common, but they can occur. Call your doctor right away if you have serious side effects. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.  Serious side effects and their symptoms can include the following:  Other serious side effects, explained in more detail below in "Side effect details," include:  You may wonder how often certain side effects occur with this drug, or whether certain side effects pertain to it. Here's some detail on some of the side effects this drug may or may not cause.   Allergic reaction   As with most drugs, some people can have an allergic reaction after taking Jardiance. Symptoms of a mild allergic reaction can include:  A more severe allergic reaction is rare but possible. Symptoms of a severe allergic reaction can include:  Call your doctor right away if you have a severe allergic reaction to Jardiance. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.   Gangrene   Gangrene is a type of infection that causes tissue in the body to die. Gangrene did not happen in people taking Jardiance during clinical studies. However, it has been  reported  after clinical trials ended. Gangrene has occurred in people taking Jardiance or other medications in the same drug class.  A type of gangrene called Fournier's gangrene has been reported in people taking Jardiance. Fournier's gangrene is rare, but very serious. It causes tissue in the genital area to become infected and die.  Symptoms of Fournier's gangrene include:  If you experience these symptoms, call your doctor right away. This type of gangrene requires immediate medical care. Treatment can include medication or hospitalization. It can even involve surgeries, including genital amputation.   Urinary tract infection   Urinary tract infection (UTI) was one of the most common side effects seen during  clinical studies  of Jardiance. This affected both men and women, but was more common in women than men. Urinary tract infections occurred in 17.0 percent to 18.4 percent of women. They only occurred in 3.6 percent to 4.1 percent of men.  Symptoms of a UTI can include:  If left untreated, UTIs can become serious. They may cause a kidney infection. Call your doctor if you have any UTI symptoms. A UTI is usually treated with  antibiotics .   Genital yeast infections   Genital yeast infections were a very common side effect during Jardiance  clinical studies . They were more common in women than in men. Yeast infections were reported in 5.4 percent to 6.4 percent of women. Of men, 1.6 percent to 3.1 percent had yeast infections.  Symptoms of yeast infections that occur in the genital area can include:  Call your doctor if you have symptoms of a yeast infection. Yeast infections can become serious. In rare cases, without treatment they can lead to Fournier's gangrene (see "Gangrene" above). Your doctor will recommend over-the-counter or prescription drugs to treat genital yeast infections.   Ketoacidosis   During  clinical studies , people taking Jardiance did not have an increased risk of ketoacidosis. However, since clinical studies ended, ketoacidosis has been reported in some people taking Jardiance. It's not known how many people experience ketoacidosis while taking Jardiance.  People with ketoacidosis have abnormally high amounts of ketones (a type of protein) in their body. Your body normally makes ketones after breaking down fat from your diet. Jardiance causes your body to make more ketones. A buildup of ketones in the body can cause the blood to be too acidic.  Symptoms of ketoacidosis can include:  Ketoacidosis can be life-threatening and requires immediate medical treatment.   Joint pain   In  clinical studies , around 2.4 percent of people who took Jardiance had joint pain. However, 2.2 percent of people who took the  placebo  (a pill that doesn't contain any active drug) also reported joint pain. Because both the people who took the drug and those who didn't take it had similar results, it's not clear if the joint pain was related to Jardiance.  If you have joint pain while taking Jardiance, talk with your doctor about ways to reduce it.   Pancreatitis   A  review  of 15 clinical studies looked at the risk of having  pancreatitis  (inflammation of the pancreas) while taking Jardiance. The results showed that people taking Jardiance have less than a 0.1 percent risk of pancreatitis.  If you have had pancreatitis in the past, you may be at greater risk of having this condition while taking Jardiance. Talk with your doctor about your risk of developing pancreatitis while taking Jardiance.   Rash   Skin rashes may be a side effect of Jardiance. In  clinical studies , rash typically occurred as a symptom of yeast infections, which often cause red, irritated skin. Yeast infections were a common side effect in these clinical studies (see "Genital yeast infections" above).  Since the clinical trials took place, skin rash and itchiness have been in reported in people using Jardiance. However, it's not known how common this side effect may be.   Stomach pain   Pain in the abdomen (belly) was not a side effect reported in  clinical studies  of Jardiance. However, abdominal pain could be a symptom of other side effects of Jardiance. For instance, lower abdominal pain and pelvic pain can be caused by urinary tract infections. Ketoacidosis can also cause abdominal pain.  If you have pain in your abdomen while taking Jardiance, talk with your doctor about possible causes and ways to treat it.   Hair loss  (not a side effect)   Hair loss  was not reported during clinical studies of Jardiance. If you are concerned about hair loss, talk with your doctor about possible causes and remedies.   Heart failure  (not a side effect)  Jardiance is not known to cause  heart failure . In fact, Jardiance and others in the same drug class are thought to protect the heart and blood vessels.  These drugs work by lowering the body's blood pressure. This decreases how hard the heart has to work. The drugs also reduce blood pressure in the kidneys, which can improve the way the heart works.  One  study  looked at more than 7,000 people with diabetes who took Jardiance. In this study, Jardiance reduced the risk of cardiovascular death and reduced the risk of being hospitalized for heart failure. This benefit was seen in people with and without a history of heart failure.   Constipation  (not a side effect)   Constipation  was not reported during clinical studies of Jardiance. However, Jardiance may cause  dehydration  in some people. Dehydration (low bodily fluids) can sometimes lead to constipation.  Constipation is also common in people with diabetes. Diabetes can cause nerve damage in the bowels. These nerves are responsible for helping maintain regular bowel movements.  If you are concerned about constipation, talk with your doctor about ways to keep your system regular.   Fatigue  (not a side effect)  Fatigue (low energy levels) was not a side effect caused by Jardiance in clinical studies. However, it can be a symptom of side effects of Jardiance, such as urinary tract infections. Also, many people with diabetes have fatigue.  If you feel abnormally tired or are bothered by fatigue, talk with your doctor about possible causes. Your doctor can recommend ways to help improve your energy levels.   Back pain  (not a side effect)   Back pain  was not reported as a side effect of Jardiance in clinical studies. However, back pain may be a symptom of other side effects caused by Jardiance.  One example of this is urinary tract infections (see "Urinary tract infection" above).These infections can cause pain in your back. The pain typically occurs on the sides of the middle of your back, where your kidneys are located.  If you are having back pain, talk with your doctor. They can determine whether the back pain is caused by a UTI or another condition.   Diarrhea  (not a side effect)   Diarrhea  was not a side effect reported in clinical studies of Jardiance. However, diarrhea can be caused by diabetes itself. Diarrhea can also be a side effect of other diabetes medications, such as metformin.  If you have diarrhea while taking Jardiance, talk to your doctor about ways to manage this side effect.  Jardiance may be used in combination with metformin to help lower blood sugar levels. Metformin is another drug used to treat type 2 diabetes. Several  clinical studies  have shown that Jardiance and metformin are effective in treating diabetes when used together.  Metformin is a prescription medication that comes as a tablet and a solution. Both the tablet and solution are taken by mouth.  Metformin is available as a generic drug and several brand-name drugs. These brand-name drugs include:  If your doctor would like to treat you with both empagliflozin (the active ingredient in Jardiance) and metformin, they may prescribe Synjardy. Synjardy is a single tablet that contains a combination of these two drugs. Synjardy comes as an immediate-release tablet and an extended-release tablet (Synjardy XR).  Jardiance can be used alone or in combination with other diabetes medications to treat type 2 diabetes. If one drug does not lower your blood sugar levels enough, your doctor may prescribe one or more drugs to be taken together.  Examples of diabetes medications that can be taken with Jardiance include:  Jardiance can interact with several other medications. It can also interact with certain supplements as well as certain foods.  Different interactions can cause different effects. For instance, some interactions can interfere with how well a drug works. Other interactions can cause increased side effects.  Below is a list of medications that can interact with Jardiance. This list does not contain all drugs that may interact with Jardiance.  Before taking Jardiance, be sure to tell your doctor and pharmacist about all prescription, over-the-counter, and other drugs you take. Also tell them about any  vitamins , herbs, and supplements you use. Sharing this information can help you avoid potential interactions.  If you have questions about drug interactions that may affect you, ask your doctor or pharmacist.   Jardiance and insulin and other diabetes drugs   Diabetes drugs are often taken together to lower blood sugar levels. However, taking Jardiance with certain diabetes drugs can increase your risk for  hypoglycemia  (low blood sugar). These drugs include insulin and other medications that increase insulin levels in the body.  Examples of insulin medications include:  Examples of other diabetes drugs that can increase your risk of hypoglycemia if taken with Jardiance include:  Talk with your doctor about the risk of hypoglycemia with each diabetes medication you take. Also talk about how the risk is increased if you take a combination of diabetes drugs. Your doctor may adjust the dosage of Jardiance or your other diabetes medications to reduce the risk of hypoglycemia.   Jardiance and certain blood pressure drugs   Taking Jardiance with certain blood pressure medications, such as diuretics (water pills), can increase the risk of low blood pressure. This is because diuretic drugs and Jardiance both increase urination. Urination moves fluid out of the body. This can lead to dehydration (low bodily fluids) and low blood pressure.  Examples of diuretics include:  Many blood pressure medications are made from a combination of drugs. Sometimes one of the drugs in the combination is a diuretic. Be sure to tell your doctor about all blood pressure drugs you take to avoid a potential interaction.   Jardiance and caffeine   Jardiance and caffeine can both cause increased urination. One  small study  found that this increase in urine output caused by Jardiance may help the drug lower blood sugar.  However, increased urination can also cause dehydration (low bodily fluids) and low blood pressure. This is more likely to happen if you consume too much caffeine. If caffeine is part of your diet, talk with your doctor about how much caffeine is safe for you.  There is no direct interaction between Jardiance and alcohol. However, drinking too much alcohol while taking Jardiance can worsen certain effects of Jardiance.  For example, both Jardiance and alcohol can increase urination. Taking Jardiance and alcohol together can increase the risk of dehydration (low bodily fluids) and low blood pressure.  Also, drinking too much alcohol while taking Jardiance (or similar medications) may increase the risk of ketoacidosis. With this condition, large amounts of ketones (a type of protein) build up in your blood.  Your body normally makes ketones after breaking down fat from your diet. Drinking alcohol can cause your body to make more ketones than normal. Jardiance also makes your body produce ketones. A buildup of ketones in the body can cause the blood to be too acidic.  Ketoacidosis requires immediate medical treatment because it can be life-threatening.  According to the  American College of Endocrinology , people taking Jardiance or other drugs from the same class (SGLT2 inhibitors) should avoid excessive alcohol intake. This helps to reduce their risk of ketoacidosis.  The Jardiance dosage your doctor prescribes will depend on how well your body responds to the medication.  Typically, your doctor will start you on a low dosage and adjust it over time to reach the dosage that's right for you. They'll ultimately prescribe the smallest dosage that provides the desired effect.  The following information describes dosages that are commonly used or recommended.  However, be sure to take the dosage your doctor prescribes for you.  Your doctor will determine the best dosage to suit your needs.  Jardiance comes as a tablet that's taken by mouth. It's available in two strengths: 10 mg and 25 mg.  The starting dosage of Jardiance is 10 mg once daily. It should be taken in the morning with or without food.  If Jardiance is working well for you, your doctor may increase your dosage. The maximum dosage of Jardiance is 25 mg per day.  If you miss a dose of Jardiance, take it as soon as you remember. If it's almost time for your next dose, just take that one dose.  Don't take two doses at the same time. This may lead to increased side effects.  It depends. If you and your doctor decide that Jardiance is effective and safe for you, you may need to take it long term to help manage diabetes.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves prescription drugs such as Jardiance to treat certain conditions. Jardiance may also be used off-label for other conditions. Off-label use is when a drug that's approved to treat one condition is used to treat a different condition.  Jardiance is FDA-approved to lower blood sugar levels in adults with type 2 diabetes. It's approved for use in combination with diet and exercise.  Jardiance is FDA-approved to lower the risk of death caused by heart disease in adults with both type 2 diabetes and heart disease.  Jardiance isn't approved for weight loss, but weight loss is a possible side effect of the medication.  In a  clinical study , people who took Jardiance alone or with other diabetes drugs lost between 1.8 percent and 3.2 percent of their body weight. This weight loss was seen over 24 weeks of treatment.  In another  clinical study , people who took Jardiance with metformin lost an average of 3.9 percent of their body weight. This study lasted 52 weeks.  It's thought that Jardiance causes weight loss by helping the body lose sugar. Jardiance prevents the kidneys from absorbing blood sugar (glucose) back into the body. The sugar, and its  calories , then leaves the body in the urine. As a result, the body has fewer calories to process, which may lead to weight loss.   Note :   Jardiance is not FDA-approved as a medication for weight loss. It should only be used according to your doctor's prescription. You shouldn't take Jardiance for weight loss or any other purpose without your doctor's recommendation.  Other drugs are available that can treat your condition. Some may be better suited for you than others. If you're interested in finding an alternative to Jardiance, talk to your doctor to learn more about other medications that may work well for you.  Below are examples of other drugs that are used to treat type 2 diabetes. Some of these medications are in the same drug class as Jardiance, and some are in a different drug class. These different drug classes work in varying ways to lower blood sugar.   Sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors   Jardiance is part of this class of medications. Examples of other drugs in this class include:   Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP1) receptor agonists   Examples of drugs in this class include:   Biguanide    Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors   Examples of drugs in this class include:   Thiazolidinediones   Examples of drugs in this class include:   Sulfonylureas   Examples of drugs in this class include:  Two drugs in addition to Jardiance have been FDA-approved to reduce certain cardiovascular risks in people with type 2 diabetes and heart disease. These risks include death from heart disease, which is what Jardiance is approved to help prevent.  These two drugs are:  You may wonder how Jardiance compares to other medications that are prescribed to treat type 2 diabetes. Below are comparisons between Jardiance and several medications.  Jardiance contains the drug empagliflozin. Invokana contains the drug canagliflozin.  Jardiance and Invokana are both in the same class of medications: sodium-glucose co-transporter (SGLT2) inhibitors. They work in the same way to treat type 2 diabetes.   Uses   Jardiance and Invokana are both FDA-approved to lower blood sugar levels in adults with type 2 diabetes. They're approved to be used with diet and exercise.  Both drugs are also approved to reduce certain risks in people with diabetes and heart disease:   Drug forms and administration   Jardiance and Invokana both come as tablets that are taken by mouth once daily. Each should be taken in the morning.  Jardiance comes as 10-mg and 25-mg tablets. It can be taken with or without food.  Invokana comes as 100-mg and 300-mg tablets. It should be taken before the first meal of the day.   Side effects and risks   Jardiance and Invokana contain similar drugs. Therefore, both medications can cause very similar side effects. Below are examples of these side effects.    More common side effects    These lists contain examples of more common side effects that can occur with Jardiance, with Invokana, or with both drugs (when taken individually).    Serious side effects    These lists contain examples of serious side effects that can occur with Jardiance, with Invokana, or with both drugs (when taken individually).   Effectiveness   In clinical studies, Jardiance and Invokana were both effective at treating type 2 diabetes and reducing certain heart-related risks. However, these two drugs have not been compared directly to each other in clinical studies.   Costs   Jardiance and Invokana are both brand-name drugs. There are currently no generic forms of either drug available. Brand-name medications usually cost more than generics.  According to estimates from  GoodRx.com , Jardiance and Invokana generally cost about the same. The actual price you would pay for either drug would depend on your dose, insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  Jardiance contains the drug empagliflozin. Farxiga contains the drug dapagliflozin.  Jardiance and Farxiga are in the same class of medications: sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors. They work in the same way to treat type 2 diabetes.   Uses   Jardiance and Farxiga are both FDA-approved to lower blood sugar levels in adults with type 2 diabetes. They are approved to be used in combination with diet and exercise.  Jardiance is also approved to reduce the risk of death caused by heart disease in people with both type 2 diabetes and heart disease.   Drug forms and administration   Jardiance and Farxiga come as tablets that are taken by mouth once daily. Both drugs should be taken in the morning. They can be taken with or without food.  Jardiance comes in 10-mg and 25-mg tablets. Farxiga comes in 5-mg and 10-mg tablets.   Side effects and risks   Jardiance and Farxiga contain drugs from the same drug class. Therefore, both medications can cause very similar side effects. Below are examples of these side effects.    More common side effects    These lists contain examples of more common side effects that can occur with Jardiance, with Farxiga, or with both drugs (when taken individually).   Can occur with Jardiance:   few unique common side effects   Can occur with Farxiga:   respiratory infections, such as the common cold   Can occur with both Jardiance and Farxiga:   urinary tract infections (UTI)  vaginal yeast infections    Serious side effects    Most of the serious side effects from Jardiance and Farxiga are similar. This list contains examples of serious side effects that can occur with each of these drugs.   Effectiveness   These drugs have not been directly compared to each other in clinical studies. However, separate studies of Jardiance and Farxiga have found them both to be effective at lowering blood sugar levels in people with type 2 diabetes.   Costs   Jardiance and Farxiga are both brand-name drugs. There are currently no generic forms of either drug available. Brand-name medications usually cost more than generics.  According to estimates from  GoodRx.com , Jardiance and Farxiga generally cost about the same. The actual price you would pay for either drug depends on your insurance plan, your location, and the pharmacy you use.  Jardiance helps lower blood sugar levels in people with type 2 diabetes.  Normally, the body releases a hormone called insulin when you eat food. Insulin helps move sugar (glucose) from the bloodstream into your body's cells. Your cells turn the sugar into energy.  People who have type 2 diabetes are usually resistant to insulin. This means that their body doesn't respond to insulin the way it should. Over time, people with type 2 diabetes may also stop making insulin.  Without the help of insulin, your body's cells can't absorb glucose. This can affect how well the cells work in your body. Your blood levels of glucose can also become too high. High blood glucose levels are called hyperglycemia.  High blood glucose levels can cause many health problems. Areas of the body that can be affected include:  Jardiance belongs to a drug class called sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors. A drug class is a group of medications that work in very similar ways inside the body. Medications in the same class or group are usually used to treat the same or similar conditions.  Jardiance lowers blood sugar levels by causing the kidneys to get rid of excess sugar in the blood. The kidneys release the extra glucose out of the body through the urine.  Jardiance also reduces the risk of death caused by serious heart-related events. It does this by lowering the body's blood pressure. Jardiance increases urination, which reduces the amount of fluid in the body. Having less fluid in the body reduces blood pressure. This puts less strain on the heart and blood vessels.  Jardiance begins working within 30 to 60 minutes after you take it. It may take several days to a week before Jardiance has its full effect on reducing your blood sugar levels. If your doctor increases your dose, it may take longer to see the full effects of the drug.  You should take Jardiance according to your doctor or healthcare provider's instructions.  Jardiance is taken by mouth once daily. It should be taken in the morning.  Jardiance can be taken with or without food.  Jardiance tablets should not be crushed. If you have trouble swallowing Jardiance tablets, talk with your doctor about other medications that might be easier for you to take.  As with all medications, the cost of Jardiance can vary. To find current prices for Jardiance in your area, check out  GoodRx.com.   The cost you find on  GoodRx.com  is what you may pay without insurance. The actual price you'll pay depends on your insurance coverage and the pharmacy you use.  If you need financial support to pay for Jardiance, or if you need help understanding your insurance coverage, help is available.  Boehringer Ingelheim and Lilly, the manufacturers of Jardiance, offer a program called Jardiance Savings. For more information and to find out if you're eligible for support, visit the  program website .  Taking Jardiance during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy is not recommended. In  animal studies , kidney damage was seen in fetuses whose mothers took Jardiance during those trimesters. While animal studies don't always predict what might happen in humans, these studies show the potential for risk.  If you are pregnant or may become pregnant, talk with your doctor about whether using Jardiance is a good choice for you.  Taking Jardiance while breastfeeding is not recommended. In  animal studies , Jardiance was passed into the mother's milk after the mother took the drug. However, animal studies don't always predict what might happen in humans.  It's not known if Jardiance passes into human breast milk. But if it does pass into breast milk consumed by a child, that child may have an increased risk of problems with kidney development.  If you are breastfeeding and planning to take Jardiance, talk to your doctor. They may recommend that you stop breastfeeding before you start taking the drug. Or, they may have you try a different diabetes medication that is considered safe while breastfeeding.  Here are answers to some frequently asked questions about Jardiance.  No. Jardiance does not cause withdrawal symptoms if you stop taking it.  Yes. Jardiance can be taken with metformin. In fact, in several  clinical studies , Jardiance was taken in combination with metformin. The combination of drugs was found to be safe and effective for lowering blood sugar levels in people with type 2 diabetes.  It might. Jardiance works by increasing the amount of glucose (sugar) that's passed through your kidneys and into your urine. Larger amounts of glucose in the urine pull water out of the body with it. This causes people to urinate (pee) more often.  In a clinical study, around 3 percent of people had increased urination as a side effect of Jardiance.  Jardiance may lower your blood pressure. This happens because Jardiance causes you to urinate (pee) more often, which lowers fluid amounts in your body. In people with heart disease, having lower blood pressure may reduce the risk of cardiovascular death.  In some people, urinating more often can lead to dehydration (low bodily fluids). People who are dehydrated can develop low blood pressure. However, less than 1 percent of people in  clinical studies  of Jardiance had symptoms of low blood pressure.  Symptoms of low blood pressure can include feeling faint and having orthostatic hypotension (feeling dizzy when you stand up).  People who are at greater risk for low blood pressure while taking Jardiance include:  Talk with your doctor about how Jardiance may affect your blood pressure and how to prevent side effects.  Jardiance is not FDA-approved to treat  type 1 diabetes . However, it's thought that Jardiance may be a possible treatment option for type 1 diabetes.  People with type 1 diabetes don't make insulin in their bodies. Some drugs used to treat diabetes lower glucose levels by helping the body produce insulin or make insulin more active. Unlike those drugs, Jardiance does not need insulin to lower blood glucose levels. Because of this, Jardiance can help lower blood sugar levels in people whose bodies don't make insulin.  Several studies have looked at using Jardiance to treat people with type 1 diabetes.  Two  clinical studies  showed that Jardiance lowered blood sugar levels and body weight in people with type 1 diabetes. In these studies, Jardiance was used in combination with insulin.   Three additional studies  looked at treating type 1 diabetes with medications similar to Jardiance. Medications from the same class of drug as Jardiance (SGLT2 inhibitors) were taken in combination with insulin. The people in the studies had the following results:  In all of these studies, Jardiance and the other SGLT2 inhibitors increased the risk of ketoacidosis. This condition is a serious complication of diabetes and can be life-threatening. The risk of ketoacidosis was higher in people taking SGLT2 inhibitors, such as Jardiance, than in people taking insulin alone.  More research is needed before Jardiance can be approved to safely and effectively treat type 1 diabetes.  Use of Jardiance may have resulted in amputation, but only in rare and serious cases. A  review  of several clinical studies found only one case of amputation related to Jardiance. In this  case , a person taking Jardiance needed a finger amputation. Amputation was seen in only one person out of more than 1,000 people taking Jardiance.  Two other  reports  of amputation in people taking Jardiance have been made to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). These were toe amputations.  Invokana (canagliflozin), a drug that's similar to Jardiance, has also been linked with amputation. Amputations seen with these drugs typically occurred in people with foot complications from diabetes.  It's important to note that foot complications are common in people with diabetes. This is because diabetes can cause nerve damage and reduced blood flow to the feet. This can lead to problems in the feet, including:  Proper foot care is very important for preventing serious outcomes, such as amputation. If you're concerned about the health of your feet, talk with your doctor about ways to take care of them.  Before taking Jardiance, talk with your doctor about your health history. Jardiance may not be right for you if you have certain medical conditions. These include:   Note:  For information about the potential negative effects of Jardiance, see "Jardiance side effects" above.  Taking too much Jardiance can increase your risk of serious side effects.  Symptoms of an overdose can include:  If you think you've taken too much of this drug, call your doctor or seek guidance from the American Association of Poison Control Centers at 800-222-1222 or through their  online tool .  But if your symptoms are severe, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room right away.   When you get Jardiance from the pharmacy, the pharmacist will add an expiration date to the label on the bottle. This date is typically one year from the date they dispensed the medication.  The expiration date helps guarantee the effectiveness of the medication during this time. The  current stance  of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is to avoid using expired medications. If you have unused medication that has gone past the expiration date, talk to your pharmacist about whether you might still be able to use it.  How long a medication remains good can depend on many factors, including how and where you store the medication. Jardiance tablets should be stored at room temperature. The bottle should be closed tightly.  If you no longer need to take Jardiance and have leftover medication, it's important to dispose of it safely. This helps prevent others, including children and pets, from taking the drug by accident. It also helps keep the drug from harming the environment.  You can find useful tips on medication disposal  here . You can also ask your pharmacist for tips on how to dispose of your medication.  The following information is provided for clinicians and other healthcare professionals.  Jardiance is FDA-approved to improve glycemic control, as adjunct to diet and exercise in adults with type 2 diabetes. It's also approved to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death in adults with type 2 diabetes and established cardiovascular disease.  Jardiance is a sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor. By inhibiting SGLT2, it reduces glucose reabsorption in the proximal convoluted tubule and increases renal excretion of glucose and urine. This mechanism is independent of insulin availability or activity.  Peak plasma concentration is reached 1.5 hours after administration. Approximately 86 percent of the drug is bound to plasma proteins.  Metabolism occurs via glucuronidation. Half-life is approximately 12.4 hours. Approximately 41.2 percent of Jardiance is eliminated in the feces and 54.4 percent is eliminated in the urine.  Renal and hepatic impairment both increase exposure.  Jardiance is contraindicated in patients with a history of serious hypersensitivity to empagliflozin or any inactive components in Jardiance. Jardiance is also contraindicated in patients with severe renal impairment or end-stage renal disease, as well as people who require dialysis.  Jardiance should be stored in a tightly-sealed container at room temperature.   Disclaimer:  Medical News Today has made every effort to make certain that all information is factually correct, comprehensive, and up-to-date. However, this article should not be used as a substitute for the knowledge and expertise of a licensed healthcare professional. You should always consult your doctor or other healthcare professional before taking any medication. The drug information contained herein is subject to change and is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. The absence of warnings or other information for a given drug does not indicate that the drug or drug combination is safe, effective, or appropriate for all patients or all specific uses.    
 American Diabetes Association: Standards of medical care in diabetes - 2018. (2018).  http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/diacare/suppl/2017/12/08/41.Supplement_1.DC1/DC_41_S1_Combined.pdf  
 Autonomic neuropathy. (2013).  http://www.diabetes.org/living-with-diabetes/complications/neuropathy/autonomic-neuropathy.html  
 Boehringer Ingelheim. (2017). Jardiance (empagliflozin) analysis reinforces established safety profile [Press release].  https://www.boehringer-ingelheim.us/press-release/jardiance-empagliflozin-analysis-reinforces-established-safety-profile  
 Careyva B, et al. (2016). Diabetes mellitus: Management of gastrointestinal complications.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2016/1215/p980.html  
 Disposal of unused medicines: What you should know. (2019).  https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou/Consumers/BuyingUsingMedicineSafely/EnsuringSafeUseofMedicine/SafeDisposalofMedicines/ucm186187.htm  
 Donnan JR, et al. (2019). Comparative safety of the sodium glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6361337/  
 Don’t be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm  
 Efficacy and safety of empagliflozin (BI 10773)/linagliptin (BI 1356) fixed dose combination in treatment naïve and metformin treated type 2 diabetes patients. (2015).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/study/NCT01422876?term=NCT01422876&amp;rank=1  
 Fadini GP, et al. (2017). SGLT2 inhibitors and amputations in the US FDA Adverse Event Reporting System.  https://www.thelancet.com/journals/landia/article/PIIS2213-8587(17)30257-7/fulltext  
 Farxiga - dapagliflozin tablet, film coated. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=72ad22ae-efe6-4cd6-a302-98aaee423d69  
 Fattah H, et al. (2018). The potential role of SGLT2 inhibitors in the treatment of type 1 diabetes mellitus.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6429906/  
 Fitchett D, et al. (2018). Effects of empagliflozin on risk for cardiovascular death and heart failure hospitalization across the spectrum of heart failure risk in the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial. DOI:  https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/39/5/363/4096345  
 Foot complications. (2018).  http://www.diabetes.org/living-with-diabetes/complications/foot-complications/  
 GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com/  
 Handelsman Y, et al. (2016). AACE/ACE position statement on the association of SGLT-2 inhibitors and diabetic ketoacidosis. DOI: 10.4158/EP161292.PS 
 Hashimoto Y, et al. (2016). Caffeine intake enhances the benefits of sodium glucose transporter 2 inhibitor [Abstract].  https://www.aace.com/disease-state-resources/diabetes/position-and-consensus-statements  
 Invokana - canagliflozin tablet, film coated. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=b9057d3b-b104-4f09-8a61-c61ef9d4a3f3  
 Jardiance - empagliflozin tablet, film coated. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=faf3dd6a-9cd0-39c2-0d2e-232cb3f67565  
 Kalray S. (2014). Sodium glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors: A review of their basis and clinical pharmacology.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4269649/  
 Kohler S, et al. (2017). Safety and tolerability of empagliflozin in patients with type 2 diabetes: Pooled analysis of phase I-III clinical trials.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5504200/  
 Metformin hydrochloride - metformin hydrochloride tablet, film coated. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=56d13a1c-b289-4528-b23c-60f5427b4552  
 Prasad VG, et al. (2017). Management of chronic constipation in patients with diabetes mellitus [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27987136  
 Rosenstock J, et al. (2018). Empagliflozin as adjunctive to insulin therapy in type 1 diabetes: The EASE trials [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30287422  
 Synjardy - empagliflozin and metformin hydrochloride tablet. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=0fdd0255-0055-65f3-b2c0-db8fbb87beae  
 Woo V, et al. (2019). The role of sodium glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors in heart failure and chronic kidney disease in type 2 diabetes.  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/03007995.2019.1576479     American Diabetes Association: Standards of medical care in diabetes - 2018. (2018).  http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/diacare/suppl/2017/12/08/41.Supplement_1.DC1/DC_41_S1_Combined.pdf   Autonomic neuropathy. (2013).  http://www.diabetes.org/living-with-diabetes/complications/neuropathy/autonomic-neuropathy.html   Boehringer Ingelheim. (2017). Jardiance (empagliflozin) analysis reinforces established safety profile [Press release].  https://www.boehringer-ingelheim.us/press-release/jardiance-empagliflozin-analysis-reinforces-established-safety-profile   Careyva B, et al. (2016). Diabetes mellitus: Management of gastrointestinal complications.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2016/1215/p980.html   Disposal of unused medicines: What you should know. (2019).  https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ResourcesForYou/Consumers/BuyingUsingMedicineSafely/EnsuringSafeUseofMedicine/SafeDisposalofMedicines/ucm186187.htm   Donnan JR, et al. (2019). Comparative safety of the sodium glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors: A systematic review and meta-analysis.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6361337/   Don’t be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm   Efficacy and safety of empagliflozin (BI 10773)/linagliptin (BI 1356) fixed dose combination in treatment naïve and metformin treated type 2 diabetes patients. (2015).  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/study/NCT01422876?term=NCT01422876&amp;rank=1   Fadini GP, et al. (2017). SGLT2 inhibitors and amputations in the US FDA Adverse Event Reporting System.  https://www.thelancet.com/journals/landia/article/PIIS2213-8587(17)30257-7/fulltext   Farxiga - dapagliflozin tablet, film coated. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=72ad22ae-efe6-4cd6-a302-98aaee423d69   Fattah H, et al. (2018). The potential role of SGLT2 inhibitors in the treatment of type 1 diabetes mellitus.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6429906/   Fitchett D, et al. (2018). Effects of empagliflozin on risk for cardiovascular death and heart failure hospitalization across the spectrum of heart failure risk in the EMPA-REG OUTCOME trial. DOI:  https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/39/5/363/4096345   Foot complications. (2018).  http://www.diabetes.org/living-with-diabetes/complications/foot-complications/   GoodRx. (n.d.).  https://www.goodrx.com/   Handelsman Y, et al. (2016). AACE/ACE position statement on the association of SGLT-2 inhibitors and diabetic ketoacidosis. DOI: 10.4158/EP161292.PS  Hashimoto Y, et al. (2016). Caffeine intake enhances the benefits of sodium glucose transporter 2 inhibitor [Abstract].  https://www.aace.com/disease-state-resources/diabetes/position-and-consensus-statements   Invokana - canagliflozin tablet, film coated. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=b9057d3b-b104-4f09-8a61-c61ef9d4a3f3   Jardiance - empagliflozin tablet, film coated. (2019).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=faf3dd6a-9cd0-39c2-0d2e-232cb3f67565   Kalray S. (2014). Sodium glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT2) inhibitors: A review of their basis and clinical pharmacology.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4269649/   Kohler S, et al. (2017). Safety and tolerability of empagliflozin in patients with type 2 diabetes: Pooled analysis of phase I-III clinical trials.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5504200/   Metformin hydrochloride - metformin hydrochloride tablet, film coated. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=56d13a1c-b289-4528-b23c-60f5427b4552   Prasad VG, et al. (2017). Management of chronic constipation in patients with diabetes mellitus [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27987136   Rosenstock J, et al. (2018). Empagliflozin as adjunctive to insulin therapy in type 1 diabetes: The EASE trials [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30287422   Synjardy - empagliflozin and metformin hydrochloride tablet. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=0fdd0255-0055-65f3-b2c0-db8fbb87beae   Woo V, et al. (2019). The role of sodium glucose co-transporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors in heart failure and chronic kidney disease in type 2 diabetes.  https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/03007995.2019.1576479   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Slowiczek, Lindsay. "Jardiance (empagliflozin)."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326007.php&gt;    APA  Slowiczek, L. (2019, August 31). "Jardiance (empagliflozin)."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  