 In some cases, a person can take preventive measures to avoid splitting their nails. In other cases, splitting a nail may be unavoidable.  When a nail splits, a person may be able to use at-home methods to fix the issue. However, if the split is severe enough or affects the nail bed, a person may require medical treatment.  Keep reading for more information on possible causes, treatments, and prevention tips.  There are many  common causes  of nail splitting, the medical term for which is onychoschizia.  A split can occur across the nail, or it could split the nail vertically.  Some of the most common causes of nail splitting include:   Trauma or injury   Fingers and fingernails are easy to injure. People can catch them in doors, pinch them under a heavy object, or catch them on something and cause a rip.  Any number of traumatic events can cause a small or large split. If the injury is severe, it may also affect the nail bed.   Biting or picking   A common symptom of  anxiety  is picking or biting at the nails. When this occurs regularly, the nail's strength decreases. This can lead to them splitting more easily.  In other cases, a person may split a nail while picking at it.   Excessive exposure to moisture   Being well hydrated is important to nail health, but submerging them in or constantly exposing them to water can weaken a person's nails.  People may have excessive exposure to moisture when they:  Frequent use of nail polish can also weaken the nails, making them easier to split.   Nail psoriasis    Psoriasis  is a condition that affects the skin, causing outbreaks of red scaly areas and patches, or plaques.  According to a study in the   Journal of Indian Dermatology  , nail psoriasis affects 10–78% of people with the condition. Psoriasis may weaken nails and make them more prone to splitting.   Other underlying conditions   Though much less common, several potential underlying conditions can cause nails to split more easily.  Some potential conditions include:  Most of the treatment options are home remedies. Home remedies usually involve fixing the nail in place and improving its appearance until the break grows out.  All home remedies are ways to hide or hold the nail together until the split disappears.   Try glue   One potential home remedy involves reattaching the nail with glue.  For this method, try applying a very small amount of adhesive to the detached nail and then use gentle pressure to push the nail back together.  After the glue has set, if a person wishes to hide the break, they can paint their nail.   Use a tea bag   Another home remedy involves using a tea bag.  For this method to work, try cutting a nail sized portion of a tea bag from an ordinary bag of tea. Then, use a brush with adhesive to glue the tea bag in place.  Once the glue sets, a person can buff the nail and paint over it if they wish.   Try a gel and silk wrap   Another potential remedy is to try a gel and silk wrap to hold the nail in place.  Similar to the tea bag method, the gel and silk wrap method involves using a nail sized piece of silk wrap, placing it against the broken nail, and applying a gel coat to it.  Once set, a person can choose to buff the nail and apply polish.   Use a fake nail   A final potential home remedy involves using a fake nail. In this case, a person can either remove the piece that is splitting off or leave it in place.  A person can apply a fake nail to just the broken nail or to all of them.   Medical treatments   In some cases, a person may require medical treatment.  For example, psoriasis can damage a person's nail bed. Taking medication to control psoriasis can help prevent damage to the nails.  In other cases, a person may have an acute infection from fungi, yeast, or bacteria. These infections require antifungal or  antibiotic  treatments to help prevent further damage to the nails.  In cases of severe nail splits, a person may need to see their healthcare provider.  They may need to remove the nail completely. They may also need to stitch the nail bed. If possible, they may reattach the nail using either stitches or glue.  A person should contact their healthcare provider if they notice any of the following symptoms, as they may require additional medical treatment:  It is not always possible to prevent split nails. However, a person can take certain precautions and make lifestyle changes to help prevent damage to their nails.  Some tips and tricks include:  Fixing a split nail often involves a home remedy that either mends it, such as with glue, or hides it, such as with a fake nail.  If a person's nail is severely split, causes constant pain, or appears infected, a person should seek medical attention to fix the nail and address any potential underlying issues.  Preventing split nails usually involves a combination of lifestyle measures, such as wearing gloves while doing chores and not exposing the nails to harsh chemicals.    
 Brittle splitting nails. (n.d.).  https://www.aocd.org/page/BrittleSplittingNail  
 Dogra, A., &amp; Arora, A. K. (2014). Nail psoriasis: The journey so far.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4103264/  
 Structure of the nails. (2018).  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK513133/     Brittle splitting nails. (n.d.).  https://www.aocd.org/page/BrittleSplittingNail   Dogra, A., &amp; Arora, A. K. (2014). Nail psoriasis: The journey so far.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4103264/   Structure of the nails. (2018).  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK513133/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What to know about split nails."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 9 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326008.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2019, August 9). "What to know about split nails."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  