 Genetic factors or age can influence whether someone gets large veins on their forehead. The skin becomes thinner as the body ages, which can make veins appear more pronounced or larger than they are.  Enlarged veins can appear in the center of the forehead or the sides of the face, near the temples. Bulging forehead veins rarely indicate a medical emergency.  Read on to learn more about bulging forehead veins, including causes and treatments. Possible causes of bulging forehead veins include:  An increase in pressure can cause the veins to protrude through the skin. Factors that increase pressure in the neck and head include:  A bulging forehead vein may develop from a tension headache. Tension headaches are the  most common type of headache , which occur because of tightness in the muscles of the shoulders, scalp, or jaw.  Hormone changes during pregnancy can lead to higher blood volume, which may result in enlarged veins.   Progesterone  levels increase during pregnancy. Progesterone thickens the uterine lining, preparing the uterus to receive a fertilized egg. Progestin also dilates or expands the blood vessels, which may make them appear larger under the skin.  According to the  National Institutes of Health (NIH) , progesterone levels are ten times higher in females who are pregnant than those who are not.   Temporal arteritis , or giant cell  arteritis , is a type of vasculitis affecting the veins near the temples. Vasculitis refers to  inflammation  of the blood vessels.  Temporal  arteritis  causes inflammation in the temporal arteries and the surrounding blood vessels. This can lead to bulging veins that extend from the temples to the middle of the forehead.  Other symptoms of temporal arteritis include:  Spending too much time in the sun can damage skin tissue and veins.  The heat from the sun causes veins to dilate so that they can regulate the body's internal temperature. However, dilated veins near the surface of the skin have the potential to pop or break, resulting in spider veins.  Spider veins refer to small red, blue, or purple lines that appear right below the surface of the skin. These lines indicate broken veins, and they can develop anywhere on the body, including the face.  A bulging vein might appear suddenly if someone loses a significant amount of weight. People with less body fat may have more prominent veins. Thinning skin due to gaining weight could also explain new bulging veins.  Hormonal changes and  high blood pressure  could also result in the sudden appearance of forehead veins.  According to the  American Institute of Stress , both physical and mental  stress  can significantly raise  blood pressure .  In most cases, forehead veins do not require treatment. People who do not like the way their forehead veins look can choose to undergo procedures that reduce their visibility.  Treatments for forehead veins include:  Although large forehead veins do not indicate a medical emergency, people may want to speak with a doctor if they experience:  Even if someone does not experience symptoms, they can still consult a doctor about possible treatment options for large forehead veins.  People should carefully consider all the benefits and risks associated with surgical and nonsurgical treatments before making a decision.  Several factors can contribute to the appearance of bulging forehead veins. These can include natural reasons, such as genetics, aging, and sun exposure. An underlying medical condition that affects the cardiovascular system, such as vasculitis, may also cause large forehead veins.  Large forehead veins do not require treatment unless someone does not like the way they look. People can choose from a variety of surgical and nonsurgical procedures to reduce the appearance of forehead veins.  People should ask a trained medical professional to review the potential risks and benefits associated with any treatment.    
 Headache. (2019).  https://medlineplus.gov/headache.html  
 Progesterone test. (2018).  https://medlineplus.gov/lab-tests/progesterone-test/  
 Stress and hypertension: Symptoms and treatment. (n.d.).  https://www.stress.org/hypertension     Headache. (2019).  https://medlineplus.gov/headache.html   Progesterone test. (2018).  https://medlineplus.gov/lab-tests/progesterone-test/   Stress and hypertension: Symptoms and treatment. (n.d.).  https://www.stress.org/hypertension   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Eske, Jamie. "What to know about forehead veins."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326047.php&gt;    APA  Eske, J. (2019, August 14). "What to know about forehead veins."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  