 Ativan (lorazepam) is a prescription tranquilizing medication. You might also hear it called a sedative-hypnotic or anxiolytic medication. Ativan belongs to a class of medications called benzodiazepines.  Ativan is used to treat  anxiety  symptoms,  insomnia  (trouble sleeping), and status epilepticus (a type of severe seizure). It's also given before surgery to make you sleep.  Ativan comes in two forms:  Ativan is available in a generic form called lorazepam.  Generic drugs are often less expensive than the brand-name version. In some cases, the brand-name drug and the generic version may be available in different forms and strengths.  Ativan can cause mild or serious side effects. The following list contains some of the key side effects that may occur while taking Ativan. This list doesn't include all possible side effects.  For more information on the possible side effects of Ativan, or tips on how to deal with a troubling side effect, talk with your doctor or pharmacist.  The more common side effects of Ativan include:  Some people may also experience less frequent side effects such as:  In people who receive the Ativan injection, redness and pain at the injection site can commonly occur.  Some of these side effects may go away within a few days or a couple of weeks. If they're more severe or don't go away, talk to your doctor or pharmacist.  Serious side effects from Ativan aren't common, but they can occur. Call your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects. Call 911 if your symptoms feel life-threatening or if you think you're having a medical emergency.  Serious side effects and their symptoms can include the following:  Ativan tablets aren't approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in children under 12 years. They're sometimes used off-label in children under 12 years, but this use hasn't been confirmed to be safe.  Children may be more likely than adults to experience side effects from Ativan.  In older adults, Ativan should be used cautiously or avoided altogether. Many seniors are more likely to experience side effects such as drowsiness or dizziness. This can increase their risk of falls, which can lead to  bone fractures . Lower dosages are often needed for seniors.  Ativan is FDA-approved for short-term use, up to four months. Long-term use of Ativan should be avoided because it can cause serious side effects. These include:  If you've been taking Ativan regularly for a long time, talk with your doctor about other medication options, and how you might be able to stop taking Ativan.  Ativan can impair your ability to drive. If you feel lightheaded or sleepy after taking it, don't drive. Also, don't use dangerous equipment.  It's not common, but some people who take Ativan can feel nauseated. This side effect may go away with continued use of the drug. If nausea doesn't go away or is bothersome, talk with your doctor.  Some people who take Ativan report having headaches afterward. This side effect may go away with continued use of the drug. If headaches don't get better or are bothersome, talk with your doctor.  Ativan can cause your breathing to slow down. In rare cases, this can lead to respiratory failure.  Slowed breathing is more likely to occur in people who are:  Weight gain or loss aren't typical side effects of Ativan, and studies have not confirmed these as side effects of this drug. However, weight changes may still occur.  Some people who take Ativan say they have a bigger appetite. This might cause them to eat more and gain weight. And other people who take it have a reduced appetite. This might cause them to eat less and lose weight.  Some people who take Ativan can have temporary memory loss. If this happens, you may have trouble remembering things that occurred while you were taking the medication.  Memory loss should stop after you stop taking Ativan.  It's not common, but some people who take Ativan report  constipation . This side effect may go away with continued use of the drug. If it doesn't get better or is bothersome, talk with your doctor.  It's not common, but some people who take Ativan can experience  vertigo . Vertigo is a feeling that things around you are moving when they're not. People with vertigo often feel dizzy.  It's not clear if Ativan is the actual cause of symptoms of vertigo. Also, Ativan is sometimes used off-label to treat people who have symptoms of vertigo caused by other conditions such as  Meniere's disease .  It's rare, but some people who take Ativan have hallucinations. If you have this side effect, talk with your doctor about alternatives to Ativan.  The Ativan dosage your doctor prescribes will depend on several factors. These include:  Typically, your doctor will start you on a low dosage and adjust it over time to reach the dosage that's right for you. They'll ultimately prescribe the smallest dosage that provides the desired effect.  The following information describes dosages that are commonly used or recommended.  However, be sure to take the dosage your doctor prescribes for you.  Your doctor will determine the best dosage to suit your needs.  The usual oral dosage for Ativan tablets is 2 to 6 mg daily. This dosage amount is usually divided and taken two or three times daily.   Typical dosage : 1 to 3 mg taken two or three times daily.   Typical dosage : 2 to 4 mg at bedtime.  Older adults and people with certain physical conditions may need to start with a lower dosage. This might be 1 to 2 mg, taken two or three times daily for anxiety or once at bedtime for insomnia.  If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you can. However, if it's just a few hours until your next dose, skip the missed dose and take the next one on schedule.  Never try to catch up by taking two doses at a time. This can cause dangerous side effects.  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approves drugs to treat certain conditions. Ativan is approved to treat several conditions. In addition, it's sometimes used off-label for purposes that aren't approved by the FDA.  Ativan is FDA-approved for treating several different conditions.   Ativan for anxiety   Ativan is FDA-approved for the short-term treatment of anxiety symptoms. It's also commonly used off-label for treating generalized anxiety disorder and  panic attacks .   Ativan for sleep/insomnia   Ativan is FDA-approved for short-term treatment of insomnia (trouble sleeping) that's caused by anxiety or  stress .  Ativan is also used off-label for other types of insomnia. However, according to the  American Academy of Sleep Medicine , it's not a first-choice medication for this use.   Ativan for seizures   The IV form of Ativan is FDA-approved for treating a severe type of seizure called status epilepticus. With this condition, seizures don't stop, or one seizure comes after another without allowing the person time to recover.   Ativan for sedation during surgery   The IV form of Ativan is FDA-approved to cause sleep before surgery.  Ativan is also sometimes prescribed off-label. Off-label use is when a drug is approved for one use but is prescribed for a different use.   Ativan for nausea from vertigo   Ativan is sometimes used off-label for the short-term treatment of symptoms of vertigo. These symptoms include nausea and vomiting. In some cases, Ativan may be used along with other medications for this purpose.   Ativan for depression   Ativan and other similar medications aren't prescribed to treat depression itself. However, some people with depression also have symptoms of anxiety or insomnia. In these cases, your doctor may prescribe Ativan to reduce those symptoms.  If you have depression only, your doctor will likely prescribe a different medication.   Ativan for pain   Ativan isn't typically used to treat pain itself. However, people who have severe, long-lasting pain are often prescribed Ativan or similar medications. This may be because they have anxiety or trouble sleeping due to their pain.  People with severe pain are often treated with opioid pain medications. Ativan and other benzodiazepine medications shouldn't be used with opioids. This is due to the risk of life-threatening side effects such as serious sedation, decreased breathing, coma, and death.  If you're taking an opioid pain medication with Ativan, talk to your doctor about safer options.  Ativan may also be used off-label to treat other conditions such as:  If you're taking Ativan, you shouldn't drink alcohol. Consuming alcohol with Ativan can increase the risk of serious side effects such as:  Ativan can interact with several other medications. It can also interact with certain supplements and foods.  Different interactions can cause different effects. For instance, some can interfere with how well a drug works, while others can cause increased side effects.  Below is a list of medications that can interact with Ativan. This list doesn't contain all drugs that may interact with Ativan.  Before taking Ativan, be sure to tell your doctor and pharmacist about all prescription, over-the-counter, and other drugs you take. Also tell them about any  vitamins , herbs, and supplements you use. Sharing this information can help you avoid potential interactions.  If you have questions about drug interactions that may affect you, ask your doctor or pharmacist.   Opioids   Taking opioids with Ativan can cause dangerous side effects. These include excessive drowsiness, breathing problems, respiratory failure, and coma.  Examples of these drugs include:  Opioids should only be used with Ativan when there are no other treatment alternatives.   Sedative drugs   Taking sedative drugs with Ativan can cause excessive drowsiness and breathing problems. Examples of sedative drugs include:   Probenecid   Taking Ativan with probenecid, a drug that can be used to treat  gout , can increase the levels of Ativan in your body. This can increase your risk of Ativan side effects. For people who take probenecid and Ativan together, the Ativan dosage needs to be reduced by half.   Valproic acid   Taking Ativan with valproic acid (Depakene, Depakote), a drug used to treat seizures and other conditions, can increase the levels of Ativan in your body. This can increase your risk of Ativan side effects.  For people who take valproic acid and Ativan together, the Ativan dosage needs to be reduced by half.   Ativan and Zoloft   Zoloft (sertraline) can make some people feel tired or drowsy. Ativan can also cause drowsiness. Taking these medications together may cause you to feel even more tired or drowsy.   Ativan and Ambien   Ativan and Ambien (zolpidem) shouldn't be taken together. Both medications are used to help promote sleep. If taken together, they can cause excessive sleepiness and sedation.  Taking this combination of medications can also increase the risk of odd behaviors such as sleep-driving (trying to drive while asleep).   Ativan and Tylenol   There are no known interactions between Ativan and Tylenol (acetaminophen).  Taking Ativan with herbs or supplements that have sedative effects can cause excessive drowsiness and breathing problems. Examples of sedative herbs and supplements that can cause these effects include:   Ativan and marijuana   Marijuana shouldn't be used with Ativan. Using marijuana with Ativan can cause excessive drowsiness or sedation.  Some people can have bothersome withdrawal symptoms after stopping Ativan. These can occur after taking Ativan for as little as one week. If Ativan is taken longer, withdrawal symptoms are more likely to occur. They're also likely to be more severe.  Withdrawal symptoms can include:  Talk with your doctor before stopping Ativan. Your doctor may recommend that you slowly reduce your dosage before stopping the drug completely.  Taking too much Ativan can increase your risk of harmful or serious side effects.  Symptoms of overdose can include:  If you think you or your child has taken too much of this drug, call your doctor or seek guidance from the American Association of Poison Control Centers at 800-222-1222 or through their  online tool .  But if your symptoms are severe, call 911 or go to the nearest emergency room right away.   There are other medications that are often used to treat the same conditions as Ativan. Some may be better suited for you than others.  The best choice may depend on your age, the type and severity of your condition, and previous treatments you've used.  To learn more about other medications that may work well for you, talk to your doctor.   Note:  Some of the drugs listed here are used off-label for treating conditions also treated by Ativan.  Examples of medications that could be used as alternatives to Ativan include:  Some people use certain herbs and dietary supplements to help manage their anxiety. Examples include:  Be sure to talk to your doctor before using herbs or supplements to treat your anxiety  You may wonder how Ativan compares to other medications that are prescribed for similar uses. Below are comparisons between Ativan and several medications.  Ativan and Xanax both belong to the class of drugs called benzodiazepines. They work in the same way and are very similar medications.  The generic name of Xanax is alprazolam.   Uses   Ativan and Xanax are used for similar and different purposes.   Drug forms   Ativan is available as an oral tablet and as an intravenous (IV) solution. The oral tablet is usually taken one to three times a day. The IV solution is given by your healthcare provider.  Xanax is available as an oral tablet, which is usually taken three times daily. It's also available as an extended-release tablet, which is taken just once daily.   Side effects and risks   Ativan and Xanax have some similar side effects, and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.    More common side effects    More common side effects that Ativan and Xanax share include:  In addition to these, other side effects that Xanax can cause include:    Serious side effects    Possible serious side effects that Ativan and Xanax share include:   Effectiveness   Ativan and Xanax are both used to treat anxiety symptoms. Xanax is also FDA-approved to treat generalized anxiety disorder and panic attacks. Ativan is used off-label to treat those conditions, too. They work about equally well to treat all three conditions.  It's important to note, however, that these drugs are usually considered second-choice options for these conditions and should only be used for short-term treatment. This is due to the risk of side effects and dependence.  Both Ativan and Xanax work quickly, but Ativan may last slightly longer than Xanax.   Costs   Ativan and Xanax are both brand-name medications. They're also both available in generic form. The generic version of a drug usually costs less than the brand-name version. The generic name of Xanax is called alprazolam.  Brand-name Ativan usually costs much more than brand-name Xanax. The generic versions of Ativan and Xanax cost about the same. Whichever drug or version you use, the amount you pay will depend on your insurance.  Ativan and Klonopin work in the same way and are very similar medications. They both belong to the class of drugs called benzodiazepines.  The generic name of Klonopin is clonazepam.   Uses   Although Ativan and Klonopin are similar medications, they're FDA-approved for different uses.  Ativan is approved for:  Klonopin is approved for treating:  Klonopin is used off-label for treating anxiety symptoms, insomnia, and status epilepticus.   Drug forms   Ativan is available as an oral tablet and as an intravenous (IV) solution. The oral tablet is usually taken one to three times a day. The IV solution is given by your healthcare provider.  Klonopin is available as an oral tablet that's usually taken one to three times a day.   Side effects and risks   Ativan and Klonopin have similar side effects. Both drugs can cause these more common side effects:  Both can also cause these serious side effects:   Effectiveness   While Ativan and Klonopin have different FDA-approved uses, they're both used to treat the following conditions:  Both Ativan and Klonopin work quickly, but Klonopin may last longer than Ativan:   Costs   Ativan and Klonopin are both brand-name medications. They're also both available in generic form. The generic version of a drug usually costs less than the brand-name version. The generic name of Klonopin is called clonazepam.  Brand-name Ativan usually costs much more than brand-name Klonopin. The generic versions of Ativan and Klonopin cost about the same. Whichever drug or version you use, the amount you pay will depend on your insurance.  Ativan and Valium both belong to the class of drugs called benzodiazepines. They work in the same way and are very similar medications.  The generic name of Valium is diazepam.   Uses   Ativan and Valium are used for similar and different purposes.   Drug forms   Ativan is available as an oral tablet and as an intravenous (IV) solution. The oral tablet is usually taken one to three times a day. The IV solution is given by your healthcare provider.  Valium is also available as an oral tablet, which is typically taken one to four times daily.   Side effects and risks   Ativan and Valium have some similar side effects, and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.    More common side effects    More common side effects that Ativan and Valium share include:  In addition to these, other side effects that Valium can cause include:    Serious side effects    Possible serious side effects that Ativan and Valium share include:   Effectiveness   Ativan and Valium have different FDA-approved uses, but they are both used to treat the following conditions:  Both Ativan and Valium work quickly. Valium may work longer than Ativan for some uses, but not as long for other uses:   Costs   Ativan and Valium are both brand-name medications. Both are also available in generic form. The generic version of a drug usually costs less than the brand-name version. The generic name of Valium is diazepam.  Brand-name Ativan usually costs much more than brand-name Valium. The generic versions of Ativan and Valium cost about the same. Whichever drug or version you use, the amount you pay will depend on your insurance.  Ativan and Ambien have some similar effects in the body. Both are considered to work as sedative-hypnotic drugs. This means they both cause sleepiness and sedation (relaxation). However, these medications belong to different drug classes. Ativan is a benzodiazepine, while Ambien belongs to a class of drugs called non-benzodiazepine hypnotics.  The generic name of Ambien is zolpidem.   Uses   Ativan is FDA-approved for many uses, including:  Ambien is only FDA-approved for short-term treatment of insomnia.   Drug forms   Ativan is available as an oral tablet and as an intravenous (IV) solution. The oral tablet is usually taken one to three times a day. The IV solution is given by your healthcare provider.  Ambien is available as an oral tablet and as an extended-release tablet called Ambien CR. Both forms are taken once daily just before bedtime.   Side effects and risks   Ativan and Ambien have some similar side effects, and some that differ. Below are examples of these side effects.   * These can include sleepwalking, and eating, driving, making phone calls, or having sex while asleep.    Effectiveness   The only condition that both Ativan and Ambien are approved to treat is insomnia. Both are effective for treating this condition, although they haven't been compared in clinical studies for this purpose.  It's important to note that Ambien is typically a first-choice option for treating insomnia because it usually causes fewer side effects than other drugs.  Ativan is usually considered a second-choice option for treating insomnia. It's typically used in people for whom first-choice options such as Ambien don't work well.   Costs   Ativan and Ambien are both brand-name medications. Both are also available in generic form. The generic version of a drug usually costs less than the brand-name version. The generic name of Ambien is zolpidem.  Brand-name Ativan usually costs more than brand-name Ambien. The generic versions of Ativan and Ambien cost about the same. Whichever drug or version you use, the amount you pay will depend on your insurance.  Ativan tablets should be taken in the way your doctor prescribed them. Don't take more or less Ativan than prescribed without first talking with your doctor.  Ativan is usually taken two or three times daily. These doses are usually spread out at equal intervals. However, when Ativan is used for insomnia, it's usually taken just once at bedtime.  You can take Ativan with or without food. If it upsets your stomach, try taking it with food to help decrease this side effect.  Yes, Ativan can be crushed. Some Ativan tablets may also be split. If you'd like to split your tablets, ask your pharmacist if it's safe to do so.  Ativan is classified as a benzodiazepine. These drugs are typically used to treat anxiety and insomnia, but can also be used to treat other conditions.  Benzodiazepines are often categorized by how fast they work (onset of action) and how long they last in the body (duration). This chart includes examples of these classifications.  Ativan belongs to a class of medications called benzodiazepines. These medications work by boosting the activity of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) within your body.  GABA is a neurotransmitter that transmits messages between cells in different parts of your body. Increasing GABA in the body results in a tranquilizing effect that reduces feelings of stress and anxiety.  Benzodiazepines such as Ativan are categorized based on how fast they work. Ativan is classified as having a rapid to intermediate onset (start) of action. It begins to work right away after it's taken, but its peak effect occurs within 1 to 1.5 hours.  Ativan is sometimes prescribed by veterinarians to sedate an animal during surgery or to treat seizures. It's also used to help reduce stress or fears, especially related to loud noises.  If you think your dog or cat is in distress, see your veterinarian for an evaluation and treatment. Don't give your pet any Ativan that your doctor has prescribed for you.  If you think your pet has eaten your Ativan, call your veterinarian immediately.  Ativan can harm a fetus when taken by a pregnant woman. Avoid using Ativan during pregnancy.  If you're pregnant or planning to become pregnant, talk to your doctor. If you're taking Ativan, you may need to stop.  You shouldn't breastfeed while taking Ativan. This medication can pass through breast milk and cause side effects in a child who is breastfed.  Tell your doctor if you're breastfeeding. You may need to decide whether to stop breastfeeding or stop taking this medication.  Before taking Ativan, talk with your doctor about any medical conditions you have. Ativan may not be appropriate for you if you have certain medical conditions.  Yes, Ativan is a controlled substance. It's classified as a  Schedule four (IV)  prescription drug. This means that it has an accepted medical use but may also cause physical or psychological dependence and be may be abused.  The government has created special rules for how Schedule IV drugs can be prescribed by a doctor and dispensed by a pharmacist. Your doctor or pharmacist can tell you more.  Some people who take Ativan can become physically and psychologically dependent on the drug. The risk of dependence increases if Ativan is used in doses that are higher than prescribed, or for long periods of time.  In some cases, Ativan dependence can lead to misuse or abuse of the drug. The risk is higher with people who have previously abused alcohol or drugs.  Symptoms of Ativan abuse can include:  Taking Ativan may cause a positive result for benzodiazepines on urine drug screenings. If you're taking Ativan, consider disclosing this information before completing a drug screening.  The length of time Ativan stays in your system varies from person to person, but it's usually three to five days.  Here are answers to some frequently asked questions about Ativan.  Most of the effects of Ativan last about six to eight hours. However, this can vary from person to person.  Ativan begins to work within minutes, but its maximum effect usually happens about 1 to 1.5 hours after you take it.  If you've been taking Ativan regularly, yes, you'll likely need to slowly taper your dosage of the medication. If you don't taper your dosage, you may experience withdrawal symptoms.  In some cases, the taper may last several weeks. How slowly you taper the medication will depend on how much you've been taking and how long you've been using Ativan. Talk with your doctor before stopping Ativan to find out the best way to taper the medication.  Ativan can cause withdrawal effects in some people when they stop taking the medication. These effects are more likely to happen if you've taken higher doses or taken Ativan for a long period of time.  Symptoms of withdrawal can include:  For people with severe Ativan dependence who abruptly stop taking it, more severe withdrawal symptoms can occur. These can include:  Ativan is habit-forming and can lead to physical and psychological dependence and  addiction .  Long-term use of Ativan can increase your risk of certain side effects, especially physical and psychological dependence. This can lead to withdrawal symptoms (see above) when the medication is stopped.  Ativan is typically prescribed for short-term use of two to four weeks. If you're concerned that you might need to use this medication for longer periods, talk with your doctor.  When Ativan is dispensed from the pharmacy, the pharmacist will add an expiration date to the label on the bottle. This date is typically one year from the date the medication was dispensed.  The purpose of such expiration dates is to guarantee the effectiveness of the medication during this time.  The  current stance  of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is to avoid using expired medications. However, an FDA  study  showed that many medications may still be good beyond the expiration date listed on the bottle.  How long a medication remains good can depend on many factors, including how and where the medication is stored. Ativan should be stored at room temperature in its original container.  If you have unused medication that has gone past the expiration date, talk to your pharmacist to find out whether you might still be able to use it.  The following information is provided for clinicians and other healthcare professionals.  Ativan has a tranquilizing effect in the  central nervous system . Ativan binds to benzodiazepine receptors, which increases the effects of gamma-aminobutyric acid. This results in sedation, skeletal muscle relaxation, anticonvulsant effects, and coma.  Ativan has a bioavailability of 90 percent. Peak plasma levels occur about two hours after oral administration.  Ativan is conjugated to glucuronide and excreted in the urine.  The mean half-life of Ativan is about 12 hours; however, it can range from 10 to 20 hours.  The following should be assessed or monitored in patients receiving Ativan:  Ativan is contraindicated in people with hypersensitivity to benzodiazepines or any component of Ativan. It's also contraindicated in people with acute narrow-angle glaucoma.  The use of Ativan can cause psychological and physical dependence. The risk of dependence increases when higher doses are used or when it's used for long periods of time. The risk of dependence is also higher in people with a history of drug or alcohol abuse.  The risk of dependence and abuse can be reduced by using appropriate doses for the shortest time possible.  Ativan should be stored in a tight container at room temperature of 77°F (25°C). Temperature excursions to 59°F to 86°F (15°C to 30°C) are permissible.   Disclaimer : MedicalNewsToday has made every effort to make certain that all information is factually correct, comprehensive, and up-to-date. However, this article should not be used as a substitute for the knowledge and expertise of a licensed healthcare professional. You should always consult your doctor or other healthcare professional before taking any medication. The drug information contained herein is subject to change and is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. The absence of warnings or other information for a given drug does not indicate that the drug or drug combination is safe, effective, or appropriate for all patients or all specific uses.    
 Ambien - zolpidem tartrate tablet, film coated. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=c36cadf4-65a4-4466-b409-c82020b42452  
 Ativan - lorazepam injection. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=5fc0e987-61c9-40c4-b0d5-fcea07c8733e  
 Ativan - lorazepam tablets. (2016).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=89057c93-8155-4040-acec-64e877bd2b4c  
 Brett, J.,  et al.  (2015). Management of benzodiazepine misuse and dependence.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4657308/  
 Clinical pharmacology. (2018). Tampa, FL: Elsevier.  http://www.clinicalpharmacology-ip.com/  
 Cohn, J. B.,  et al . (1984). Long-term comparison of alprazolam, lorazepam and placebo in patients with an anxiety disorder.  https://accpjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.1875-9114.1984.tb03327.x?sid=nlm%3Apubmed  
 Comparison of benzodiazepines. (n.d.).  http://www.vhpharmsci.com/VHFormulary/Tools/Benzodiazepines-comparison.htm  
 Craven C,  et al.  (2015). Demystifying benzodiazepine urine drug screen results.  https://www.practicalpainmanagement.com/treatments/pharmacological/demystifying-benzodiazepine-urine-drug-screen-results  
 Don't be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm  
 Gomez, A. F.,  et al.  (2018). Comparing the efficacy of benzodiazepines and serotonergic antidepressants for adults with generalized anxiety disorder.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6097846/  
 Katzman, M. A.,  et al.  (2014). Canadian clinical practice guidelines for the management of anxiety, posttraumatic stress and obsessive-compulsive disorders.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4120194/  
 Khan, S. A. (n.d.). Tranquilizers, antidepressants, sleep aids, and anticonvulsants (toxicity).  https://www.merckvetmanual.com/toxicology/toxicities-from-human-drugs/tranquilizers,-antidepressants,-sleep-aids,-and-anticonvulsants-toxicity  
 Klonopin (clonazepam) tablet. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=542f22e8-dad2-47a8-93b6-30936715d73b  
 Locke, A .B.,  et al.  (2015). Diagnosis and management of generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder in adults.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2015/0501/p617.html  
 Lyon, R. C.,  et al.  (2006). Stability profiles of drug products extended beyond labeled expiration dates.  https://jpharmsci.org/article/S0022-3549(16)32045-7/fulltext  
 Maree, R. D.,  et al.  (2016). A systematic review of opioid and benzodiazepine misuse in older adults.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5069126/  
 Martin, J. L. R.,  et al.  (2007). Review: Benzodiazepines in generalized anxiety disorder: heterogeneity of outcomes based on a systemic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials.  https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0269881107077355  
 Mehdi T. (2012). Benzodiazepines revisited.  http://www.bjmp.org/content/benzodiazepines-revisited  
 Naeser, J.,  et al.  (2004). Clinical comparison of lorazepam vs. diazepam in the control of canine seizures.  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1476-4431.2004.t01-30-04035.x  
 Schutte-Rodin, S.,  et al.  (2008). Clinical guideline for the evaluation and management of chronic insomnia in adults.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2576317/  
 Schwebach, A.,  et al.  (2016). Urine drug screening: Minimizing false-positives and false-negatives to optimize patient care.  https://www.uspharmacist.com/article/urine-drug-screening-minimizing-false-positives-and-false-negatives-to-optimize-patient-care  
 Stein, M. B.,  et al.  (2015). Generalized anxiety  disorder. https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMcp1502514?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&amp;rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org&amp;rfr_dat=cr_pub%3Dpubmed  
 Tennant, F. (2014). Benzodiazepines in pain practice: Necessary but troubling.  https://www.practicalpainmanagement.com/treatments/pharmacological/non-opioids/benzodiazepines-pain-practice-necessary-troubling  
 Xanax - alprazolam tablet. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=388e249d-b9b6-44c3-9f8f-880eced0239f     Ambien - zolpidem tartrate tablet, film coated. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=c36cadf4-65a4-4466-b409-c82020b42452   Ativan - lorazepam injection. (2017).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=5fc0e987-61c9-40c4-b0d5-fcea07c8733e   Ativan - lorazepam tablets. (2016).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=89057c93-8155-4040-acec-64e877bd2b4c   Brett, J.,  et al.  (2015). Management of benzodiazepine misuse and dependence.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4657308/   Clinical pharmacology. (2018). Tampa, FL: Elsevier.  http://www.clinicalpharmacology-ip.com/   Cohn, J. B.,  et al . (1984). Long-term comparison of alprazolam, lorazepam and placebo in patients with an anxiety disorder.  https://accpjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.1875-9114.1984.tb03327.x?sid=nlm%3Apubmed   Comparison of benzodiazepines. (n.d.).  http://www.vhpharmsci.com/VHFormulary/Tools/Benzodiazepines-comparison.htm   Craven C,  et al.  (2015). Demystifying benzodiazepine urine drug screen results.  https://www.practicalpainmanagement.com/treatments/pharmacological/demystifying-benzodiazepine-urine-drug-screen-results   Don't be tempted to use expired medicines. (2016).  https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/specialfeatures/ucm481139.htm   Gomez, A. F.,  et al.  (2018). Comparing the efficacy of benzodiazepines and serotonergic antidepressants for adults with generalized anxiety disorder.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6097846/   Katzman, M. A.,  et al.  (2014). Canadian clinical practice guidelines for the management of anxiety, posttraumatic stress and obsessive-compulsive disorders.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4120194/   Khan, S. A. (n.d.). Tranquilizers, antidepressants, sleep aids, and anticonvulsants (toxicity).  https://www.merckvetmanual.com/toxicology/toxicities-from-human-drugs/tranquilizers,-antidepressants,-sleep-aids,-and-anticonvulsants-toxicity   Klonopin (clonazepam) tablet. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=542f22e8-dad2-47a8-93b6-30936715d73b   Locke, A .B.,  et al.  (2015). Diagnosis and management of generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder in adults.  https://www.aafp.org/afp/2015/0501/p617.html   Lyon, R. C.,  et al.  (2006). Stability profiles of drug products extended beyond labeled expiration dates.  https://jpharmsci.org/article/S0022-3549(16)32045-7/fulltext   Maree, R. D.,  et al.  (2016). A systematic review of opioid and benzodiazepine misuse in older adults.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5069126/   Martin, J. L. R.,  et al.  (2007). Review: Benzodiazepines in generalized anxiety disorder: heterogeneity of outcomes based on a systemic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials.  https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0269881107077355   Mehdi T. (2012). Benzodiazepines revisited.  http://www.bjmp.org/content/benzodiazepines-revisited   Naeser, J.,  et al.  (2004). Clinical comparison of lorazepam vs. diazepam in the control of canine seizures.  https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1476-4431.2004.t01-30-04035.x   Schutte-Rodin, S.,  et al.  (2008). Clinical guideline for the evaluation and management of chronic insomnia in adults.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2576317/   Schwebach, A.,  et al.  (2016). Urine drug screening: Minimizing false-positives and false-negatives to optimize patient care.  https://www.uspharmacist.com/article/urine-drug-screening-minimizing-false-positives-and-false-negatives-to-optimize-patient-care   Stein, M. B.,  et al.  (2015). Generalized anxiety  disorder. https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMcp1502514?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&amp;rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org&amp;rfr_dat=cr_pub%3Dpubmed   Tennant, F. (2014). Benzodiazepines in pain practice: Necessary but troubling.  https://www.practicalpainmanagement.com/treatments/pharmacological/non-opioids/benzodiazepines-pain-practice-necessary-troubling   Xanax - alprazolam tablet. (2018).  https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=388e249d-b9b6-44c3-9f8f-880eced0239f   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Network, MNT’s Medical. "Ativan (lorazepam)."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 31 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326015.php&gt;    APA  Network, M. (2019, August 31). "Ativan (lorazepam)."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  