 Typical symptoms of strawberry legs include:  Strawberry legs can cause a person embarrassment, but they are not usually itchy or painful. If a person does experience pain or itching, they should see a doctor, as it may indicate the presence of an underlying condition.  Strawberry legs occur when enlarged pores or hair follicles trap dead skin, oil, and bacteria. A person often experiences strawberry legs following shaving. Other skin conditions that can cause strawberry legs include clogged pores,  folliculitis , dry skin, and  keratosis pilaris .  In the following sections, we discuss prevention methods and treatment options for strawberry legs.  The following are some home remedies for strawberry legs, as well as some tips to help prevent them in the future.  In most cases, a person can take simple steps at home to prevent the occurrence of strawberry legs. However, if home prevention methods are ineffective, a person may choose to remove their leg hair permanently or seek medical treatment.  There are a few different home treatment options a person can try before seeing their doctor:  People should exfoliate their legs regularly.  When a person exfoliates their legs, they remove dead skin. Doing this makes it easier for new hairs to grow.  In addition to reducing the appearance of strawberry legs, exfoliation can also help prevent strawberry legs from reoccurring.  A range of dry and wet exfoliating products is available for  purchase online .  Another home treatment option is to use moisturizing creams to hydrate the skin.  When a person hydrates the skin on their legs, the appearance of strawberry legs will usually improve. It may also help prevent future occurrences.  Moisturizing creams are available for  purchase online .  A final home remedy to improve strawberry legs is to use salicylic acid or glycolic acid. These are ingredients in many over-the-counter  acne  products.  These acids can help treat  acne conditions  that may be contributing to the appearance of strawberry legs.  Alternatively, a person may have an underlying condition that is causing a symptom similar in appearance to strawberry legs. In such cases, it will require treatment.  The following are some medical treatment options for strawberry legs:  One medical method of hair removal is electrolysis. Electrolysis uses electricity to target the irritated hair follicles and stop the hair from growing.  This method will prevent ingrown hairs from recurring, which can reduce the likelihood of strawberry legs.  Another medical treatment option is  laser therapy .  The  American Academy of Dermatology  say that laser hair removal may require anywhere from two to six sessions to safely and effectively remove leg hair.  Despite taking several treatments to work, it is safe for the skin and can target multiple hair follicles at the same time.  If inflamed hair follicles are not the cause of strawberry legs, it may be an underlying condition that requires treatment.  Both bacterial and fungal infections can affect a person's hair follicles. In either case, a doctor will prescribe medication to treat the infection.  After treatment, the appearance of strawberry legs should disappear.  Taking preventive measures is usually achievable at home. That said, most medical treatment options also serve as methods of prevention.  Prevention tends to focus on changes in self-care. The following are some simple ways a person can help prevent strawberry legs:   Razors  and  shaving cream  are available for purchase online.  A person may also want to consider using epilators. An epilator is an electrical tool that removes hairs at the follicle.  Using an epilator is similar to waxing, but proponents of epilators believe that it is less damaging to the skin.  Many epilators are available to  purchase online .  However, epilators are not comfortable and may cause some pain. Therefore, not everyone will want to use the device as a substitute for shaving.  Strawberry legs can be annoying, but they are not usually a cause for concern.  If taking preventive steps does not treat or prevent strawberry legs, a person should talk to their healthcare provider.  If strawberry legs do not respond to treatment, it may suggest the presence of an underlying infection. Most underlying infections are easy to treat with  antibiotics  or antifungal medications.  Strawberry legs are not usually a cause for concern.  A person can usually prevent or treat strawberry legs at home by making self-care changes. For example, they may start using shaving cream and a sharp razor to shave the legs. Regularly exfoliating and moisturizing the legs can also prevent and treat strawberry legs.  If home remedies do not work, a person should talk to their doctor about underlying infections that may be causing the appearance of strawberry legs. In most cases, these infections are easy to treat.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Acne. (n.d.).  http://www.americanskin.org/resource/acne.php  
 Keratosis pilaris. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/bumps-and-growths/keratosis-pilaris  
 Laser hair removal. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/cosmetic-treatments/laser-hair-removal     Acne. (n.d.).  http://www.americanskin.org/resource/acne.php   Keratosis pilaris. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/bumps-and-growths/keratosis-pilaris   Laser hair removal. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/cosmetic-treatments/laser-hair-removal   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Fletcher, Jenna. "What to do about strawberry legs."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326033.php&gt;    APA  Fletcher, J. (2019, August 13). "What to do about strawberry legs."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  