  Chemotherapy drugs  are powerful anticancer drugs that work by killing cells as they divide. By doing this, they stop the  cancer  cells from growing and multiplying.   Chemotherapy , which people often refer to as chemo, is more likely to kill cancer cells than healthy cells because cancer cells tend to divide and multiply more quickly. However, this treatment also kills healthy cells that are in the process of cell division.  Damage to healthy cells inside the mouth can interfere with its ability to fight off harmful bacteria and to heal. This interference can result in the development of  mouth sores .  In this article, we provide information on the symptoms, management, and prevention of mouth sores from chemo.  Mouth sores are small cuts or ulcers inside the mouth.  They may appear a  few days  after a person starts chemotherapy, and they are usually at their worst around the seventh day following treatment.  Sores can appear on any of the soft tissues in or around the mouth, including the:   Symptoms  to look out for include:  Depending on the location and severity of the sores, a person may experience difficulties with the following:  Very painful mouth sores may lead to further complications, such as:  Mouth sores may develop a few days after starting chemotherapy, and they tend to clear up about  10–14 days  after the treatment ends.  In the meantime, there are various ways in which people can shorten the duration of mouth sores, relieve symptoms, and prevent further complications.  We offer some tips below.  The following home remedies and lifestyle tips can help people manage mouth sores at home:  Keeping the mouth moist can help relieve mouth pain and irritation.  A person can usually achieve this by drinking eight 8-ounce glasses of water per day. Drinking through a straw can allow the water to bypass any painful sores in the mouth.  Other tips for keeping the mouth moist include:  Spicy, salty, and acidic foods can further irritate mouth sores.  People should also avoid eating foods that have a dry, hard, crusty, or sticky texture. These can be uncomfortable or painful to eat.  Examples of foods and drinks to avoid include:  When possible, a person should choose soft, moist foods that are easy to chew and swallow. Some  healthful options  include:  It is important to ensure that these foods have cooled to room temperature before eating them. Hot or warm foods can further irritate a sore mouth.   Additional mealtime tips    The following practices  can also help alleviate mouth soreness during mealtimes:  Keeping the mouth clean is important for preventing infection. However, cleaning a sore mouth can be difficult and painful.  The  American Cancer Society (ACS)  provide the following mouth care plan for people managing mouth sores:   Brushing the teeth   When mouth sores are present, people should floss the teeth daily, except in areas that are sore or bleed easily.  People should also aim to brush their teeth about 30 minutes after eating and every 4 hours throughout the day.  The  following tips  can help prevent mouth irritation when brushing the teeth:   Rinsing the mouth   People should avoid using store bought mouthwash, which typically contains alcohol and other irritants.  Instead, the  ACS  recommend rinsing the mouth with one of the following mixtures:  Or  People should stir the solution thoroughly to ensure that the ingredients dissolve properly.  They can then gently swish it around in the mouth and gargle with it before spitting it out.   Caring for dentures   Wearing ill fitting dentures increases the risk of mouth sores during chemotherapy. People should avoid wearing them while receiving treatment.  Even properly fitting dentures can cause problems if sores develop underneath them. If this happens, a person should leave the dentures out between meals and at night to give the sores a chance to heal.  The  ACS  also advise people with dentures who are experiencing mouth sores to remove and clean the dentures between meals and store them in an antibacterial soak when they are not in use.  Some people may experience sores on their lips. Applying the following products to the lips can help treat dryness or soreness:  Currently, there are no medications to prevent the development of mouth sores during chemotherapy.  However, people who regularly check their mouth are likely to detect sores at an earlier stage. Early detection and management of sores can reduce their duration and severity.  The  ACS  advise that people check their mouth twice a day using a small flashlight. Gently pressing a Popsicle stick onto the middle of the tongue will give them a more unobstructed view of the back of the mouth. People who wear dentures should remove them before checking for sores.  People should notify their healthcare team if they notice changes in the mouth or differences in how things taste.  People should see a doctor if their mouth sores prevent them from doing any of the following activities:  A doctor will be able to prescribe medications to ease mouth pain and other symptoms.  A person should also see a doctor if they experience any of the following signs of infection:  Chemotherapy drugs  weaken  the immune system, making it difficult for people to fight off infections. Early detection and treatment of infections help lower the risk of further complications.  Mouth sores are a potential side effect of chemotherapy. These sores usually develop within the first few days of starting the treatment.  The sores generally clear up about 10–14 days after the chemotherapy has ended. In the meantime, a person can try many techniques to manage the sores at home.  Successful home management can relieve symptoms, decrease the duration of sores, and prevent infection.  A person should see their doctor if mouth sores become very painful or if there are signs of infection. Early treatment of infection reduces the risk of further complications.    
 How chemotherapy drugs work. (2016).  https://www.cancer.org/treatment/treatments-and-side-effects/treatment-types/chemotherapy/how-chemotherapy-drugs-work.html  
 Managing mouth sores (n.d.).  http://urology.ucla.edu/prostate-cancer/managing-mouth-sores  
 Mouth sores or sore throat. (2019).  https://www.cancer.org/treatment/treatments-and-side-effects/physical-side-effects/mouth-problems/mouth-sores.html  
 Preventing infections in people with cancer. (2015).  https://www.cancer.org/content/cancer/en/treatment/treatments-and-side-effects/physical-side-effects/low-blood-counts/infections/preventing-infections-in-people-with-cancer.html     How chemotherapy drugs work. (2016).  https://www.cancer.org/treatment/treatments-and-side-effects/treatment-types/chemotherapy/how-chemotherapy-drugs-work.html   Managing mouth sores (n.d.).  http://urology.ucla.edu/prostate-cancer/managing-mouth-sores   Mouth sores or sore throat. (2019).  https://www.cancer.org/treatment/treatments-and-side-effects/physical-side-effects/mouth-problems/mouth-sores.html   Preventing infections in people with cancer. (2015).  https://www.cancer.org/content/cancer/en/treatment/treatments-and-side-effects/physical-side-effects/low-blood-counts/infections/preventing-infections-in-people-with-cancer.html   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lillis, Charlotte. "What to know about mouth sores from chemo."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 13 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326026.php&gt;    APA  Lillis, C. (2019, August 13). "What to know about mouth sores from chemo."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  