 The  chickenpox  infection generally clears up within a couple weeks, and the body will then create an immunity to the virus.  However, the symptoms of chickenpox can be extremely irritating while the infection is active.  The main symptom of chickenpox is a rash that produces red sores, similar to blisters, that spread all over the skin. The rash is itchy and occasionally painful, and it gets worse when a person scratches it.  However, many home remedies can help soothe the symptoms of chickenpox and discourage people from picking at the sores. Learn about home remedies for the symptoms of chickenpox in this article.  There is no cure for chickenpox. However, a vaccine can prevent most cases of the infection.  Usually, once a person gets the infection, they simply have to wait out the process as their body overcomes it.  Home remedies may help with certain symptoms and make the process more bearable. Below, we list possible remedies for each symptom.  Many people with chickenpox will complain of the persistent itch associated with the virus.  This symptom is especially difficult for children, as they may not understand that it is important not to scratch it.  Remedies for itchiness include:  Preventing itching is also a vital part of treatment. Scratching the sores can make itching worse and may increase the risk of complications, such as open sores that bleed or develop a secondary infection.  Prevention tips include:  Many people with chickenpox develop a  fever  and will experience aches and pains.  Using over-the-counter (OTC) medications such as acetaminophen may help reduce symptoms of pain.  There are also children's versions of these medications available.  Always follow the dosage instructions on the package or any special dosage instructions from a doctor or pharmacist.  People can try the following home remedies for sores that develop in the mouth:  Chickenpox is most common in children, and there are some special things to consider when treating a child.  Children should not take adult versions of any medication, including OTC medication, unless a doctor specifically tells them to. Always stick to products designed for children and follow the dosage instructions.  Never use  aspirin , and if possible, avoid using ibuprofen (Advil) in children with chickenpox. The  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  note that these products may lead to potentially life threatening complications.  It is also vital to take steps to prevent the spread of the infection. Keep children home from school and away from public spaces to prevent spreading the virus.  If it becomes necessary to set up a medical appointment for the child, call the doctor in advance. Showing up to urgent care may put other people, such as those with weakened immune systems and those who have not been vaccinated, at risk of contracting the infection.  Chickenpox tends to resolve without treatment, with no need to seek medical attention. However, in some special cases, a person should see a doctor.  Some people have a higher risk of complications, and they should contact a doctor at the first sign of chickenpox. These groups include:  If a doctor diagnoses chickenpox early enough, they can prescribe an antiviral medication that may help clear up the infection faster.  Additionally, anyone who develops more severe symptoms should see a doctor. Severe symptoms include:  Children routinely receive two doses of a chickenpox vaccine, which prevents chickenpox infections altogether in most cases. The small percentage of people who get the vaccination and still contract chickenpox will experience  fewer or milder symptoms .  Chickenpox typically clears up on its own within 1–2 weeks. Managing symptoms can help many people find relief during this time.  It is also essential to find ways to avoid scratching the itch, as scratching may result in open cuts, infection, and scarring.  If a doctor diagnoses chickenpox early enough, they can prescribe medications to people at high risk to help clear the infection. Vaccines can also help people avoid the infection entirely.  Some of the home remedies in this article are available at drugstores or online.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 About the varicella vaccines. (2019).  https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/varicella/hcp/about-vaccine.html  
 Miraj, S., &amp; Alesaeidi, S. (2016). A systematic review study of therapeutic effects of Matricaria recuitta chamomile (chamomile).  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5074766/  
 Prevention and treatment. (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/chickenpox/about/prevention-treatment.html  
 Reynertson, K. A.,  et al.  (2015). Anti-inflammatory activities of colloidal oatmeal ( Avena sativa ) contribute to the effectiveness of oats in treatment of itch associated with dry, irritated skin [Abstract].  https://jddonline.com/articles/dermatology/S1545961615P0043X/     About the varicella vaccines. (2019).  https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/varicella/hcp/about-vaccine.html   Miraj, S., &amp; Alesaeidi, S. (2016). A systematic review study of therapeutic effects of Matricaria recuitta chamomile (chamomile).  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5074766/   Prevention and treatment. (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/chickenpox/about/prevention-treatment.html   Reynertson, K. A.,  et al.  (2015). Anti-inflammatory activities of colloidal oatmeal ( Avena sativa ) contribute to the effectiveness of oats in treatment of itch associated with dry, irritated skin [Abstract].  https://jddonline.com/articles/dermatology/S1545961615P0043X/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "Home remedies for relief from chickenpox symptoms."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 14 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326051.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2019, August 14). "Home remedies for relief from chickenpox symptoms."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  