 However, there are a number of remedies that may help people find relief and get to sleep, including taking pain relievers or applying a cold compress or even cloves to the tooth.  In this article, learn more about nine home remedies for relieving a toothache at night.  Treating a toothache at night may be more difficult, as there is not much to distract a person from the pain.  However, people can try the following methods to relieve pain:  Taking over-the-counter (OTC) pain medications such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) or  ibuprofen  (Advil) is a quick, simple way for many people to effectively reduce mild-to-moderate toothaches.  Always stay within the recommended dosage on the packaging.  If the toothache is severe, it is best to see a dentist and speak to them about stronger pain relievers.  Using a cold compress may help ease the pain of a toothache.  Applying a bag of ice wrapped in a towel to the affected side of the face or jaw helps constrict the blood vessels in the area, which can reduce pain to allow a person to fall asleep.  Applying a cold compress to the area for 15–20 minutes every few hours in the evening may also help prevent pain when going to bed.  Pooling blood in the head may cause additional pain and  inflammation . For some people, elevating the head with an extra pillow or two may relieve the pain enough for them to fall asleep.  Some medicated ointments may also help reduce toothache pain. OTC numbing gels and ointments that contain ingredients such as benzocaine may numb the area.  However, benzocaine is not suitable for use by young children.  A simple salt water rinse is a common home remedy for a toothache.  Salt water is a natural  antibacterial agent , so it may reduce inflammation. This, in turn, helps protect damaged teeth from infection.  Rinsing with salt water may also help remove any food particles or debris stuck in the teeth or gums.   Periodontitis  is a serious gum infection that generally occurs as a result of poor oral hygiene. It can cause issues such as soreness, bleeding gums, and teeth that come loose in their sockets.  The author of a  2016 study  found that rinsing with hydrogen peroxide mouthwash helped reduce plaque and symptoms of periodontitis.  People should always dilute food-grade hydrogen peroxide with equal parts water. Swish the solution in the mouth, but do not swallow it.  This remedy is not suitable for children, as there is a risk they may accidentally swallow the mixture.  Swishing  peppermint tea  or sucking on peppermint tea bags may also help temporarily relieve pain from a toothache.   Researchers  note that peppermint contains antibacterial and  antioxidant  compounds. Menthol, an active ingredient in peppermint, may also have a mild numbing effect on sensitive areas.  Eugenol, which is one of the main compounds in  cloves , can reduce tooth pain. The results of a  2015 clinical trial  indicated that people who applied eugenol to their gums and socket after having a tooth extracted had less pain and inflammation during healing.  Eugenol acts as an analgesic, which means that it numbs the area. To use clove for a toothache, soak ground cloves in water to make a paste. Then, apply the paste to the tooth, or put it in an empty tea bag and place it in the mouth.  Alternatively, gently chewing or sucking on a single clove and then allowing it to sit near the painful tooth may help relieve pain.  This is not a suitable remedy for children, as they may swallow too much clove. Single cloves can be spiky and painful if a person swallows them.   Garlic  is a common household ingredient that some people use to relieve toothache pain.  Allicin, which is the main compound in garlic, has a  strong antibacterial effect  that may help kill the bacteria in the mouth that lead to cavities and tooth pain.  Simply chewing a clove of garlic and allowing it to sit near the tooth may help relieve pain. That said, the taste of raw garlic can be too strong for some people, so this may not be the right solution for everyone.  Tooth decay is a very common cause of a toothache. Tooth decay may lead to cavities if a person does not receive treatment.  Cavities occur when acids and bacteria break through the enamel and eat away at the delicate tissues inside the tooth. This can expose the nerve, causing mild-to-severe pain.  Sinus infections may also cause toothache in some people. This symptom occurs as the infection drains from the head. Symptoms such as pain and pressure from the infection may hurt more at night.  Other potential causes for a toothache include:  Toothaches can be painful in the day, but they may seem to get worse at night.  One reason that this may occur is because when a person is lying down, blood rushes to the head. This extra blood in the area may increase the pain and pressure that people feel from a toothache.  Another reason why many aches feel worse at night is because there are fewer distractions. With little else to focus on but the toothache, a person may find it difficult to fall asleep.  People with a toothache at night should see a dentist as soon as possible. Any home remedies are only for temporary relief.  If the toothache also comes with other signs of an infection, a person may need  antibiotics  to clear out the infection.  When a cracked or decaying tooth is causing the pain, a person should see their dentist. They will be able to find a permanent solution.  Ignoring the signs of tooth decay, such as an aching tooth, may lead to more serious issues, including abscesses, gum disease, and tooth loss.  Dealing with a toothache is a painful experience. Although many home remedies can provide temporary relief and help a person get some sleep, they are not permanent solutions.  Anyone who experiences a toothache for longer than 1 or 2 days without symptoms of a sinus infection should see a dentist for a full diagnosis and treatment.  They may need to clean out a cavity or consider more serious options, such as root canals or tooth extractions.  Some of the home remedies in this article are available in stores and online:  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Asl, M. K.,  et al.  (2013). Analgesic effect of the aqueous and ethanolic extracts of clove.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4075701/  
 Bayan, L.,  et al.  (2014). Garlic: A review of potential therapeutic effects.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4103721/  
 Huynh, N. C.-N.,  et al.  (2016). Rinsing with saline promotes human gingival fibroblast wound healing  in vitro .  https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0159843  
 Jesudasan, J. S.,  et al.  (2015). Effectiveness of 0.2% chlorhexidine gel and a eugenol-based paste on postoperative alveolar osteitis in patients having third molars extracted: A randomised controlled clinical trial [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26188932  
 Rashed, H. T. (2016). Evaluation of the effect of hydrogen peroxide as a mouthwash in comparison with chlorhexidine in chronic periodontitis patients: A clinical study.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4916793/  
 Singh, R.,  et al.  (2015). Antibacterial and antioxidant activities of  Mentha piperita  L.  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1878535211000232     Asl, M. K.,  et al.  (2013). Analgesic effect of the aqueous and ethanolic extracts of clove.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4075701/   Bayan, L.,  et al.  (2014). Garlic: A review of potential therapeutic effects.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4103721/   Huynh, N. C.-N.,  et al.  (2016). Rinsing with saline promotes human gingival fibroblast wound healing  in vitro .  https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0159843   Jesudasan, J. S.,  et al.  (2015). Effectiveness of 0.2% chlorhexidine gel and a eugenol-based paste on postoperative alveolar osteitis in patients having third molars extracted: A randomised controlled clinical trial [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26188932   Rashed, H. T. (2016). Evaluation of the effect of hydrogen peroxide as a mouthwash in comparison with chlorhexidine in chronic periodontitis patients: A clinical study.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4916793/   Singh, R.,  et al.  (2015). Antibacterial and antioxidant activities of  Mentha piperita  L.  https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1878535211000232   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Johnson, Jon. "How to get rid of a toothache at night."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326133.php&gt;    APA  Johnson, J. (2019, August 22). "How to get rid of a toothache at night."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  