 When a person experiences  vertigo , they may feel as though their surroundings are spinning or moving around them.  Although anyone can develop BPPV at any age, this condition usually affects people  over the age of 50 years . BPPV is more common in women than in men.  BPPV is not a life threatening condition, but it can cause significant discomfort. In this article, we take a look at its symptoms, causes, and treatment options.  Symptoms of BPPV include:  BPPV symptoms vary among individuals in intensity and duration. A slight change of head position can cause severe symptoms in some people, while rapid or extreme head movements might produce only mild symptoms in others.  Although vertigo usually lasts for  less than a minute , other symptoms can last for several days or weeks.  The inner ear contains two different structures:  BPPV occurs when  calcium  carbonate crystals, which usually appear in the membranous labyrinth, move to one or more of the semicircular canals.  When enough calcium carbonate crystals build up, they disrupt the movement of fluid through the semicircular canals, altering the signals that travel to the brain.  Moving the head can trigger vertigo because the solid crystals respond to gravity. The following head positions and movements can trigger vertigo in people who have BPPV:  A doctor can confirm BPPV after reviewing a person's symptoms and medical history. They may perform a physical examination and inspect the ear for signs that could indicate a different underlying condition.  Tests that a doctor can use to help them diagnose BPPV include:  Treatments for BPPV mainly focus on improving visual stability and reducing vertigo and dizziness.  Effective treatments for BPPV include the following:      The  Epley maneuver  involves performing a specific series of head movements to dislodge the calcium carbonate crystals from the semicircular canals.  A trained healthcare professional can administer this treatment and teach people how to perform the movements at home.  To do the Epley maneuver:  Repositioning maneuvers are incredibly useful for treating BPPV. In a  2019 study  involving 359 people with BPPV, researchers found that repositioning maneuvers had a 75–100% success rate 1 month after treatment.  A doctor may advise a person to keep their head upright for a few days following the procedure. Doing this will prevent the crystals from moving back to the semicircular canals.  These exercises are  less effective  than the Epley maneuver because they do not necessarily remove calcium carbonate crystals from the semicircular canals. Instead, these exercises spread out any buildups. However, Brandt-Daroff exercises can help reduce vertigo symptoms.  To do Brandt-Daroff exercises:  Some people may feel dizzy or light-headed after completing a set of Brandt-Daroff exercises. If this is the case, they should wait for the dizziness to pass before standing up.  People should stop doing these exercises if they notice new or worsening symptoms.  Betahistine is a medication that doctors use to treat vertigo and BPPV.  In a  2017 study , 305 adults with vestibular vertigo received 48 milligrams of betahistine each day for 60 days. At the end of the treatment period, 94.4% of the participants had responded positively to the treatment, according to their doctors. A significant proportion of the participants experienced a reduction in vertigo-related symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, and faintness.  In another  2017 study , people with BPPV who received treatment with both betahistine and the Epley maneuver showed earlier signs of improvement and fewer recurring episodes than people who received only one of these treatments.  People who have BPPV can work with an audiologist or physical therapist to develop a personalized treatment plan. This plan may include exercises, medication, and tips for coping with vertigo.  General tips for living with BPPV include:  When experiencing dizziness or vertigo, it may help to move the head slowly into a neutral position or lie down on a bed or couch and wait until this symptom resolves.  People should see a doctor if they experience:  People should seek immediate medical attention if they experience the following symptoms after sustaining a head or neck injury:  BPPV is a common cause of vertigo. BPPV occurs when calcium carbonate crystals move from the membranous labyrinth to the semicircular canals in the ear.  Although this condition is not life threatening, it can cause significant discomfort and interfere with a person's daily life.  BPPV can go away on its own once the body reabsorbs the calcium carbonate crystals. However, if symptoms do not improve on their own, people can choose from several effective treatment options.  BPPV treatments usually focus on removing the vertigo-inducing crystals from the semicircular canals. People who have BPPV can speak with a doctor about their treatment options.    
 Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. (2017).  https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/benign-paroxysmal-positional-vertigo/  
 Kaur, J., &amp; Shamanna, K. (2017). Management of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo: A comparative study between Epleys maneuver and Betahistine [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28723599  
 Parfenov, V. A.,  et al.  (2017). Effectiveness of betahistine (48 mg/day) in patients with vestibular vertigo during routine practice: The VIRTUOSO study.  https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0174114  
 Pérez-Vázquez, P., &amp; Franco-Gutiérrez, V. (2017). Treatment of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. A clinical review.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6002633/  
 Wang. Y.-H.,  et al.  (2019). Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo — recommendations for treatment in primary care.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6572671/     Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. (2017).  https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/benign-paroxysmal-positional-vertigo/   Kaur, J., &amp; Shamanna, K. (2017). Management of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo: A comparative study between Epleys maneuver and Betahistine [Abstract].  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28723599   Parfenov, V. A.,  et al.  (2017). Effectiveness of betahistine (48 mg/day) in patients with vestibular vertigo during routine practice: The VIRTUOSO study.  https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0174114   Pérez-Vázquez, P., &amp; Franco-Gutiérrez, V. (2017). Treatment of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. A clinical review.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6002633/   Wang. Y.-H.,  et al.  (2019). Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo — recommendations for treatment in primary care.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6572671/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Eske, Jamie. "What is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 27 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326157.php&gt;    APA  Eske, J. (2019, August 27). "What is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  