 Although it is not always possible to avoid these triggers, there are techniques that people can use to manage their  anxiety  in certain situations.  Here, we provide information on anxiety management techniques and describe the various treatment options for people with severe or debilitating anxiety.  There are many different anxiety triggers. Below, we look at eight  common examples  of these triggers and how a person can manage them.  Caffeine  increases  the levels of epinephrine in the body. Epinephrine is one of the hormones that play a role in the fight-or-flight response.  Drinking excessive amounts of  coffee  and other caffeinated beverages can, therefore, leave people feeling anxious and on edge.  Drinking less caffeine may help improve feelings of anxiety.   Learn more about how caffeine can affect the body here .  It is common for people to feel anxious before a test. The name for this is  test anxiety , which is a type of performance anxiety.  Sometimes, test anxiety is due to a lack of study or preparation. Other times, it occurs because a person has a fear of failure. An intense pressure to perform commonly drives this concern.  Most schools have special programs in place or counselors to help students manage test anxiety.  Some people may experience anxiety before a social gathering or event or when meeting people for the first time. For example, they may feel particularly anxious in the following circumstances:  A certain amount of anxiety in these situations is normal. Sometimes, however, the anxiety is so intense that it stops people engaging in activities that they would otherwise enjoy.  People may feel excessively self-conscious and become socially withdrawn. These may be signs of  social anxiety disorder .  People who experience bullying in school or the workplace may become anxious about spending time there.  The fear of bullies can distract people from their studies or work. Some children may skip school altogether. These behavioral responses can lead to underperformance, which may trigger further anxiety.  Over time, people can become fearful of social situations in general.  People who are experiencing bullying should try to reach out to a trusted friend, colleague, or mentor. Most organizations have established procedures for managing bullying in the school or workplace.  Financial difficulty can significantly affect a person's  mental health .  Living with debt, losing a job, or having an unstable income can all trigger feelings of anxiety.  According to a 2017 survey by the American Psychological Association, about  72%  of people in the United States reported feeling stressed about money during the previous month.  People with financial anxiety may benefit from talking to a mental health professional or a supportive family member or friend.  Many people associate bereavement with intense feelings of grief and  depression . In many cases, the loss may also trigger  deep anxiety .  A person who has lost a loved one may worry about how they will cope. People may feel particularly anxious after the death of a person whom they confided in or relied on in some way.  Many people also worry about how they will cope with their grief. They may feel anxious about whether they will be able to function at work or in the home. They may even fear that they will never feel normal again.  People who feel anxious after a bereavement should talk to their doctor. The doctor may refer the person for bereavement counseling.  Becoming a parent is a significant life event. While it may be an exciting prospect, it can also trigger feelings of intense  stress  and anxiety.  Parents-to-be may have concerns about how they will cope in their new role. They may also worry about the birth itself, as well as the health of the baby.  Women experiencing high levels of  pregnancy anxiety  should talk to their doctor. Chronic stress can have a negative effect on both the woman and the unborn baby. The doctor may recommend a form of talking therapy to help alleviate anxiety.  Getting a diagnosis of a severe illness or chronic medical condition can be deeply upsetting and worrying.  People may experience anxiety over how they are going to manage their condition and how it may progress. They may also worry about how they or their loved ones will cope emotionally or financially.  People who experience these anxieties should talk to their doctor. A doctor will be able to recommend appropriate therapies and other useful resources.  Many people feel anxious in certain situations, some of which tend to provoke greater anxiety than others.  However, people should see a doctor if anxiety begins to affect any of the following aspects of their life:  A person who has severe, persistent, or debilitating anxiety may have an anxiety disorder. In such cases, a doctor may recommend treatment to help manage the anxiety.  The type of treatment that a person receives depends on the type and severity of their anxiety, as well as its cause.  Some  treatment options  include:  Different types of talking therapy are available.   Counseling : Counseling is usually a short term therapy that lasts for several weeks. The goal of counseling is to help people develop strategies for managing stressful situations.   Psychotherapy : This therapy is more long term than counseling, and it covers a broader range of issues.  There are many different types of psychotherapy, but they all aim to help people become better able to:  The type of psychotherapy that a person receives will depend on their personal preferences and the type of anxiety that they have.   Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) :  CBT  is a specific form of psychotherapy that helps people recognize how their negative thought patterns can influence their anxiety and behaviors. Becoming more aware of this can help people develop more effective coping strategies.  A doctor may sometimes prescribe anti-anxiety medications alongside talking therapy. A person's overall health and the type of anxiety that they have will determine the most suitable medication for them.  Some anti-anxiety medications include:  It is not always possible to avoid the situations and events that trigger anxiety. Trying to avoid these triggers can sometimes make anxiety worse.  Stress management techniques can help people achieve a more relaxed state of mind and manage anxiety better in these situations.  Examples include:  Exercise  decreases  the levels of stress hormones within the body. It can also distract people from worry by making them focus on the task of exercising instead.  A  2014 review  investigated the anti-anxiety effects of exercise compared with those of standard anxiety treatments, such as medication and CBT. The review included eight randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of exercise interventions for anxiety.  On its own, exercise was less effective than the standard anxiety treatments. However, combining the treatment with exercise generally led to greater reductions in anxiety than the treatment alone.  Both aerobic and anaerobic exercises appear to reduce anxiety symptoms. However, further RCTs are necessary to confirm the benefits of exercise for anxiety.  Meditation is the practice of focusing the mind.  Mindfulness is a type of meditation that involves focusing on the feelings, thoughts, or bodily sensations that are happening in the present moment. By doing this, a person can often slow their thoughts and stop their mind from racing.   Guided imagery  is a type of meditation in which a person visualizes scenes to promote relaxation.  For example, a person may choose to imagine a beautiful sunset or a peaceful garden. These visualizations can distract people from their anxious state and promote positive thoughts and sensations.   Diaphragmatic breathing  is a breathing technique that slows the heart rate and lowers  blood pressure .  A  2017 study  found that diaphragmatic breathing also reduces cortisol levels. Cortisol is a hormone that the body releases in response to stress. Having too much in the bloodstream can cause or exacerbate anxiety.  To try this type of breathing, people can follow the  steps  below:  Try practicing diaphragmatic breathing for 10 minutes several times a day.  Most people experience occasional bouts of anxiety, which a particular situation or event commonly triggers. Various stress management techniques exist to help people prevent or reduce anxiety in these situations.  Sometimes, anxiety can get in the way of normal life, which can indicate that a person has an anxiety disorder.  People who experience persistent or severe anxiety should see a doctor. The doctor will be able to recommend appropriate treatments.    
 Caffeine. (2016).  https://www.anxiety.org/the-top-five-foods-that-are-making-you-anxious-caffeine  
 Feinberg, M. (2016). Building better relationships relieves stress.  https://www.anxiety.org/overcoming-pregnancy-anxiety-congnitive-behavioral-therapy-supportive-partners  
 Jayakody, K.,  et al.  (2014). Exercise for anxiety disorders: Systematic review [Abstract].  https://bjsm.bmj.com/content/48/3/187.short  
 Jovanovic, T.,  et al.  (n.d.). What is anxiety?  https://www.anxiety.org/what-is-anxiety  
 Learning diaphragmatic breathing (n.d.).  https://www.health.harvard.edu/lung-health-and-disease/learning-diaphragmatic-breathing  
 Lee, C. S. (2017). After losing a loved one, worry may predict your level of depression and anxiety.  https://www.anxiety.org/worry-may-predict-anxiety-depression-prolonged-grief  
 Ma, X.,  et al.  (2017). The effect of diaphragmatic breathing on attention, negative affect and stress in healthy adults.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5455070/  
 Pawlowski, S., &amp; Rettew, D. C. (2016). Six tips to break the bullying-anxiety-avoidance cycle.  https://www.anxiety.org/ways-to-break-bullying-anxiety-avoidance-cycle  
 Smith, M.,  et al.  (2019). Social anxiety disorder.  https://www.helpguide.org/articles/anxiety/social-anxiety-disorder.htm  
 Speaking of Psychology: The stress of money. Episode 22. (n.d.).  https://www.apa.org/research/action/speaking-of-psychology/financial-stress  
 Test anxiety. (n.d.).  https://adaa.org/living-with-anxiety/children/test-anxiety  
 Wilson, T. K., &amp; Tripp, J. (2019). Buspirone.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK531477/     Caffeine. (2016).  https://www.anxiety.org/the-top-five-foods-that-are-making-you-anxious-caffeine   Feinberg, M. (2016). Building better relationships relieves stress.  https://www.anxiety.org/overcoming-pregnancy-anxiety-congnitive-behavioral-therapy-supportive-partners   Jayakody, K.,  et al.  (2014). Exercise for anxiety disorders: Systematic review [Abstract].  https://bjsm.bmj.com/content/48/3/187.short   Jovanovic, T.,  et al.  (n.d.). What is anxiety?  https://www.anxiety.org/what-is-anxiety   Learning diaphragmatic breathing (n.d.).  https://www.health.harvard.edu/lung-health-and-disease/learning-diaphragmatic-breathing   Lee, C. S. (2017). After losing a loved one, worry may predict your level of depression and anxiety.  https://www.anxiety.org/worry-may-predict-anxiety-depression-prolonged-grief   Ma, X.,  et al.  (2017). The effect of diaphragmatic breathing on attention, negative affect and stress in healthy adults.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5455070/   Pawlowski, S., &amp; Rettew, D. C. (2016). Six tips to break the bullying-anxiety-avoidance cycle.  https://www.anxiety.org/ways-to-break-bullying-anxiety-avoidance-cycle   Smith, M.,  et al.  (2019). Social anxiety disorder.  https://www.helpguide.org/articles/anxiety/social-anxiety-disorder.htm   Speaking of Psychology: The stress of money. Episode 22. (n.d.).  https://www.apa.org/research/action/speaking-of-psychology/financial-stress   Test anxiety. (n.d.).  https://adaa.org/living-with-anxiety/children/test-anxiety   Wilson, T. K., &amp; Tripp, J. (2019). Buspirone.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK531477/   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Lillis, Charlotte. "What can trigger anxiety?."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 22 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326134.php&gt;    APA  Lillis, C. (2019, August 22). "What can trigger anxiety?."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  