 Over the past 3 years, the  MNT  editorial team has quadrupled in size.  We've grown from a team of six working in a small office in a little seaside town in the south of England, to a team of 24 working in a large office in one of the biggest seaside cities (still in the south of England).  Accuracy and transparency have always been our guiding stars when it comes to creating authoritative and trustworthy health content.  By adding even more talent to our editorial team, we have been able to drive our content forward and help more people make informed decisions about their health and well-being.  I am so proud to lead an innately curious team dedicated to researching and reporting on the latest medical studies and providing you, our readers, with reliable health information.  Alongside our editorial team, our audience has grown significantly. More than 70 million of you visit our site every month.   What is more, we were delighted to receive the news this month that  MNT  is now the third biggest health information website in the United States!   Without collaboration, however, we wouldn't be celebrating this amazing achievement.  No less than five teams — writers, editors, medical reviewers, copy editors, and our production team — create every piece of  MNT 's clinical content. We all work together to ensure that we deliver the best possible health information.  Every day, each member of the editorial team joins forces to come up with improved processes and content ideas. We work with  you , taking on board  your  valuable feedback via email and on our social platforms.  As American author and educator Helen Keller once said:   " Alone we can do so little; together we can do so much."  So, which of our collaborative efforts caught your eye this month? You were interested to learn  what happens if you do pushups every day , as well as  whether receding gums can grow back .  Our article on  8 natural supplements to help fight inflammation  was popular, as were our reports on  what to know about the effects of metformin  and  earwax colors and what they mean .  Within our news content, you were intrigued by our coverage of a study suggesting that  overtreatment for diabetes could pose health dangers , and our article on research  linking a plant-based diet to a lower risk of cardiovascular death  piqued your curiosity.  Our report on a warning from the Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) that a bleach-based product that makers advertise as a cure-all  may have "life-threatening side effects"  also caught your attention.  My top pick for this month is a feature our research editor penned, which investigates  whether 5G technology is bad for human health   . If you're an avid user of mobile technology, I'm sure you'll find this an interesting read.  Do you have any health topics you'd like the  MNT  team to investigate?  Get in touch!  We'd love to hear from you and continue the collaboration.  You can also contact us on  Facebook  and stay up to date with the latest medical news by following us on  Twitter .  I'll be back next month with more on what you've been reading.   In the meantime, have a happy and healthful September!    Honor Whiteman , Managing Editor  