  Vitamin D  is an essential nutrient for the body. The body needs  vitamin  D to absorb  calcium . Vitamin D also plays a role in bone growth, bone healing, and immune system function.  This article looks at how the body gets its vitamin D from the sun, tips for maximizing vitamin D production, and other ways to get vitamin D.  The body needs a steady source of vitamin D for many different processes.  The sun is our best natural source of vitamin D. Spending even a short time in the sun can provide the body with all of the vitamin D it needs for the day. According to the  Vitamin D Council , this could be:  Very few foods contain significant amounts of vitamin D, so people can ensure they get enough of the vitamin by scheduling regular time outdoors.  When the sun's ultraviolet B (UVB) rays hit a person's skin, processes inside the tissue start making vitamin D for the body to use. It is essential to remember, however, that too much sun exposure can burn the skin and potentially lead to  skin cancer .  Vitamin D helps the body to absorb calcium, which is one of the main building blocks of bone. The body also needs vitamin D to keep the nerves, muscles, and immune system working properly.  Vitamin D deficiencies can cause soft bone conditions such as  rickets  or osteomalacia, and the porous, fragile bone condition called  osteoporosis .  When the sun's rays hit the skin, processes inside the tissues start making vitamin D.  People do not need to get a tan or burn to get vitamin D from the sun. The body will make all the vitamin D it needs for a day in about half the time it takes the skin to burn.  Many factors affect how much vitamin D a person gets from the sun, such as:  Where a person lives in relation to the equator also has a significant impact on how much vitamin D their bodies can make.  In the United States, people in the sunnier southern states will find it easier to meet their vitamin D needs with sun exposure than those in the northern states. This is especially true in the winter months when the sun is lower in the sky.  Frequent, moderate exposure to the sun is healthful, but prolonged exposure can be dangerous.  It is important to note that when someone stays in the sun so long that their skin burns, they have a higher risk of developing skin cancer.  Current advice is for people to stay in the sun for half as long as it takes their particular skin type to burn before covering up and retiring to the shade. This should give them all the vitamin D they need without increasing the risk of skin cancer.  Wearing sunscreen limits the body's ability to make vitamin D. However, spending time in the sun without sunscreen can cause  sunburn  and may contribute to the development of skin cancer.  The body cannot make vitamin D when exposed to the sun's rays through a window as the glass blocks the sun's UVB rays.  Some people's skin is less able to make vitamin D than others. Others may not be able to adequately release vitamin D into their blood circulation from fat cells.  Also, certain individuals may not activate vitamin D to a usable state. These people may find themselves at risk of vitamin D deficiency, including:  Vitamin D sources include the sun, certain foods, and vitamin D supplements.  In the United States, the  recommended daily intake of vitamin D  from food or supplements is as follow:  Some foods are higher in vitamin D than others. Eggs, sardines, and salmon naturally contain vitamin D. Also, manufacturers fortify most milk and some brands of yogurt and breakfast cereals with the vitamin.  The  University of Florida  provides examples of foods that contain vitamin D:  Vitamin D rich food and supplements are particularly important for people who find it difficult to get the vitamin from exposure to the sun, and those who cannot spend much time outside.  Older people, those with darker skin, other groups whose skin is less able to make vitamin D, and individuals at higher risk for vitamin D deficiency may wish to consider taking a supplement.  It is worth noting that, while it is rare, vitamin D toxicity can occur and cause nausea,  constipation , weakness, and kidney damage.  The latest advice is for adults to get  no more than 4,000 IU  of vitamin D a day from food and supplements. Sun exposure typically will not lead to vitamin D toxicity.  It is also possible to get vitamin D production from an indoor tanning bed. The  Vitamin D Council  advise people thinking about this route to:  Sun exposure is the most important natural source of vitamin D. The body uses the vitamin to absorb the calcium it needs to build and maintain bones.  Short bursts of sun exposure can usually allow your body to produce all the vitamin D it needs for the day. Some people, including older people or those with kidney or liver problems, may be at risk of becoming deficient in vitamin D. They can consider eating more foods that contain vitamin D or taking a supplement.  When exposing the skin to the sun, it is essential to consider the risk of skin cancer. People should avoid allowing their skin to burn.    
 Bobroff, L. B., &amp; Valentín-Oquendo, I. (n.d.). Facts About Vitamin D.  http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/pdffiles/FY/FY20700.pdf  
 How do I get the vitamin D my body needs? (n.d.).  https://www.vitamindcouncil.org/about-vitamin-d/how-do-i-get-the-vitamin-d-my-body-needs/#.XV1npOhKg2w  
 Vitamin D [Factsheet]. (2019).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-HealthProfessional/  
 Vitamin D [Factsheet]. (2019).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-Consumer/  
 Vitamin D. (2019).  https://medlineplus.gov/vitamind.html     Bobroff, L. B., &amp; Valentín-Oquendo, I. (n.d.). Facts About Vitamin D.  http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/pdffiles/FY/FY20700.pdf   How do I get the vitamin D my body needs? (n.d.).  https://www.vitamindcouncil.org/about-vitamin-d/how-do-i-get-the-vitamin-d-my-body-needs/#.XV1npOhKg2w   Vitamin D [Factsheet]. (2019).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-HealthProfessional/   Vitamin D [Factsheet]. (2019).  https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-Consumer/   Vitamin D. (2019).  https://medlineplus.gov/vitamind.html   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "How to get more vitamin D from the sun."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326167.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2019, August 28). "How to get more vitamin D from the sun."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  