 Feet are vulnerable to infections, as wearing socks and shoes can create a moist environment for bacteria and fungi to grow in.  However, walking around barefoot can cause a foot injury to become infected.  Proper foot care and treatment can help prevent foot infections from becoming more serious.  Most types of foot infection cause symptoms. These may include:  All types of foot infection tend to share similar symptoms, but there are several ways a foot can become infected.  The following are some different types of foot infection, along with tips on how to treat them:   Blisters  are small pockets of fluid that can develop as a result of friction. This can be a result of wearing shoes that are too tight.  Most blisters will heal within a few days without any complications. It is best to avoid picking or bursting a blister, as this can increase the risk of infection. Use a plaster or pad to cover the blister and prevent it from rubbing against any surfaces or footwear.   Treatment   If the blister does become infected, a doctor will typically treat it using  antibiotic  medications.   Learn more about the signs of and treatments for infected blisters here.    Wounds can become infected  if bacteria enter the body through tears in the skin. This can cause a skin infection that may range from mild to severe.   Treatment   Covering the wound with a plaster will help protect it from bacteria and other germs. If the wound does become infected, a doctor will typically treat it using antibiotic medications.  Bacteria can cause many skin infections, but fungi are another possible cause of foot infection.  Fungi thrive in warm, moist environments such as swimming pools, locker rooms, and showers. Regularly visiting these places without proper footwear can lead to a fungal foot infection.  A common type of  fungal infection  is  athlete's foot . Athlete's foot, or tinea pedis, often develops between the toes. Fungal infections can also affect the toenails. This causes them to become discolored and take on a thick, crumbly appearance.   Treatment   It is possible to treat most mild cases of athlete's foot using over-the-counter creams and gels, such as econazole.  For severe fungal infections, a doctor may prescribe stronger antifungal medications.   Cellulitis  occurs when a bacterial infection reaches the deeper layers of the skin.  The  American Academy of Dermatology  suggest that people with cellulitis receive immediate treatment from a doctor. The infection can quickly become serious and lead to complications such as  sepsis .   Treatment   If a person receives antibiotic medications early enough, the infection will usually respond well to the treatment and should reduce.  An  ingrown toenail  occurs when a toenail cuts into the skin surrounding it. Bacteria can enter the through this break in the skin and cause an infection.   Treatment    Ingrown toenails  can be painful, and it is important to see a doctor if one becomes infected. In most cases, antibiotic medications can treat the condition without any complications.  Also, the  American College of Foot and Ankle Surgeons  recommend gently massaging the area or using Epsom salt soaks to help with the pain. They suggest not placing cotton under the nail, as this can also cause infection.  People with  diabetes  are  more at risk  of developing a foot infection than people without. This is because diabetes damages nerves in the feet, which may prevent people from noticing wounds in this area of the body.  Diabetes can also reduce blood flow to the feet, making it harder for the body to heal wounds and infections there.  An infection in the foot can become serious if a person has diabetes. It may take a long time to heal and can even lead to  gangrene . In the most serious cases, this can require amputation.   Treatment   When bacteria are responsible for the infection, a doctor will treat it with antibiotic medications.  It is important to keep the wound clean. Removing any damaged tissue will help prevent the infection from spreading any farther.   Learn more about how diabetes affects the feet here.   There are several factors that can increase a person's risk of foot infections, including:  Most people who receive treatment for minor foot infections can expect to recover without any complications. However, some types of foot infection, such as cellulitis, require immediate medical attention.  Foot infections can have serious consequences, such as gangrene, for people with diabetes. For this reason, they should take extra care to prevent foot infections.  See a doctor if skin or nail changes occur on the feet. Treating infections early increases the chance of a good outcome.    
 Cellulitis. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/rashes/cellulitis  
 Diabetes and foot problems. (2017).  https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diabetes/overview/preventing-problems/foot-problems  
 Ingrown toenail. (n.d.).  https://www.foothealthfacts.org/conditions/ingrown-toenail     Cellulitis. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/rashes/cellulitis   Diabetes and foot problems. (2017).  https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diabetes/overview/preventing-problems/foot-problems   Ingrown toenail. (n.d.).  https://www.foothealthfacts.org/conditions/ingrown-toenail   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Berry, Jennifer. "What to know about a foot infection."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 29 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326186.php&gt;    APA  Berry, J. (2019, August 29). "What to know about a foot infection."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  