 A  herpes  rash usually develops on the genitals or around the mouth but can occur nearly anywhere on the body.  There are two types of herpes simplex virus (HSV) that cause a skin rash in different areas:  This article will explain the symptoms of a herpes skin rash and explore its causes and treatments. It will also examine some other possible causes of skin complaints that may look like herpes.  Herpes causes small sores to appear on the skin. These usually develop around the mouth and nose, but they can appear nearly anywhere on the body, including the fingers. Where the rash appears depends on where a person has acquired the infection.  The first sign of a herpes outbreak tends to be a tingling, burning, or itching sensation in the area that it is affecting. This initial sign might occur a day or so before the sores appear.  The sores can be tender, painful, and tingly. They look like clusters of small, fluid filled blisters that become pustules. For a few days to a week, they will break open, ooze fluid, and form a crust before healing over. The rash typically lasts from 7–10 days.  The first time a rash appears, it may last for  different lengths of time , depending on the type of herpes:  When someone experiences a herpes outbreak for the first time, they may also suffer some or all of the following symptoms:  Once the virus is in the body, it invades the nerves that supply the area of the skin where it infected and stays there for life. There is no cure for the virus, which tends to reactivate and cause the symptoms of herpes from time to time.  The first outbreak is usually the worst. While the symptoms of the virus do tend to come back every so often forever, they are not typically as severe.   Learn more about what herpes looks like, with pictures, here .  Herpes rashes tend to look like clusters of small, fluid-filled blisters on a small area of the body.  Other skin conditions that may resemble herpes include:  An allergic reaction to an irritant can cause allergic  contact dermatitis . Common irritants include  antibiotic  creams, cosmetics, shampoo, and perfumes. In babies, contact dermatitis may develop in the diaper area.  Contact dermatitis can cause redness, swelling, and even blistering in the area it affects.   Shingles  causes a rash of blisters to appear on the skin. The same virus that leads to  chickenpox , the varicella-zoster virus, causes shingles.  The first sign of shingles tends to be a severe burning or tingling pain on one side of the body. A rash of fluid filled blisters follows a few days to a week later. The blisters tend to appear in one area of the body, most commonly one side of the trunk near the waistline. They may be tender to the touch or painful.  The condition usually clears up  within 3–5 weeks  or sometimes less.  An infestation of a microscopic parasite known as the human itch mite, or  Sarcoptes scabiei  causes  scabies . The mite burrows into the skin to lay its eggs and deposits its waste products, or feces. Its presence causes an extremely itchy rash that looks like little  pimples , creating red, scaly areas on the skin.  Doctors use a class of medicines they call scabicides to treat the infestation. These are only available by prescription.  There are two types of  HPV  virus that causes herpes. While closely related, people contract them in different ways, although they both spread through body fluids and close human contact. The person who is the carrier of the virus does not need to be experiencing symptoms to be contagious.  Most carriers of HSV-1 contracted it when they were infants or children. People can be spread through:  Sexual contact tends to be how HSV-2 spreads. HSV-1 can also cause genital herpes, and it can spread in saliva during oral sex. The HSV-2 virus can also pass on to a baby during childbirth.  Both forms of the virus enter the nerve cells of the body where they remain for life. The virus tends to lay dormant, or asleep, in the cells until something wakes it up and causes an outbreak of symptoms.  Factors that can lead to an outbreak include:  There is no cure for herpes, but the sores will usually clear up on their own within a few weeks.  Treatments that will shorten the duration of the outbreak and ease the symptoms are available.  If a person gets frequent outbreaks, their doctor may recommend taking a pill every day for prevention reasons. This is known as "prophylaxis."  Antiviral creams or ointments can relieve the burning, itching, or tingling. Antiviral pills can speed up the healing process. Both types of medicine tend to contain the same active ingredients. They include:  People can get herpes medication from a doctor or pharmacist. Over-the-counter options are also available  online .  For otherwise healthy people, a herpes skin rash is not usually anything to worry about unduly. The sores can be painful and uncomfortable but typically go away by themselves. Medicines to treat them are available from drug stores.  The virus can cause complications in some people. Anyone with a long term health condition or weakened immune system who thinks they may have herpes should speak to a doctor.  People living with  cancer ,  HIV , or  AIDS , or who have recently had an organ transplant should seek urgent medical help if they think they may have herpes.  Anyone who suspects something other than herpes, such as dermatitis, shingles, or scabies, is causing their skin rash can talk to their doctor about a diagnosis.  Herpes is a common virus that can cause a rash of blistering sores on the skin. These tend to develop either around the mouth or genitals but can appear almost anywhere on the body.  There is no cure for the virus, and carriers tend to suffer outbreaks at various times throughout their life.  The clusters of fluid filled blisters may be unsightly and can be painful, but they are usually harmless. Antiviral treatments that can ease the symptoms and shorten the duration of an outbreak are available in drug stores.  We picked linked items based on the quality of products, and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you. We partner with some of the companies that sell these products, which means Healthline UK and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a link(s) above.    
 Contact dermatitis (allergic and irritant). (2015).  https://www.aafa.org/contact-dermatitis/  
 Herpes simplex. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/contagious-skin-diseases/herpes-simplex  
 Parasites. (2010).  https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/scabies/index.html  
 Shingles information page. (2019).  https://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/All-Disorders/Shingles-Information-Page  
 Treatment. (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/scabies/treatment.html  
 What is Herpes? (n.d.).  http://www.americanskin.org/resource/herpes.php     Contact dermatitis (allergic and irritant). (2015).  https://www.aafa.org/contact-dermatitis/   Herpes simplex. (n.d.).  https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/contagious-skin-diseases/herpes-simplex   Parasites. (2010).  https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/scabies/index.html   Shingles information page. (2019).  https://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/All-Disorders/Shingles-Information-Page   Treatment. (2018).  https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/scabies/treatment.html   What is Herpes? (n.d.).  http://www.americanskin.org/resource/herpes.php   Please use one of the following formats to cite this article in your essay, paper or report:   MLA  Barrell, Amanda. "How to identify and treat a herpes skin rash."  Medical News Today . MediLexicon, Intl., 28 Aug. 2019. Web. 6 Sep. 2019. &lt;https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/326173.php&gt;    APA  Barrell, A. (2019, August 28). "How to identify and treat a herpes skin rash."  Medical News Today .  Please note: If no author information is provided, the source is cited instead.  